IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 1349

 LogBoost: Boost Log Anomaly Detection by
 Cherry-Picking Log Sequences
 Min Li , Xiaoyun Li , Pengfei Chen , Yuanhao Lai , and Zibin Zheng , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Debugging and operating services always benefit from
logs. Since logs provide rich information on events and render
comprehensive execution traces, it is imperative to automatically
detect faults from extensive logs through log-based anomaly detection. However, due to the ineffectiveness and complexity of
log-based detection models, they have not been widely adopted
in template evaluation and real-world detection. Therefore, we
propose LogBoost, a lightweight framework to boost log-based
anomaly detection by automatically reducing redundant log templates. Based on our proposed similarity measurement, it effectively
sorts the importance of log templates and identifies templates that
are ineffective in anomaly detection. In evaluation, we introduce
Spark-SDA, a new dataset featuring more diverse log templates
and excessively long sequences, alongside the HDFS log dataset.
We further evaluate LogBoost using established log-based anomaly
detection models. The results demonstrate that eliminating ineffective log templates via LogBoost improves feature efficacy while
reducing computational overhead. For instance, RandomForest
obtains an F1-score at 0.983 given only 500 training samples on
an optimized frequency vector of the HDFS dataset. Meanwhile,
the lengths of log sequences are reduced by 51% to 77%, and Fig. 1. Log sequences preprocessing and optimization in LogBoost.
the prediction time of deep learning models is reduced by 55%
to 81%. Our results show that LogBoost is an effective approach
to accelerate log-based anomaly detection. raw logs without losing critical information has become a serious
 Index Terms—Log analysis, feature optimization, anomaly issue. Nowadays, data-driven methods enable the automatic
detection, deep learning. analysis of log data, significantly improving the effectiveness
 of log utilization [1], [2]. Log-based anomaly detection, as a
 I. INTRODUCTION sub-field of log analysis, assists operators in locating culprit
 logs [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. To preserve the integrity of the log
 OGGING is an important part of system and service mon-
L itoring, as it provides rich information for debugging and
fault localization. Log dataset analysis often enables operators
 events and chronological context, most of the existing log-based
 anomaly detection methods rely on log sequences rather than
 single log records [5], [8], [9]. A log sequence groups a series
to pinpoint the root causes of failures with greater precision and of log records by a unique identifier [10](e.g., thread ID, task
insight compared to conventional metric-based methods. How- ID, job ID), such as the detailed executions of a transaction or
ever, existing logs are not specifically designed for log analysis computation task, both of which are chronological log records.
modeling, leading to ineffective analysis and the high cost of As shown in Fig. 1, log-based anomaly detection on log
storing massive service logs. Therefore, how to reduce redundant sequences is usually based on two pre-processing procedures.
 (i) Log parsing converts the constant part and variables in raw
 Received 5 July 2024; revised 8 January 2026; accepted 8 February 2026. log records as log templates and log variables, respectively. (ii)
Date of publication 13 February 2026; date of current version 10 April 2026.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of Extract features of log sequences based on parsed log templates.
China under Grant 62272495 and in part by Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Generally, digital features such as sequence vectors formed by
Research Foundation under Grant 2023B1515020054. (Corresponding author: the values of log template ID, or frequency vectors that count the
Pengfei Chen.)
 Min Li is with the School of Systems Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen number of log templates are used for detection. Another popular
University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: limin258@mail2.sysu.edu.cn). feature is the semantic encoding. For example, Word2Vec [11]
 Xiaoyun Li and Pengfei Chen are with the School of Computer Science encodes the words and sentences of templates as a semantic
and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail:
lixy223@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; chenpf7@mail.sysu.edu.cn). vector. Current excellent log-based anomaly detection methods
 Yuanhao Lai is with the Huawei Technologies, Shenzhen 518129, China are predominantly grounded on the aforementioned preprocess-
(e-mail: laiyuanhao@huawei.com). ing techniques [1], [12], [13]. Although they are evaluated to
 Zibin Zheng is with the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn). be effective in their experiments, they still suffer from certain
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3664358 limitations in real production.
 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Based on the research and experiments on the real-world
system [14], [15], [16], we conclude three drawbacks of existing
log-based anomaly detection methods. (i) Since the error logs
intermingle with normal logs, the normal and abnormal log
sequences always share common sub-sequences. It enhances
the similarity and length of sequences as well as the feature dimensionality, thereby impacting the performance and efficiency
of the detection models. (ii) Due to the variability of industry
logging, it is challenging to establish a universal prior knowledge
of evaluating logs. Despite most log-based anomaly detection
models achieving high accuracy, they are incapable of assessing
the contribution of each log template in anomaly detection. (iii) Fig. 2. Example of definitions in log preprocessing.
Semantic features allow semantically similar sentences to be
closer in the hyperspace, enabling a higher generalizability of
 achieves 0.983 F1-Score given only 500 (0.087%of the total
detection models. However, the higher dimensional semantic
 dataset) training samples on optimized frequency vectors of the
vectors (e.g., 300 dimensions generated by the FastText [17])
 HDFS dataset. Our results show the efficiency of LogBoost on
introduce a substantial overhead in terms of time and resource
 Log-based anomaly detection models [27], [28], [29].
consumption.
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
 We investigate various approaches to feature dimensionality
 follows.
reduction and sequence mining to address the aforementioned r We propose a novel method to measure the similarity
issues. Firstly, considering the feature dimensionality reducamong log sequences based on the State Transition Probation, MultiDimensional Scaling (MDS) [18] and Stochastic
 bility Matrix, which is used to assess and rank the efficacy
Neighbor Embedding (SNE) [19] are widely used methods to
 of log templates more accurately.
reduce the feature dimension. But they lose the semantics of r We propose LogBoost, a log optimization framework, that
the original features after optimization, and cannot tell which
 filters out ineffective or redundant log templates in log
and how features are selected. Furthermore, encoding semantic
 sequences for boosting anomaly detection.
vectors of log events by deep neural networks is an effective r As the HDFS dataset [26] is over-simplicity and no
method for feature optimization [20], [21], but these methods
 longer representative in modern applications. Based on
also fail to provide an assessment of the effectiveness of log
 the Apache Spark [30], we construct a higher complex
templates. Secondly, separating key logs (logs that are useful for
 Spark-SDA log dataset with normal and anomaly labels
anomaly localization) and redundant logs in log sequences can
 to further evaluate to further evaluate LogBoost.
significantly improve the effectiveness of features for sequence r Extensive and rigorous experiments are conducted to valiclassification. Mining sequence patterns is a widely used method
 date that LogBoost can effectively optimize log sequences,
for extracting crucial features of sequences. Currently, mining
 and boost existing anomaly detection methods.
sequence patterns for sequence classification is well established
 The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II gives the
and applied, which primarily employ frequent item mining to
 important definitions. Section III introduces our investigation
extract sequential sequence patterns as features for classificaand motivation. Section IV describes the methodology including
tion [22], [23], [24], [25]. However, when mining frequent items
 an optimization example of LogBoost. The experimental results
in log sequences, the primary outcome is high-frequency logs
 are shown in Section V, and we give a case study in Section VI
with INFO and WARN levels, as well as ERROR logs that are
 and discussion in Section VII. Related works are reviewed in
generated frequently during system malfunctions.
 Section VIII. Section IX provides an overall conclusion of our
 In this paper, we propose LogBoost, a lightweight log sework.
quence optimization framework, that is designed to automatically filter ineffective or redundant log templates in anomaly
detection without any prior knowledge. LogBoost ranks the II. DEFINITION
importance of log templates based on our novel Markov-based Log template: As shown in Fig. 2, the log parsing stage
measurement with only simple features instead of semantic separates log templates and parameters “<∗>” (e.g., <Date>,
features. As shown in Fig. 1, by eliminating ineffective log tem- <blk_id>, <IP>, <Num>). The log template is the constant
plates, such as template IDs 2 and 5 are identified as ineffective part of a log message (e.g., “DataXceiver: <*> src: <*> dest:
templates, the length of log sequences is reduced significantly <*>”, “PacketResponder: <*> for block <*> terminating”),
as well as the dimension of semantic vectors. Our experiments which is mainly designed by developers.
show that the maximum length of sequences in the HDFS Log sequence: After parsing, the raw log are typically grouped
dataset [26] is decreased by more than 70%, greatly reducing the into log sequences. They are listings of chronological log records
time for model training and detection, the prediction time of deep that are correlated by unique identifiers in raw logs. As shown
learning models are reduced by 55% to 81%. With LogBoost in Fig. 2, <blk_id> in the HDFS dataset correlates a series of
optimization, lightweight models can readily achieve higher log records (e.g., blk_-16), as well as an anomaly or normal
accuracy with a smaller training set. For example, RandomForest label. Likewise, in the Spark-SDA dataset, <app-id> is the
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1351

unique identifier to correlate log sequences (e.g., app-20). As for without expert knowledge [31]. However, relying solely on
logs lacking sequence identifiers, a fixed window is commonly template distribution may lead to the neglect of critical logs
employed to segment the log sequences. with info and warn levels or error logs that are numerous on
 Log sequence feature: During the parsing, different log tem- certain exceptions.
plates are numbered into positive integers according to their
arriving order, starting from 1, and the increment step is 1. B. The Similarity Measurements on Log Sequence
The template set is denoted as T = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tH }, ti ∈ N ∗ ,
ti is the ID of a log template by a positive integer, H is the Currently, assessing the similarity among sequences is mainly
total number of log templates. Thus, a log sequence vector l is based on the vector or set similarity, such as Euclidean distance,
 j Cosine similarity, Pearson Correlation Coefficient and Dynamic
denoted as l = [t1i , t2i , . . . , tL
 i ], ti ∈ T , where L is the length of
log sequence. Time Warping (DTW) [34]. Based on an extensive survey of log
 Log frequency feature: For each log sequence, its fre- sequences in the public HDFS dataset [26], several key issues
quency vector f is generated based on the template frequency affect the similarity among log sequences. For the below two log
 sequence examples from the HDFS dataset, where each numerof sequence vector l, f = [ count(t L
 1 ) count(t2 )
 , L , . . . , count(t
 L
 H)
 ],
 ical ID in these sequences corresponds to a distinct log template
where count(ti ) is the occurrence number of the log template
 as defined in Section II, and the entire sequence encapsulates a
ti in sequence l, and L is the length of the sequence.
 comprehensive operation log for a block. We consider several
 sequence changes that commonly occur during log engineering
 to evaluate existing similarity measurements.
 III. MOTIVATION
A. The Evaluation of Log Template Effectiveness <blk_6986538622634403948>: 1 2 1 1 3 4 3 4 3 4 5 5 5
 Logs are primarily designed for human debugging rather than 11 11 11 34 34 34 10 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34
for automated data-driven anomaly detection [4], [31]. They 31 31 31 15 15 15
usually contain common subsequences logs between normal and <blk_6035208985581955117>: 1 1 2 1 3 4 4 3 3 4 5 5 5
abnormal log sequences [32]. We divide the HDFS logs [26] into 11 11 11 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 34 10
normal and abnormal sequences as two subsets and deduplicate 31 31 31 15 15 15
them separately. Then, we apply the PrefixSpan algorithm [33]
for frequent subsequence mining and extract subsequences that Template changes: In systems employing an unique log
cover 80% of the dataset with a length exceeding 10 (Since the parser, the parsed log template IDs remain invariant. However,
average of the sequence length in HDFS is 19, we opt to take modifications to logging statements during code development
half of this value). The results show that the number of frequent can disrupt this stability. Specifically, alterations to a log statesubsequences in the two sets is 550 and 848, with a total of 237 ment may lead the parser to identify it as a new template, thereby
identical subsequences. It indicates that normal and abnormal se- replacing the original template ID within the log sequence.
quences share numerous identical subsequences. Consequently, This substitution alters the template ID in sequences, which
we define ineffective log templates as those present in both consequently impacts similarity calculations based on template
sequence types, which impede the identification of abnormal IDs. Consider the case where template ID 34 in the sequence
patterns. These templates substantially increase sequence length changes to 40 in the example above. The numerical values in
and similarity, thereby degrading the effectiveness and efficiency vectors directly affect the value-based distance measurements,
of log-based anomaly detection. such as Euclidean distance, Cosine similarity, Pearson Correla-
 To investigate the influence of shared log templates, we tion Coefficient and DTW.
removed the intersections between normal and abnormal se- LCS in context: The Longest Common Subsequence (LCS)
quences and evaluated XGBoost, DeepLog, and RobustLog. All increases the context similarity, for instance, the subsequence
models exhibited a reduction in accuracy. The substantial decline [t1 , t5 , t9 ] of the sequence [t1 , t2 , t5 , t4 , t9 ] and the sequence
in XGBoost and DeepLog suggests that the ordering of specific [t1 , t3 , t5 , t7 , t9 ] is an LCS. Our investigation of HDFS [26]
templates is vital for their classification. Meanwhile, the result- and BGL [35] log datasets reveals that LCS is prevalent in both
ing sparsity in contextual information constrained RobustLog’s normal and anomalous sequences. They substantially inflate
semantic reasoning, rendering it less effective at identifying similarity scores of the Cosine, Pearson, Jaccard, and DTW.
failure patterns. Furthermore, consider removing the LCS. We eliminate the
 Existing detection methods identify abnormal patterns within segments in the two sequence instances that share identical
log sequences or messages, they typically transform raw logs locations and templates (change to blk_*48: [2,1,3,4,10,34],
into high-dimensional features, resulting in an inability to eval- blk_*17: [1,2,4,3,34,10]). However, the above methods, includuate the contribution of specific log templates during detection. ing Euclidean distance, fail to distinguish those two entirely
For example, machine learning-based methods (e.g., XGBoost) disparate sequences based on their similarity scores.
and attention mechanisms can quantify feature contributions, but Sequence length: It is difficult to measure the similarity of
these relate to fixed positions in the feature vector rather than over-length and contextual correlated log sequences. The DTW
specific log templates. Therefore, it is difficult to automatically algorithm retains the context of sequences, but its efficiency is
evaluate the contribution of log templates in anomaly detection greatly affected by the sequence length. Meanwhile, repetitive
1352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 3. Overview of LogBoost framework in log-based Anomaly Detection.

 TABLE I and 2, we parse raw logs into templates and group log sequences
 THE OVERHEAD OF STATE-OF-ART LOG ANALYSIS
 by unique identifiers (e.g., blk_id) to construct log sequence
 vectors. In step 3, LogBoost starts up based on log sequence
 vectors, they are grouped by length and position similarity
 at first. LogBoost calculates the State Transition Probability
 Matrix (STPM) for each group and computes Similarity Among
 Groups (SAG) based on STPMs. Then, LogBoost filters out a
 log template in sequence vectors and recalculates new SAG to
 evaluate the deviation score of this template. After traversing all
 templates, LogBoost outputs top-k log templates. In step 4, those
 templates are directly filtered out in log sequence vectors, and log
and cyclic subsequences, such as IDs: {5, 11, 34} in example frequency vectors are regenerated with optimized log sequence
sequences, increase their similarity and maximum length. We vectors. Finally, in step 5, the optimized data is forwarded to the
evaluate the computational efficiency of DTW by replicating the anomaly detection model for analysis. Therefore, LogBoost is a
example sequence above. The original sequence has a length of feature-level optimization framework before anomaly detection,
38, when the sequence length is 1,140 (replicating 30 times), it does not decrease the number of log sequences but only
the time to calculate similarity between two sequence is 2.18 mitigates the negative impact of ineffective templates within
seconds, and when the sequence length is up to 3,040 (80 times), them.
it costs 15.4 seconds. This results indicate that the DTW is
significantly influenced by the length of sequences and struggles
 B. A Novel Similarity Measurement in LogBoost
to process excessive-long log sequences.
 Since detecting anomalous patterns in log sequences consti-
C. The Overhead of Log Analysis tutes a classification task, log templates that enhance sequence
 similarity are counterproductive. Removing such templates im-
 We validate the state-of-the-art models on the Spark-SDA proves the classification accuracy of both log sequences and
dataset which has 22,110 log sequences and over 33% of anomalous patterns. However, existing standard similarity metsequences have lengths exceeding 550. The cost of training, rics (e.g., Cosine similarity) often fail on ultra-long log seprediction and resources are shown in Table I. All of the models quences because they primarily account for template frequency
need a GPU device for acceleration, and the complexity of the while ignoring the intrinsic execution logic. Since logs are
log sequences significantly impacts the memory requirement, generated by structured program execution, the order of events
considering the peak memory utilization during the prediction is a more robust signature than their count.
of the entire dataset. The prediction time of RobustLog and Considering the issues in Section III-B, and motivated by
PLELog is relatively short, as it processes multiple sequences the Markov chain model for sequence data [37], we propose
in batches, and there are only 18,708 sequences for prediction. a novel similarity measurement based on the State Transition
Therefore, existing deep-learning anomaly detection models are Probability Matrix (STPM), which is not affected by the nuanalysis costly and hard to transfer to current applications [36]. merical value while keeping their context information and can
 handle excessive-long sequences. The calculation process is
 IV. METHODOLOGY shown in Fig. 3 at step 3, the details are presented as follows.
 i) Group by Length and Similarity: Suppose a set of log
A. The Overview of LogBoost Framework
 sequences as S = {l1 , l2 , . . . , lN }, N is the total number of log
 The overview of the LogBoost is shown in Fig. 3. The input sequences. Those sequence vectors are grouped by their length
of LogBoost is the log sequence vectors, and the output is the at first. However, only grouping by sequence length may lead to
boosted dataset and log templates to be filtered out. In steps 1 grouping different operations with the same length. Therefore,
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1353

 M
  M
 
 SAG = sim(i, Psum ), Psum = Pj . (3)
 i=1 j=1

 As for the key issues in IV-B, when template IDs from 34
 change to 40, LogBoost is not affected and distinguishes entirely
 distinct sequences after removing LCS. As for efficiency, when
 the sequence length is 3,040, it costs only 1.79 milliseconds.
 Therefore, LogBoost can efficiently handle large-scale long
Fig. 4. Example of calculating STPM and similarity.
 sequences.

we further separate log sequences according to their differences C. Effectiveness Evaluations of Log Templates
in context position, ensuring different type of sequences are not
in the same group. For example, the length of the sequence A Conceptually, SAG quantifies the total overlap across the
and B are L. Based on the sequence order of A, the number of transition spaces of all identified groups. A high SAG value
different templates in the same position of A and B is denoted indicates that anomalous and normal sequences share highly
 
as L , when LL ≥ α, α ∈ [0, 1], separating sequence B into a similar transition patterns, making them difficult to distinguish.
 Therefore, the optimization goal of LogBoost is to minimize
new group. Finally, the representative vector ˆl for a group is
 SAG. Decreasing SAG can increase the hyperspace distance
constructed by templates with the highest occurrence frequency
 among groups, leading to a more accurate classification. Supat each position.
 pose SAGbase is the original SAG of dataset V, then evaluate
 ii) Calculate STPM: After grouping, STPM is calculated for
 the effectiveness of a log template ti as follows: (i) Filter out
each group, denoted as Pi , which is a H × H matrix and H is
 log template ti in log sequence vectors of V, and obtain a new
the total number of log templates in all groups. Fig. 4(a) shows
 dataset V . (ii) Recalculate the SAGi by V . (iii) Consider the
a calculation example, suppose there are 3 templates [t1 , t2 , t3 ],
 ΔSAGi = SAGbase − SAGi .
and only one log sequence vector l = [t1 , t1 , t2 , t1 , t3 ] in group i,
 Evaluation Rules: ❶ When ΔSAGi > 0, filtering out the log
where log template t1 transits to t1 , t2 , and t3 once respectively.
 template decreases the hyperspace similarity of log sequence
The first row of Pi is the State Transition Probability (STP) of the
 vectors, these log templates are redundant or contained in the
template t1 , which is the number of transitions to each possible
 LCS. ❷ When ΔSAGi < 0, filtering out the log template instate divided by its total transitions. Similarly, the second and
 creases the hyperspace similarity of log sequence vectors, these
third rows correspond to the STP of templates t2 and t3 calculog templates are important ones with a strong contribution to
lated in the same way. When there is more than one sequence
 classification. ❸ When ΔSAGi = 0, the log template does not
vector in a group, it needs to sum the state transition times in all
 appear in this dataset, considering that the training set may not
vectors to calculate STP for each template. Therefore, STPMs
 contain the whole set.
of all groups are denoted as E = {P1 , P2 , . . . , PM }, M ≤ N ,
 Notably, the above method has limitations when handling
M is the total number of groups.
 log sequences comprising substantial distinct task types (e.g.,
 iii) Similarity Among Groups: The similarity among groups
 the Spark-SDA dataset), as template intersections across seis measured based on STPMs. As shown in Fig. 4(b), lˆi is the
 quences of different tasks are sparse, often resulting in masrepresentative sequence vector of group i, the STPM of group
 sive ΔSAGi = 0. To solve this problem, if LogBoost detects
j is Pj , the similarity from group i to j is sim(i, j) defined as
 that issue in more than 10% of templates during analysis, it
(1). lˆi (k) is the log template ID at position k (1 ≤ k ≤ L − 1) will prompt that the dataset needs to be classified manually.
of lˆi with length L. Pj (tm , tn ) is the value in STPM indicating Generally, it is recommended to classify based on component
log template tm transits to tn . or task type. Therefore, we partition the Spark-SDA dataset by
 1
 L
    task type before analysis. After LogBoost traverses all log temsim(i, j) = sim(lˆi , Pj ) = Pj lˆi (k), lˆi (k + 1) . (1) plates and calculates ΔSAGi for each log template, LogBoost
 L then arranges them in descending order, and outputs top-k log
 k=1

 The representative vector of a group i always encounters zero templates with ΔSAGi > 0 for filtering.
or less probability in STPMs of other groups, thus sim(i, i) >
sim(i, j). It means that the more similar group i and j, the D. Feature Optimization
greater the value of sim(i, j) is. To evaluate the separation The optimization of LogBoost is based on log sequence
degree of all log sequences of the dataset, we define Similarity features, as shown in Fig. 5, it shows the optimization process
Among Groups (SAG) as (2), whose computational complexity on HDFS log datasets. Firstly, the ΔSAGi of templates are
is O(M 2 ). To accelerate the calculation, based on the distributive calculated and sorted. The analysis of the frequency distribution
property of matrix multiplication, it can be further simplified by of template occurrences reveals that templates with higher scores
rewriting it as (3), which has computational complexity O(M ). do not necessarily exhibit the highest frequencies. Subsequently,
 M 
  M these redundant templates are filtered, where li represents the
 SAG = sim(i, j), (2) raw log sequence, while the highlighted (red) portion represents
 i=1 j=1 the templates subject to filter.
1354 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 log sequences. We construct a more complex and labeled Spark-
 SDA log dataset which is similar to the HDFS dataset for
 evaluation. The statistical comparison of the datasets is shown
 in Table III, and the Spark-SDA dataset has a higher length of
 log sequence.
 HDFS log dataset: It is a log dataset published in work [26],
 which is widely used in log-based anomaly detection research.
 The detailed raw logs are generated by running Hadoop-based
Fig. 5. Optimization example of HDFS log dataset. map-reduce jobs on more than 200 Amazon EC2 nodes. Each
 line of raw logs contains a file block id (blk_id) indicating
 a complete log sequence of block operations, and each log
 sequence is labeled by experts as normal or anomaly.
 Spark-SDA log dataset: We constructed it by running 29
 types of standard Apache Spark [30] jobs in the standalone
 mode. We deploy the Spark system on a cluster consisting of
 one master and one slave server. Sample tasks are randomly
 generated using automated scripts, and Chaosblade [38] are
 employed for fault injection during the execution process. We
 collect the task execution logs over a week. The raw logs of each
 job are stored in separate files, and we aggregate all log files
 together and use the app_id in each job as a unique identifier
 for a complete execution sequence. Moreover, We record the
Fig. 6. Example of LogBoost optimization process.
 task type of each sequence as well as the faults injected in the
 Spark-SDA dataset. We marked tasks finished successfully as
 normal and tasks with injected faults in the logs are marked as
 As for the optimization of frequency and semantic features, anomalies. The detailed task types and injected faults are shown
both of which can be regenerated based on new sequences. The in Table II. Spark-SDA contains 29 types of tasks and 7 types of
frequency feature can be regenerated using the new log sequence faults since some tasks do not generate logs in testing, and we
features, while semantic features are derived by mapping each choose the types of fault injection that have obvious impacts on
log template to high-dimensional vectors. logs. Such as server network failures (e.g., fault injection type
 (2)(3)), which cause network connection error logs and retry
E. Log Boosting Process logs. Due to the limitation of paper space, detailed generation
 There is an optimization example of LogBoost in Fig. 6. The and injection instructions are available in our artifacts.
raw Spark logs are parsed into log templates and grouped into BGL log dataset: It is generated by the Blue Gene/L superlog sequence vectors with unique identifiers (e.g., app-id). Then computer, which consists of 128 K processors and is deployed
LogBoost iteratively calculates ΔSAGt for each log template at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) [35]. Each
and generates optimized vectors by templates with ΔSAGt > 0 line of log is manually labeled as either anomalous or normal.
for anomaly detection. Hence, LogBoost serves as a feature-level However, since BGL dataset lacks a standard identifier for
optimization framework that can be integrated into the existing partitioning log sequences, we employ a fixed window size in
anomaly detection methods as a feature engineering procedure. supplementary experiments to validate LogBoost.
When the set of log templates is unchanged, it only needs to be Based on the HDFS and Spark-SDA log datasets, we extract
executed once. The obtained template can then be directly used three types of datasets for evaluation. ❶ HDFS-A is generated by
for feature optimization in subsequent anomaly detection. the HDFS log dataset based on DeepLog [27] using Spell [39]
 log parser, which converts raw logs into 29 event types (each
 V. EVALUATION line of log is represented by a numerical value ti ∈ [1, 29]).
 Then construct log sequence vectors by the numerical ID of
 Our evaluation addresses the following research questions.
 r RQ1: How well can LogBoost improve the accuracy and log templates. Furthermore, considering the low accuracy of log
 template extraction [40], the log parser of SwissLog [9] is used
 performance of anomaly detection models?
 r RQ2: How well can LogBoost optimize log dataset? to generate the following new dataset (the comparison of log
 r RQ3: What are the impacting factors of LogBoost? parser is introduced in Section V-G). ❷ HDFS-B is generated
 by the HDFS log dataset using the log parser of SwissLog,
 which generates 48 log templates, then constructs log sequence
A. Dataset vectors (templates ID: ti ∈ [1, 48]). ❸ SPARK is generated by
 Log-based anomaly detection methods commonly use the the Spark-SDA log dataset using the SwissLog parser (158 log
HDFS [26], BGL [35] log datasets as benchmarks. Since Log- templates), and constructed to log sequence vectors (templates
Boost is primarily designed to analyze log sequences, it requires ID: ti ∈ [1, 158]). Additionally, since RobustLog [29] needs
raw data including unique identifiers to identify and delineate semantic features, we generated the semantic features of the
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1355

 TABLE II
 TASK TYPES AND FAULT INJECTION DETAILS IN SPARK-SDA DATASET

 TABLE III C. Metrics
 THE STATISTICS OF LOG DATASET
 The accuracy of anomaly detection models is evaluated by
 F-measure, including False Positive (FP), True Negative (TN),
 False Negative (FN) and True Positive (TP). Recall (R) and
 Precision (P) are defined as R = T PT+F P TP
 N , P = T P +F P , the
 F1-Score is defined as Fscore (β = 1) = 2·P ·R
 P +R .
 Additionally, log parsing and feature optimization are regarded as uniform preprocessing works, and the performance
 of models is primarily evaluated by training and prediction. To
 unify the time comparison criterion, the neural network models
HDFS and Spark-SDA log datasets using the FastText algo- are all trained for 500 iterations, and we validated that all models
rithm [17] and TF-IDF [41]. When using HDFS-A, HDFS-B achieve a stable loss at that stage.
and Spark as input, each log template ID corresponds to a
300-dimensional semantic vector. D. Baseline Models and Experiment Setup
 We select PrefixOpt, LogAssist [44], and LogCleaner [25]
B. Anomaly Detection Models
 as baselines. While PrefixOpt identifies redundant templates via
 Since log-based anomaly detection is a classification task, frequent item mining [45], LogAssist employs n-gram modeling
we choose the simple and efficient Ensemble Learning Models and sequence hiding, and LogCleaner focuses on event reduction
model for classification evaluation. To evaluate the enhancement for anomaly detection. In our experiments, LogBoost and these
of LogBoost on existing models, we deploy several LSTM-based baseline models optimize using log sequence vectors. Notably,
deep learning models. The details are as follows. log frequency vectors are restricted to ensemble learning models,
 Ensemble Learning Models: RandomForest (RF) [42] and as sequence models like DeepLog and LogAnomaly require
XGBoost [43] are extensively used supervised classification integer-based template IDs.
models, which are composed of multiple decision trees and Parameters: There are two parameters α and topk of Logoutput binary classification probability to detect anomalies. Boost, where α is a hyper-parameter used to avoid the existence
 DeepLog [27]: An unsupervised model with classical Long of different log sequences in the group with the same length,
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) to learn the context information it is related to the average length of log sequences. Generally,
of log sequences. It predicts the top-k probability of the next log if a lower threshold is set in long sequences, there are more
template in sequences to determine abnormality, where k is a groups. We validate that α from 0.1 to 0.4 are suitable for
hyperparameter as an anomaly threshold. each dataset. Moreover, topk is set to filter out default top-k
 LogAnomaly [28]: An unsupervised model with LSTM units log templates, it is related to the total number of templates.
to learn sequential and quantitative patterns. It considers the We validate that the top k templates with ΔSAGi > 0 for each
counts of different log templates as an additional feature and dataset. A detailed discussion of parameter selection is presented
also detects anomalies by predicting the next log template. in the Section V-G. To ensure consistent comparison conditions,
 RobustLog [29]: A supervised model with Bidirectional Long both PrefixOpt and LogAssist set the same top-k as LogBoost.
Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) units, which utilizes semantic In summary, ❶ HDFS-A, set α = 0.2, topk = 2; ❷ HDFS-B, set
features derived from log sequences to detect anomalies through α = 0.2, topk = 4; ❸ SPARK, set α = 0.4, topk = 9; ❹ BGL,
binary classification probability. set α = 0.2, topk = 20.
 In the above models, RandomForest and XGBoost are set to Evaluation: Training dataset sizes are determined based on
fit binary classification and parameters remain as default, while established benchmarks [27], [28], [29]. Specifically, DeepLog
DeepLog, LogAnomaly and RobustLog are matched to different and LogAnomaly are trained using the first 4,855 normal sedatasets according to the configuration provided in their papers. quences from HDFS-A and HDFS-B; for the Spark dataset,
Moreover, since the input vectors of some models need to be of they utilize the initial 7 normal sequences per task, totaling 203
equal length, we use 0 to pad vectors. It does not affect the value samples. RobustLog employs a balanced set of first 6,000 normal
of log sequence vectors, since the template ID starts from 1 in and 6,000 abnormal sequences for HDFS, and 3,402 samples for
our log parsing. Spark (comprising randomly 3,000 normal, 200 abnormal, and
1356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 OPTIMIZATION OF BOOST ALGORITHMS ON HDFS-A OPTIMIZATION OF BOOST ALGORITHMS ON HDFS-B

 LogAssist yield a slight improvement for RandomForest and
the 203 previously selected samples). To ensure performance XGBoost, primarily because their frequent itemsets capture
parity with deep learning models, RandomForest and XGBoost templates associated with cyclic patterns. In terms of comare trained on 500 randomly selected samples, a size validated to putational efficiency, LogBoost achieves substantial speedups,
yield comparable F1-Scores. All remaining samples are reserved but LogCleaner yields more time savings by filtering a larger
for evaluation. volume of contextual templates, enabling significantly faster
 The evaluation proceeds in two stages: (i) Optimization, 100 model execution.
iterations of random sampling (n = 500 according to RF and HDFS-B: As shown in Table V, the increased number of
XGBoost) are performed to rank and filter the top-k templates templates and the complexity of log sequences resulted in a
by occurrence frequency. This process maintains the original significant decrease in the F1-Score of models. PrefixOpt and
sequence order and applies correspondingly to semantic vectors. LogAssist only yield a slight performance improvement on
(ii) Partitioning, both the original and optimized datasets are RandomForest and XGBoost, primarily by pruning redundant
split into training and testing sets using the same partition. decision branches. In contrast, datasets preprocessed by Log-
All experiments are conducted on a Windows 11 workstation Cleaner and LogBoost consistently enhance the performance of
equipped with an Intel Core i7-13700K CPU (3.40 GHz), 32 GB all models. Notably, while LogCleaner removes more context-
RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX 4070 Ti GPU (12GB). sensitive templates, it may lead to a sparsity of log semantics
 in datasets with high template diversity, thereby capping potential improvements. These results underscore that LogBoost
E. RQ1: How Well Can LogBoost Improve the Accuracy and
 effectively filters out noise while preserving the critical features
Performance of Anomaly Detection Models? essential for anomaly detection.
 HDFS-A: As shown in Table IV, it suggests that the removal SPARK: The Spark-SDA log dataset is more complex with
of templates from log sequences reduces their length, thereby more log templates and excessively long log sequences. The
improving the time efficiency of detection models across all op- results on the SPARK dataset are shown in Table VI, Logtimized datasets. However, only the datasets optimized by Log- Cleaner and LogBoost improve the F1-Score across all models,
Cleaner and LogBoost exhibit improved F1-Scores relative to the while PrefixOpt and LogAssist only improve the XGBoost and
baseline. Although LogCleaner significantly reduces log redun- RobustLog models. Because Deeplog and LogAnomaly detect
dancy, its removal of certain context-sensitive templates renders anomalies by assessing the probability of the following log
some abnormal sequences unclassifiable, thereby limiting the template, removing context-dependent log templates can affect
potential performance improvement. Meanwhile, PrefixOpt and their accuracy. Moreover, PrefixOpt, LogAssist, and LogCleaner
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1357

 TABLE VI TABLE VII
 OPTIMIZATION OF BOOST ALGORITHMS ON SPARK OPTIMIZATION F1-SCORE OF FREQUENCY VECTORS

 sophisticated models is greatly boosted by LogBoost, and the
 time is reduced by 20% to 41% in training and 55% to 81% in
remove additional important templates, thereby enabling detec- prediction. RobustLog does not exhibit substantial acceleration
tion models to operate more efficiently at the expense of a decline on the Spark dataset, as the maximum sequence window size of
in F1-Score. Conversely, LogBoost enhances efficiency without 200 is smaller than the average lengths of both raw and optimized
compromising the accuracy. datasets as shown in Table IX. Moreover, the analysis time of
 The following is a summary of the detection models, (i) LogBoost for 500 samples is 0.28 seconds for HDFS-A, 0.35
RF and XGB are classification models, and on the LogBoost- seconds for HDFS-B, and 28.39 seconds for Spark. The analysis
optimized dataset they exhibit a comparable F1-Score to that of time of LogBoost is influenced by the sequence length, and
deep learning models. It demonstrates that LogBoost enhances optimization is achieved within a reasonable time. The perforthe distance of various log sequences in the hyperspace, thereby mance of PrefixOpt, LogAssist, and LogCleaner is significantly
enhancing the classification. In addition, RF and XGB are sim- influenced by the sequence length, primarily because they rely
ple machine-learning models that are much faster to compute on frequent itemset search. Consequently, when executed on
than sophisticated models. (ii) DeepLog, LogAnomaly and Ro- the Spark dataset, the average sequence length surpasses 3000,
bustLog are LSTM-based models, reducing the complexity of rendering them incapable of completing the operation. Therelog sequences and significantly reducing the cost of training fore, to analyze the Spark dataset with PrefixOpt and LogAssist,
and prediction. But DeepLog and LogAnomaly predict the log we segment its sequence with a window size of 300, which is
templates in the sequence one by one, which is more affected according to the maximum sequence length of the HDFS dataset.
by the length of the sequence, especially for SPARK. More- Frequency Vectors: Since RF and XGB can accept equalover, Deeplog and LogAnomaly rely on the hyperparameter length vectors, such as log frequency vectors in Section II, we
num_classes in prediction, which is the anomaly threshold based evaluate whether template probabilities can achieve high accuon the probability of log template occurrence. It is difficult to set racy after LogBoost optimization. We transformed the original
a suitable threshold facing a large number of log templates and and optimized dataset into log frequency vectors for comparison,
the threshold still requires labeled samples for evaluation. (iii) and the results are shown in Table VII. The performance of Pre-
RobustLog is based on semantic features and runs in batches, but fixOpt and LogAssist degrades as some pruned high-frequency
it consumes a lot of device memory, and the maximum length templates have critical features for anomaly classification. In
of the Spark-SDA needed to be truncated to complete the test contrast, LogBoost consistently enhances the F1-score across all
in an acceptable time, leading to raw information losing. We datasets and models. While LogCleaner shows improvements
validate that a window of 200 is suitable. Because as window on HDFS datasets, its efficacy is constrained elsewhere due
size increases, the model accuracy is no longer improved. to the removal of some high-frequency templates. Notably,
 Additionally, observing from the training and prediction time HDFS datasets optimized by LogBoost enable RF and XGB
shown in HDFS-A, HDFS-B and Spark, the performance of to outperform more sophisticated models with a limited training
1358 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE VIII TABLE IX
 OPTIMIZATION OF BOOST ALGORITHMS ON BGL THE STATISTICS OF DATASET WITH/WITHOUT OPTIMIZATION

 training and predicting. The second is the average length distribution of log sequences, which affects the storage and preprocessing. (i) HDFS log dataset. As shown in Table IX, LogBoost
 effectively reduces the length of log sequences by filtering out
 ineffective log templates. After optimizing, the maximum length
 is only 68, much less than 298 in the original dataset, reducing
 the maximum sequence length by more than 77.1%, and most
 of the sequences are less than 17 (the cumulative frequency
 is 99.22%). (ii) Spark-SDA log dataset. LogBoost also greatly
 reduces the length of log sequences. The maximum length is
 only 3027, far from the original dataset with 6250, reducing the
 maximum sequence length by more than 51.2%, and most of
 the sequences are distributed less than 1750 (the cumulative
 frequency is 96.52%). (iii) Ultimately, filtering the template
set of only 500 samples (including a mere 15 to 32 anomalous resulted in a 23.5% reduction in the number of log records of
instances). This robustness under label sparsity underscores the HDFS dataset and 46.5% of the Spark dataset.
the practical utility of LogBoost for real-world applications. In contrast, LogBoost exhibits suboptimal performance on
Furthermore, the vector dimensionality of the template count the BGL dataset due to constraints in sample selection and
(29 for HDFS-A to 158 for SPARK) is substantially lower than template characteristics. Specifically, the abundance of diverse
the maximum log sequence length (298 to 6,242), significantly log templates, pronounced variability in window segmentation
reducing the computing time while enabling a higher F1-Score. sequences, and limited template recurrence hinder sequence
 BGL: To validate LogBoost on log sequence without IDs, analysis. Consequently, LogBoost is more suitable for datasets
we utilize the BGL dataset for comparison. According to with complete sequences.
LogAnomaly [28], we set the window size as 20 to obtain a
log sequence. The results are shown in the Table VIII. On the G. RQ3: What are the Impacting Factors of LogBoost?
raw BGL dataset, the accuracy of RF and XGB is relatively
low due to log templates crossing in fixed windows. DeepLog, Log parser: It is worth noting that different log parsers may
LogAnomaly, and RobustLog are based on adjacent contexts generate distinct templates, which potentially impact the log seand are not significantly affected. For optimization, LogCleaner quence vector by template ID values. We conduct a comparison
and LogBoost demonstrate performance gains across various of extensively utilized and efficacious log parsers, Spell [39],
models. However, PrefixOpt, LogAssist, and LogCleaner are Drain [46], SwissLog [8] and LogPPT [40] to generate log
susceptible to log template overlap, which removes critical high- templates. The results show that LogBoost consistently filters
frequency templates and degrades accuracy for several models. identical log templates of Fig. 7 and overcomes discrepancies
Notably, while LogCleaner implements more aggressive tem- in the number of log templates across log parsers. However, the
plate pruning, resulting in a more pronounced improvement in accuracy of log template extraction is a critical factor that can
computational efficiency compared to LogBoost, it also incurs impact the effectiveness of LogBoost, such as some templates
the risk of information loss. may not be properly separated, leading LogBoost to treat them
 as identical ones.
 Sequence length and quantity: The efficiency of LogBoost
 is mainly affected by the sequence length and the number of
F. RQ2: How Well Can LogBoost Optimize Log Dataset?
 training samples. We evaluate LogBoost in different training set
 The first issue is the maximum length of log sequences in sizes, as shown in Table IX, the sequence length of the HDFS
datasets, as it determines the length of the vector padding when dataset is mainly concentrated from 12.5 to 22.5, while Spark is
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1359

 recommend classifying logs from different tasks or components
 before analysis.

 VI. CASE STUDY
 To evaluate the impact of LogBoost-filtered log templates on
 fault localization, we conducted a case study analyzing their
 effectiveness. Fig. 7 shows the log templates filtered by Log-
 Boost in HDFS-B, SPARK, and BGL datasets. Upon aligning
 those templates with the original log dataset, we arrived at the
 following findings. The first log template ID {34} with a warning
 message (WARN) in HDFS-B appears in a large number of
Fig. 7. Filtered templates of LogBoost.
 normal and abnormal log sequences, which seriously affects the
 anomaly classification. Moreover, log templates {5, 10, 11} with
 TABLE X INFO level appeared in contextual subsequences or repeated
 COMPARISON OF LOGBOOST WITH/WITHOUT CLASSIFIED SPARK
 loops, which have no contribution to classification.
 Similarly, The log templates filtered in SPARK are mainly
 in repeated loops with INFO level. As validated by our fault
 injection records, the critical fault logs are not included. For
 the BGL dataset, template 301 appeared 295,764 times, and
 log templates {278, 443, 622} defined as FATAL level appeared
 frequently but are not marked as faults in the dataset. Therefore,
 it demonstrates that LogBoost filters ineffective templates, none
 of which contain critical fault information.

 VII. DISCUSSION
 The experiments validate the redundant in the raw logs, they
 are ineffective logs both in normal and abnormal log sequences,
 and affect the accuracy of anomaly detection, increasing the log
from 150 to 1750. Therefore, the computational time of Spark sequence length and the cost of storage and analysis. Generally,
is significantly higher than that of HDFS due to its excessively we need expert knowledge to find these ineffective logs, but Loglong log sequences. For a training sample of 5,000, Spark takes Boost is a data-driven approach to automatically filter based on
247 seconds, while HDFS only takes 2.7 seconds. The primary raw logs. The results of PrefixOpt indicate that templates derived
cause of the increased complexity lies in the similarity grouping from template occurrence frequency and frequent pattern mining
at the first step, which necessitates traversing all sequences. may encompass crucial templates for sequence classification,
Consequently, the computational complexity of this process is and cannot guarantee the impact on anomaly detection perfor-
O(n). mance. In addition, the experiments show the weaknesses of
 Hyper-parameters: There are two key parameters in Log- Deep Learning models in the raw Spark-SDA dataset with highly
Boost: α and topk. We conduct 100 experiments for each α complex log sequences. They require more time for running
by randomly selecting training samples and counting the prob- and parameter adjustment, such as window size and anomaly
ability of the top-10 filtered templates containing the templates threshold, which seriously impacts their computation time and
shown in Fig. 7. It validates that when 0.01 < α < 0.4 and accuracy. Conversely, lightweight models, RandomForest and
topk > 2, LogBoost has more than 90% probability of filtering XGBoost, exhibit more feasible and extensive application scethe optimal templates. Due to α determining the similarity of narios but rely on high-quality log datasets. This underscores
sequence merging, excessive values may lead to the optimal the imperative to optimize logging and datasets.
templates being merged into non-representative sequences, it is
also inappropriate to merge sequences with a similarity less than
60% in practical applications. A. Threats to Validity
 Sequence classification: As discussed in Section IV-C, Log- The internal threat to validity mainly lies in the composition
Boost faces challenges when processing datasets that contain of log datasets. Sample selection is critical in data-driven methnumerous templates with ΔSAGi = 0. To evaluate this issue, ods, as sample diversity significantly affects outcomes. To ensure
we validate LogBoost on Spark dataset before and after applying robustness, the experiment employs multiple random sampling
sequence classification. As shown in Table X, without classifica- tests on the whole dataset. In practice, we recommend analyzing
tion, some sequences in the training set contain non-overlapping as many distinct sequences as possible.
templates, preventing the computation of SAG. This leads to The external threat to validity mainly lies in the hyperincorrect template deletion and a subsequent decline in model parameters of detection models. We utilize state-of-the-art
accuracy. Given that LogBoost relies on sequence similarity, we LSTM-based models that accept log sequence vectors and set
1360 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

certain optimal parameters based on prior research. Furthermore, dimensionality based on similarity. In addition, Principle Comthe simple machine learning models are set in default parame- ponent Analysis (PCA) [52] is also a common method to reduce
ters, there are still improvements in tuning parameters. the feature dimensionality, but it has limitations on the input
 features dimension. LogEDL [24] introduces evidential deep
 learning to quantify the aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty of
 VIII. RELATED WORK log features, enhancing the reliability against noisy or out-of-
A. Enhancing Log Analysis distribution templates. LogCleaner [25] investigates that strategic event pruning can significantly augment model performance
 Currently, many excellent works use different log enhance- by filtering out non-informative or redundant log templates.
ment methods to improve log analysis. LogRobust [10] and For sequence features, the sequence classification field is well
SwissLog [8] map logs into semantic vectors to improve the established in bioinformatics, web mining or text mining [53].
robustness and accuracy of detection models. DeepLog [27] and The method [22] based on sequence coverage to mine robust
LogAnomaly [28] consider additional features, such as param- sequence classification rules. The study [23], [54] uses the
eter changes and counts of templates to enhance log sequence Apriori algorithm [55] to mine frequent patterns as features
vectors. Qllog [6] improves the ability of models for unlearned for classification. The work [56] classifies the input action
logs by Q-learning. LogKG [47] diagnoses failures based on sequences into different categories by mining discriminative
building knowledge graphs (KG) of logs. LogEncoder [20] subsequences. LogRules [2] proposes a lightweight framework
utilizes a pre-trained model to obtain more effective semantic that induces symbolic rules via LLMs, significantly reducing the
vectors of log events. LogLM [3] and SuperLog [48] leverage computational burden of processing sequences with thousands
instruction tuning and domain-specific continual pre-training of events while maintaining high interpretability. However, these
to bridge the gap between natural language and system logs. methods are severely affected by parameters and are difficult
LogPPO [49] utilizes Proximal Policy Optimization to align to optimize for extremely long log sequences, such as the
LLM analyses with downstream classifiers, significantly boost- Spark-SDA log dataset with a more than 3000 average length of
ing detection confidence in few-shot scenarios. However, the sequences.
above approaches successfully improve their models, but they
do not thoroughly evaluate the influence of each log template on
the results. IX. CONCLUSION
 Furthermore, Logrep [16] investigates the effectiveness of This paper proposes LogBoost, a data-driven optimization
different log representations, revealing that the choice of em- method to filter ineffective log templates to optimize log sebedding technique and parsing strategy significantly dictates quences, it can be easily transferred to the feature engineering
downstream performance. LTID [50] extracts dependency re- step of general classification models as a practical solution. Our
lation between log statements from source code to remediate experiments show the shortcomings of state-of-the-art methods
the loss of information in the log file. LogAssist [44] applies on complex datasets and validate the effectiveness of Logn-gram modeling to identify common event sequences and hides Boost. With optimized datasets, RandomForest and XGBoost
consecutive events to compress the log events in workflows. can achieve better performance than sophisticated models given
LogContrast [1] and LogSentry [12] employ semi-supervised only a small portion of labeled training data, allowing easier
contrastive learning and retrieval-augmented mechanisms to few-shot training and prediction. In addition, we construct and
mitigate the impact of log instability and evolving templates. release the Spark-SDA dataset, which is helpful in further log
 optimization research.

B. Optimization of Features
 DATA AVAILABILITY
 Logs consist of structured and unstructured parts, and the
keywords in log templates are mainly valid English words or The source code, datasets and part of the results of this paper
composite tokens in Camel Case [51] format. Since semantic can be found in our replication package [57], [58].
features can improve the robustness of models by keeping the
distance between similar words and sentences [8], [9], [10], it is ACKNOWLEDGMENT
more popular than treating log templates as log events [27], [28].
 The authors greatly appreciate the insightful feedback from
We investigate dimensionality reduction techniques for semantic
 the anonymous reviewers.
features and methods to reduce redundant logs in sequence
features through sequence mining.
 For semantic features, Stochastic Neighbor Embedding REFERENCES
(SNE) [19] and Multi-dimensional Scaling (MDS) [18] map the [1] W. Yuan, H. Sun, M. Pang, H. Wang, G. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “LogContrast:
original features to a lower dimension and retain more effective Log-based anomaly detection using BERT and contrastive learning,” in
information for classification. MDS reduces dimensionality by Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., 2024,
 pp. 2510–2516.
constructing inner product matrices within a lower-dimensional [2] X. Huang, T. Zhang, and W. Zhao, “LogRules: Enhancing log analysis
space, ensuring that feature distances match the raw dataset. capability of large language models through rules,” in Proc. Findings
SNE maps data to probability distributions and reduces the Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, NAACL 2025, 2025, pp. 452–470.
LI et al.: LOGBOOST: BOOST LOG ANOMALY DETECTION BY CHERRY-PICKING LOG SEQUENCES 1361

 [3] Y. Liu et al., “LogLM: From task-based to instruction-based automated [27] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 log analysis,” in Proc. 2025 IEEE/ACM 47th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw. and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. 2017
 Eng. Pract., 2025, pp. 401–412. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA,
 [4] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
 automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv., [28] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
 vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021. quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf.
 [5] L. Zhang et al., “LogAttn: Unsupervised log anomaly detection with an Artif. Intell., Macao, China, AAAI Press, 2019, no. 7, pp. 4739–4745.
 autoencoder based attention mechanism,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Sci., [29] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log data,”
 Eng. Manage., 2021, pp. 222–235. in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations
 [6] X. Duan, S. Ying, W. Yuan, H. Cheng, and X. Yin, “QLLog: A log anomaly Softw. Eng., New York, NY, USA, Association for Computing Machinery,
 detection method based on Q-learning algorithm,” Inf. Process. Manage., 2019, pp. 807–817.
 vol. 58, no. 3, 2021, Art. no. 102540. [30] I. Mavridis and H. Karatza, “Performance evaluation of cloud-based log
 [7] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud file analysis with apache hadoop and apache spark,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 125,
 systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. pp. 133–151, 2017.
 Foundations Softw. Eng., New York, NY, USA, Association for Computing [31] S. He et al., “An empirical study of log analysis at Microsoft,” in Proc.
 Machinery, 2021, pp. 1253–1263. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng.,
 [8] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified 2022, pp. 1465–1476.
 deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc. [32] N. Busany and S. Maoz, “Behavioral log analysis with statistical guaran-
 IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., Los Alamitos, CA, USA, IEEE tees,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2016, pp. 877–887.
 Computer Society, 2020, pp. 92–103. [33] J. Pei et al., “PrefixSpan,: Mining sequential patterns efficiently by prefix-
 [9] L. Yang et al., “Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via proba- projected pattern growth,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2001,
 bilistic label estimation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 43rd Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., pp. 215–224.
 Madrid, Spain, IEEE Press, 2021, pp. 1448–1460. [34] S. Salvador and P. Chan, “Toward accurate dynamic time warping in linear
[10] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log time and space,” Intell. Data Anal., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 561–580, 2007.
 data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. [35] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
 Foundations Softw. Eng.New York, NY, USA, Association for Computing system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst.
 Machinery, 2019, pp. 807–817. Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
[11] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of [36] B. Yu et al., “Deep learning or classical machine learning? An empirical
 word representations in vector space,” 2013, arXiv:1301.3781. study on log-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf.
[12] L. Wu, X. Wu, and Z. Su, “LogSentry: An LSTM-based framework for real- Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 392–404.
 time vulnerability detection,” in Proc. 2025 Int. Conf. Blockchain Web3. [37] E. Paxinou, D. Kalles, C. T. Panagiotakopoulos, and V. S. Verykios, “Ana-
 0 Technol. Innov. Application Exchange 2nd Conf., 2025, pp. 165–176. lyzing sequence data with Markov chain models in scientific experiments,”
[13] T. Jia, Y. Li, Y. Yang, G. Huang, and Z. Wu, “Augmenting log-based SN Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 1–14, 2021.
 anomaly detection models to reduce false anomalies with human feed- [38] Chaosblade. io, “Chaosblade: An easy-to-use and powerful chaos engiback,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min- neering experiment toolkit,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
 ing, New York, NY, USA, Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, chaosblade-io/chaosblade
 pp. 3081–3089. [39] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in
[14] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly Proc. IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Data Mining, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, IEEE
 detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Computer Society, 2016, pp. 859–864.
 Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., New York, NY, [40] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot
 USA, Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 1404–1415. learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2023,
[15] J. Cândido, M. Aniche, and A. van Deursen, “Log-based software mon- pp. 2438–2449.
 itoring: A systematic mapping study,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 7, 2021, [41] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic text
 Art. no. e489. retrieval,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 513–523, 1988.
[16] X. Xie, S. Jian, C. Huang, F. Yu, and Y. Deng, “LogRep: Log-based [42] A. Liaw et al., “Classification and regression by randomforest,” R News,
 anomaly detection by representing both semantic and numeric information vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 18–22, 2002.
 in raw messages,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2023, [43] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system,”
 pp. 194–206. in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
[17] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, M. Douze, H. Jégou, and T. New York, NY, USA, Association for Computing Machinery, 2016,
 Mikolov, “FastText. zip: Compressing text classification models,” 2016, pp. 785–794.
 arXiv:1612.03651. [44] S. Locke, H. Li, T.-H. P. Chen, W. Shang, and W. Liu, “LogAssist: Assisting
[18] I. Borg and P. Groenen, “Modern multidimensional scaling: Theory and log analysis through log summarization,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 48,
 applications,” J. Educ. Meas., vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 277–280, 2005. no. 9, pp. 3227–3241, Sep. 2022.
[19] G. E. Hinton and S. T. Roweis, “Stochastic neighbor embedding,” in Proc. [45] M. Martini, D. Schuster, and W. M. van der Aalst, “Mining frequent infix
 Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2003, vol. 15, pp. 833–840. patterns from concurrency-aware process execution variants,” Proc. VLDB
[20] J. Qi et al., “LogEncoder: Log-based contrastive representation learning Endowment, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 2666–2678, 2023.
 for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, [46] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parspp. 1378–1391, Jun. 2023. ing approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Int. Conf.
[21] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. Fung, H. Wang, H. Yang, and Z. Luan, “Improving Web Serv., Los Alamitos, CA, USA, IEEE Computer Society, 2017,
 log-based anomaly detection by pre-training hierarchical transformers,” pp. 33–40.
 IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 2656–2667, Sep. 2023. [47] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge graph,”
[22] E. Egho, D. Gay, M. Boullé, N. Voisine, and F. Clérot, “A parameter-free IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 approach for mining robust sequential classification rules,” in Proc. 2015 [48] G. Wei and L. Xiao, “Super log-concavity of the first eigenfunctions for
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2015, pp. 745–750. horo-convex domains in hyperbolic space,” 2025, arXiv:2510.13072.
[23] D. Fradkin and F. Mörchen, “Mining sequential patterns for classification,” [49] Z. Wang, J. Dong, and C. Yang, “LogPPO: A log-based anomaly detector
 Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 45, pp. 731–749, 2015. aided with proximal policy optimization algorithms,” Smart Cities, vol. 9,
[24] Y. Duan et al., “LogEDL: Log anomaly detection via evidential deep no. 1, p. 5, 2026.
 learning,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 16, 2024, Art. no. 7055. [50] J. Zhao, Y. Tang, S. Sunil, and W. Shang, “Studying and complementing
[25] L. Zhang, T. Jia, K. Wang, M. Jia, Y. Yang, and Y. Li, “Reducing events the use of identifiers in logs,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Anal.,
 to augment log-based anomaly detection models: An empirical study,” Evol. Reengineering, 2023, pp. 97–107.
 in Proc. 18th ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Empirical Softw. Eng. Meas., 2024, [51] B. Dit, L. Guerrouj, D. Poshyvanyk, and G. Antoniol, “Can better identifier
 pp. 538–548. splitting techniques help feature location?,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Prog.
[26] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. Jordan, “Largescale Comprehension, 2011, pp. 11–20.
 system problem detection by mining console logs,” in Proc. SOSP, 2009, [52] I. T. Jolliffe and J. Cadima, “Principal component analysis,” Wiley Interpp. 117–132. discipl. Rev., Comput. Statist., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 124–167, 2012.
1362 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[53] Z. Xing, J. Pei, and E. Keogh, “A brief survey on sequence classification,” Pengfei Chen received the PhD degree from the De-
 ACM Sigkdd Explorations Newslett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 40–48, 2010. partment of Computer Science, Xi’an Jiaotong Uni-
[54] T. P. Exarchos, M. G. Tsipouras, C. Papaloukas, and D. I. Fotiadis, “A two- versity in 2016. He is currently an associate professor
 stage methodology for sequence classification based on sequential pattern with the School of Computer Science and Engineermining and optimization,” Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 467–487, ing, Sun Yat-sen University. He is also a PhD advisor.
 2008. He has authored or coauthored more than 50 papers
[55] M. Hegland, “The apriori algorithm–a tutorial,” in Mathematics and in some international conferences including IEEE
 Computation in Imaging Science and Information Processing. Singapore: INFOCOM, WWW, ACM/IEEE CCGRID, ICSOC,
 World Scientific, 2007, pp. 209–262. IEEE ICWS, IEEE ICPADS and journals includ-
[56] S. Nowozin, G. Bakir, and K. Tsuda, “Discriminative subsequence mining ingIEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
 for action classification,” in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2007, Computing, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
 pp. 1–8. and Learning Systems, IEEE Transactions on Reliability, IEEE Transactions on
[57] limin, “Spark-sda dataset,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ Services Computing , IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computing,
 limin5120/Spark-SDA and IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing. His research interests include
[58] limin, “Logboost,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ distributed systems, AIOps, cloud computing, microservice and blockchain.
 limin5120/LogBoost# Especially, he has strong skills in cloud computing. He is a program committee
 member of multiple conferences and reviewer of some internal journals such as
 IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, Information Science, and Neurocomputing.

 Yuanhao Lai received the PhD degree in statistics
 Min Li received the master’s degree from the Gradu- from Western University, London, ON, Canada, in
 ate School of China Academy of Engineering Physics 2020. He is currently a senior researcher with Huawei
 in 2022. He is currently working toward the PhD Technologies Company Ltd. His research interests
 degree with the School of Systems Science and Engi- include statistical learning, statistical computing, and
 neering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. cloud computing.
 His research interests include log analysis and LLMbased system operations.

 Zibin Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree in computer science and engineering from the
 Chinese University of Hong Kong. He is currently a
 professor and deputy dean of the School of Software
 Xiaoyun Li received the BE degree in 2019 from Sun Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
 Yat-sen University, where she is currently working China. He authored or coauthored more than 200 intoward the PhD degree with the School of Computer ternational journal and conference papers, including
 Science and Engineering. Her research interests in- one ESI hot paper and six ESI highly cited papers.
 clude log analysis and AI-driven operations. His research interests include blockchain, software
 engineering, and services computing. He is a fellow
 of IET. He was the recipient of several awards, including the Top 50 Influential Papers in Blockchain of 2018, ACM SIGSOFT
 Distinguished Paper Award at ICSE2010, and Best Student Paper Award at
 ICWS2010.