IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 1363

LogInstruct: Knowledge-Driven Instruction Synthesis
 for Enhancing LLM-Based Log Analysis
 Lipeng Ma , Yixuan Li , Weidong Yang , Member, IEEE, Mingjie Zhou , Mingyu Zhao ,
 Ben Fei , Member, IEEE, Shuhao Li , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Sihang Jiang , and Yanghua Xiao

 Abstract—Logs are vital for monitoring service health and trou- meaningful insights from log data [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11],
bleshooting in large-scale online service systems. Recent advance- [12], [13], [14]. In recent years, the remarkable success of large
ments in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated poten- language models (LLMs) in natural language processing (NLP)
tial for automated log analysis. However, existing general LLMs
face two key challenges in log analysis: a lack of domain-specific has spurred growing interest in their application to automated
knowledge and limited adaptability to diverse log analysis tasks. log analysis. By integrating advanced prompting strategies and
To address these limitations, we propose LogInstruct, a novel capitalizing on their powerful understanding and reasoning ca-
LLM-based knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework pabilities, LLM-based approaches [15], [16], [17], [18], [19],
designed to enhance the log analysis capabilities of LLMs. LogIn- [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25] have demonstrated significant
struct bridges the domain knowledge gap by organizing log-specific
knowledge into a structured knowledge tree to guide the synthesis of progress in log analysis tasks such as log parsing and anomaly
instruction. To ensure the diversity of instructions and hierarchical detection.
log analysis skills, we leverage Bloom’s Taxonomy to synthesize log Despite these advancements, LLMs still face two critical
instructions of varying difficulty levels, not only covering a wide limitations when applied to log analysis. First, they suffer from a
range of log analysis scenarios but also progressively challeng- domain knowledge gap. Logs are typically concise, highly coning the model’s reasoning abilities. LogInstruct synthesizes 88 K
high-quality instruction datasets without manual intervention. Ex- densed, and filled with domain terminology [17], [20], [26], [27],
periments demonstrate that open-source LLMs fine-tuned on our [28], such as IP, Port, Parameters, yet general LLMs are trained
dataset achieve state-of-the-art performance across five distinct log on general-purpose datasets, limiting their ability to understand
analysis tasks, outperforming proprietary LLMs such as GPT-4o. logs effectively. This knowledge gap results in inaccurate infer-
 Index Terms—Log analysis, large language model, data ences. Second, LLMs exhibit limited adaptability to diverse log
synthesis, instruction tuning. analysis tasks. Real-world log analysis tasks, from simple log interpretation to complex fault diagnosis and solution recommendation, require distinctly different analysis logic and thought.
 I. INTRODUCTION
 While general LLMs are optimized for general-purpose human
 OGS serve as critical records of service runtime status,
L such as cloud platforms and edge clouds, playing a pivotal
role in troubleshooting and monitoring service health [1], [2],
 intents [29], [30], they lack specialized reasoning capabilities
 and do not align with the task-specific demands of log analysis.
 To adapt general-purpose LLMs to specific domains, super-
[3]. Traditional log analysis methods, which rely heavily on vised fine-tuning (SFT) [31], [32], [33] on high-quality instrucexperienced specialists manually inspecting vast amounts of tion datasets has proven effective across specialized domains
log data, are often labor-intensive and inefficient [4]. Thus, such as code generation [34], [35], medical applications [36],
automated log analysis has emerged as a promising solution, and legal analysis [37]. However, constructing high-quality inleveraging algorithms and machine learning models to extract struction datasets for log analysis presents unique challenges.
 On one hand, manually creating high-quality instruction data is
 Received 6 August 2025; revised 17 December 2025; accepted 7 January labor-intensive and costly. On the other hand, existing public
2026. Date of publication 21 January 2026; date of current version 10 April 2026. datasets for log analysis are limited in diversity, failing to gen-
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai eralize across real-world scenarios. For example, the previous
under Grant 24ZR1405000 and in part by the Postdoctoral Fellowship Program
of CPSF under Grant GZC20242252. (Corresponding authors: Weidong Yang.) study [12] has shown that the log duplication rate in the public
 Lipeng Ma, Yixuan Li, Weidong Yang, Mingjie Zhou, Shuhao Li, Sihang datasets HDFS and Thunderbird exceeds 99% . Additionally,
Jiang, and Yanghua Xiao are with the School of Computer Science, Fu- these public datasets frequently exhibit simplistic data patterns
dan University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: lpma21@m.fudan.edu.cn;
yxli24@m.fudan.edu.cn; wdyang@fudan.edu.cn; mjzhou19@fudan.edu.cn; [12], [38], limiting their ability to develop advanced log analysis
shli23@m.fudan.edu.cn; jiangsihang@fudan.edu.cn; shawyh@fudan.edu.cn). capabilities. In real-world scenarios, high-quality log analysis
 Mingyu Zhao is with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Optics and Elec- data currently remains dependent on expert-labeled data.
tronics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China
(e-mail: myzhao@nwpu.edu.cn). To overcome the challenges of manual data construction,
 Ben Fei is with the Department of Information Engineering, the Chinese LLM-based data synthesis has recently emerged as a promis-
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: benfei@cuhk.edu.hk). ing alternative [39], [40]. However, applying these meth-
 Our source code and synthesized data are available at https://github.com/
LeaperOvO/LogInstruct. ods to log analysis introduces two critical challenges. First,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3656204 general-purpose LLMs often generate inaccurate or irrelevant

 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1364 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

log analysis instructions. The task of log analysis is knowledge- 3) We synthesize 88K instructions and demonstrate their
intensive, requiring a comprehensive knowledge chain that en- effectiveness through fine-tuning and extensive expericompasses familiarity with the syntax and semantics of logs, ments, achieving SOTA performance and providing critirecognition of patterns and anomalies, and ultimately, an un- cal insights for future research.
derstanding of troubleshooting strategies to resolve faults. This
knowledge gap makes it challenging to synthesize effective log II. RELATED WORKS
analysis instructions. Second, covering a wide range of log
analysis tasks with varying cognitive difficulty is essential but A. Large Language Models for Log Analysis
challenging. Real-world log analysis involves different levels of Recent advances in LLMs have demonstrated significant
analytical difficulty, from simple log interpretation to complex potential in automated log analysis tasks, addressing critical
fault resolution. Without explicit modeling of difficulty hierar- tasks ranging from foundational log parsing to advanced failure
chy, LLMs may develop fragmented log analysis competencies, diagnostics. For instance, LLMParser [43] systematically evalexcelling at simple pattern matching but collapsing when faced uates various LLMs on log parsing and demonstrates that LLMs
with complex troubleshooting scenarios. significantly outperform state-of-the-art parsers by leveraging
 In this work, we propose LogInstruct, a novel LLM-based their in-context learning capabilities. Similarly, frameworks like
knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework designed to LogPrompt [44], DivLog [15], LILAC [18], SelfLog [45], and
enhance the LLMs’ log analysis capabilities. Specifically, to LogBatcher [46] showcase the effectiveness of LLMs in parsbridge the knowledge gap, we first introduce domain knowl- ing structured and semi-structured logs without the need for
edge for each log from the documentation, such as background extensive task-specific fine-tuning. Beyond log parsing, LLMs
descriptions and solution strategies, and organize this frag- have also been applied to higher-order analysis tasks. Methods
mented knowledge into a structured knowledge tree that presents like LogGPT [47], LogPrompt [44], LogLLM [48], LogExpert
knowledge clearly and systematically, facilitating LLMs to fully [21], AdaptiveLog [22], and OpenRCA [24] utilize LLMs for
utilize this information for synthesis instructions. To ensure the anomaly detection, root cause analysis, and solution recommendiversity of instructions and hierarchical log analysis skills, we dation.
introduce Bloom’s Taxonomy [41], [42], a hierarchical cognitive Despite their promise, domain knowledge gaps and limited
framework that helps synthesize log instructions of varying adaptability remain challenges when adapting LLMs for log
difficulty levels based on the knowledge tree. By mapping analysis. To overcome these challenges, we introduce a novel
log analysis tasks onto different levels of cognitive difficulty, knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework, enabling
synthesized instructions that not only cover a wide range of LLMs to improve their log analysis capabilities with instruction
log analysis scenarios but also progressively challenge LLM’s tuning.
reasoning abilities.
 Using LogInstruct, we synthesize 88K high-quality instructions for log analysis without manual intervention. We eval- B. Synthesizing Instruction Tuning Data
uate our framework by fine-tuning Qwen2.5 of varying sizes Due to the huge computational overhead of pre-training,
on the synthesized instructions and assessing its performance instruction tuning has become essential for adapting LLMs to
across five distinct log analysis tasks. Our experiments demon- domain-specific tasks [31], [32], [33]. By training on highstrate that models fine-tuned on our synthesized data achieve quality instruction datasets, researchers have successfully enstate-of-the-art (SOTA) performance, significantly outperform- hanced their performance in areas such as code generation [34],
ing proprietary LLMs such as GPT-4o. Additionally, our find- [35], medical diagnosis [36], and legal analysis [37]. However,
ings reveal critical insights into LLM instruction fine-tuning constructing high-quality datasets for domain-specific tasks like
for log analysis: domain knowledge accumulation is criti- log analysis is particularly challenging due to the diversity of
cal, and instruction hierarchy matters. These findings provide scenarios and the cost of annotation. To address the high costs
actionable guidelines for future research in LLM-driven log of manual annotation, researchers have turned to LLM-based
analysis. data synthesis, which involves generating synthetic instruc-
 This paper presents the following key contributions: tion datasets using LLMs [39], [40]. However, general-purpose
 1) To our best knowledge, we are the first to introduce LLMs often suffer from hallucination and inaccuracy when
 the knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework applied to the highly technical field of log analysis. Furthermore,
 designed for log analysis. By leveraging LLMs as data ensuring diversity and relevance in synthesized instructions resynthesis engines and integrating domain knowledge, mains a critical challenge. Existing general-purpose instruction
 our framework synthesizes 88K high-quality instructions synthesis works [32], [49], [50] focus on human instruction
 without manual intervention. alignment and cannot be applied to industrial log analysis sce-
 2) We introduce the domain knowledge of logs for en- narios.
 suring the accuracy and relevance during instruction Considering the LLM-based data synthesis technique for log
 synthesis. To ensure diversity, we introduce hierarchi- analysis remains underexplored, to address these limitations,
 cal instruction synthesis based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, we explore leveraging LLM to synthesize instruction data taifacilitating the development of diverse log analysis lored specifically for log analysis. By constructing a structured
 capabilities. knowledge tree to integrate domain-specific information and
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1365

 comprises three fundamental components: 1) Root Node rooti ,
 which represents the core issue derived from the log message, synthesized into a concise phrase (e.g., “Database
 Connection Failure”). It serves as the semantic anchor
 for subsequent knowledge organization. 2) Branch Nodes
 {node1i , node2i , ..., nodemi }, these nodes serve as intermediate
 categories that organize domain knowledge into different groups
 (e.g., error causes, parameter information, impact scope). The
 identification and granularity of these branches are determined
 automatically by the LLM, guided by prompts to classify and,
 when appropriate, further subdivide knowledge categories based
 on logical coherence. 3) Leaf Nodes {leafi1 , leafi2 , ..., leafin },
Fig. 1. The pipeline of LogInstruct. which represent the most atomic knowledge units, each encapsulating a complete and non-redundant fact derived from
 the documentation. This hierarchical organization guarantees
leveraging Bloom’s Taxonomy to model instructions of varying that each root-to-leaf path forms a complete, non-redundant
difficulty, LogInstruct ensures both accuracy and diversity in the knowledge chain, ensuring both comprehensive coverage and
generated data. logical clarity.
 The domain knowledge for each log entry is sourced from
 its corresponding publicly available documentation, which is
 III. METHODS
 typically in HTML format. We first employ XPath queries
A. Overview to precisely extract the relevant textual information for each
 Fig. 1 shows the overall pipeline of LogInstruct, which is log. To transform these unstructured text passages into a form
divided into two stages: knowledge tree construction and in- usable for instruction synthesis, we leverage the semantic
struction synthesis. In the knowledge tree construction stage, understanding capability of LLMs with prompt engineering.
we collect raw logs and corresponding documentation as input, This process converts raw text into a hierarchical Knowlwhich provides sufficient background information, such as de- edge Tree. The construction proceeds through three distinct
scription, cause, and solutions. Then we employ the LLM to stages:
extract knowledge and organize it into a structured knowledge 1) Root Node Identification: The LLM analyzes the raw log
tree. In the instruction synthesis stage, we take the constructed message to identify its core semantic issue (e.g., ”Database
knowledge tree as the foundation, and then employ the LLM Connection Failure”), ignoring variable parameters. This
to synthesize instructions of different difficulty levels. After becomes the root node of the tree.
instruction synthesis, we also evaluate and refine the synthesized 2) Branch Node Categorization: The LLM classifies related
instructions to ensure the quality of the instructions. Finally, knowledge from documentation into distinct categories
these synthesized instructions will be used to fine-tune the and summarizes the category with keywords as the branch
open-source LLM and get the log analysis-specific LLM. In node. To ensure a consistent starting point for categorizathe following sections, we describe the details of LogInstruct. tion across different logs, the prompt supplies a set of seed
 categories (e.g., “Description”, “Causes”, “Impact”). The
 LLM is instructed to classify the documentation content
B. Knowledge Tree Construction into these or other logically distinct categories, using a
 LLMs are usually unable to understand logs accurately when keyword or short phrase to label each branch node. For
they lack domain knowledge, which leads to the inability to each branch, the LLM is prompted to check if the category
generate effective log analysis instructions. To mitigate this, contains subcategories or heterogeneous information. If
we incorporate domain-specific knowledge for each log entry so, it refines the branch to ensure logical clarity and capture
by leveraging publicly available documentation. Documentation multi-level details. For example, the possible causes of the
serves as a repository of domain-specific knowledge, offering log can be further divided into direct causes and indirect
detailed background information, such as descriptions of log causes.
events, their causes, and potential solutions. 3) Leaf Node extraction: Finally, for the content under each
 However, documentation is often verbose and fragmented, terminal branch, the LLM is prompted to extract atomic,
which poses challenges for LLMs to effectively extract and non-redundant factual statements. Verbose descriptions
utilize key knowledge. To address this, we systematically or- are condensed into concise knowledge units, which beganize the extracted information into a knowledge tree structure come the leaf nodes attached to their corresponding
for each log entry. This structured organization enables more branches. To ensure knowledge richness, we filter out
precise knowledge extraction and facilitates the generation of knowledge trees with fewer than three leaf nodes.
high-quality log analysis instructions. To ensure seamless integration with downstream stages of our
 We construct a knowledge treeT reei for eachlog logi , the framework, we constrain the LLM to output the final Knowlknowledge tree T reei = rooti {nodeki }m k n
 k=1 {leafi }k=1 edge Tree in a rigorously defined JSON schema. This schema
1366 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

mandates the structure, node types, parent-child relationships, These instructions provide a basic understanding of log
and text formatting. To promote consistency and handle noisy content, requiring the LLM to identify core issues or facts
documentation, we implement three key mechanisms. First, any without the need for advanced reasoning. This helps the
output that violates the predefined JSON schema will be auto- model acquire essential domain knowledge and bridge
matically captured, triggering re-generation attempts. If violated existing gaps in general LLMs.
again, it will be directly discarded. Second, after tree construc- r L2 (Medium - Apply & Analyze): L2 questions emphation, the structured JSON is fed back to the LLM with a prompt size localized analysis and reasoning that span multiple
asking it to verify the logical coherence of each root-to-leaf branches of the knowledge tree. These instructions require
path and to identify any contradictory information or logical the LLM to integrate and apply knowledge from several
gaps. Based on this feedback, specific branches can be revised. related information, fostering a deeper understanding of
Third, for missing information, we instruct the LLM not to the log context and encouraging more advanced analytical
fabricate content. If documentation lacks critical details, omit thinking.
the corresponding branches or leaf nodes rather than filling in r L3 (Hard - Synthesize & Predict): L3 questions focus
with assumptions. For redundant information, the prompt for on comprehensive analysis across the entire knowledge
leaf node generation explicitly requires “non-redundant” fact tree and require the LLM to conduct system-level reaextraction, guiding the LLM to merge semantically equivalent soning, often involving hypothetical scenarios or multistatements. step problem-solving. The LLM design questions from a
 holistic perspective, considering interactions across the full
 scope of the knowledge tree, to address more complex and
C. Instruction Synthesis realistic log analysis tasks.
 The instruction synthesis module (as shown in Fig. 2) is To explicitly model the knowledge sources of each instruction
responsible for creating high-quality instruction data tailored question, the LLM plans how to utilize different paths within the
to log analysis tasks, which comprises two components: LLM- knowledge tree to design questions of varying difficulty. This
driven Instruction Generation and Evaluation and Refinement. ensures that the generated instructions are logically grounded in
Details of both components are described next. domain knowledge. To maintain balance across difficulty levels,
 1) Instruction Generation: The process of instruction gen- we generate three instructions for L1 and 2–3 instructions each
eration is focused on constructing synthetic data with the LLM for L2 and L3 per log entry. Additionally, we ensure that the
that facilitates fine-tuning of open-source LLM for log anal- generated queries are diverse in phrasing and structure, avoiding
ysis tasks. The generated data is structured into three fields: repetitive instruction questions.
“instruction”, “input”, and “output”. The instruction field rep- Response Generation: The responses are synthesized by
resents the query to the model, the input field contains raw log leveraging the knowledge tree to provide accurate and condata, and the output field provides the expected reasoning or textually relevant answers to the questions. The complexity of
response. To avoid ambiguity, we denote the “instruction” field the response depends on the difficulty level of the instruction.
by instruction question and the “output” field by response. The Specifically, for L1 instructions, responses are concise and diinstruction generation process takes as input a raw log entry and rectly summarize factual information from the knowledge tree.
its corresponding knowledge tree, and the LLM is required to For L2 instructions, responses provide step-by-step reasoning,
traverse the knowledge tree based on breadth-first traversal and integrating knowledge from multiple branches of the knowledge
cover more than 90% of the leaf nodes. The generation process tree. For L3 instructions, responses involve predictive reasoncomprises two main steps: Question Generation and Response ing and systematic analysis, describing the potential impacts
Generation. or outcomes of specific scenarios. Responses for L2 and L3
 Question Generation: To comprehensively design a variety of instructions emphasize clarity and logical coherence, avoiding
real-world log analysis questions and capture different analytical repetition of knowledge tree content while maintaining alignperspectives, we draw inspiration from Bloom’s Taxonomy [41], ment with the domain knowledge.
[42]. Specifically, we utilize prompting strategies to systemati- The final instruction data is output in a structured JSON format
cally guide the LLM in generating diverse log analysis questions for convenient data acquisition, including a detailed plan for
that span a range of cognitive difficulty levels, grounded in instruction generation and the synthesized data.
the structured knowledge tree. By explicitly defining difficulty 2) Evaluation and Refinement: To ensure the quality and
requirements within the prompts, the LLM can craft different diversity of the generated instructions, a robust evaluation and
questions that range from straightforward factual queries to refinement process is implemented in the LogInstruct frameadvanced multi-step reasoning tasks. This approach ensures that work. This process is designed to systematically evaluate the
the model is trained on instructions across multiple cognitive generated instructions and refine them to meet predefined quality
levels, enhancing its ability to adapt to a wide array of log anal- standards. Specifically, we evaluate the quality of the generated
ysis scenarios. Specifically, we design three different instruction instructions along three key dimensions: Coverage, Diversity,
difficulties: and Correctness. Instructions failing to meet the requirements
 r L1 (Easy - Remember & Understand): L1 questions are in any of these dimensions are refined with the LLM, ensurdesigned around a single path within the knowledge tree ing the final instruction dataset is comprehensive, diverse, and
 and focus on fundamental knowledge and comprehension. accurate.
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1367

 1) Coverage: The coverage dimension measures the com- TABLE I
 STATISTICS OF DATASET USED FOR INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS.
prehensiveness of the instructions in terms of the tree paths,
ensuring that the synthesized instructions fully utilize the tree
paths to generate questions and answers that cover all relevant
aspects of the log. For evaluation, we compute the ratio of the
number of utilized leaf nodes to the total number of leaf nodes
in the knowledge tree for each log. If the coverage rate falls
below 90% , the LLM is prompted to generate additional easy
questions targeting the missing leaf nodes. By enforcing high IV. EXPERIMENTS
coverage, the process guarantees that relevant knowledge points
are represented in the synthetic instruction set. A. Data Preparation
 2) Diversity: The diversity dimension evaluates the variety To mitigate the risk of data leakage from existing public
of instruction questions generated for the same log. High diver- system logs (e.g., distributed or operating system logs) that may
sity in instruction questions prevents overfitting and provides a have been included in LLM pretraining corpora, our experiments
broader range of learning scenarios for the follow-up training focus on network device logs, which are independently devel-
[32], [51]. Following previous works [32], we compute the oped by vendors (e.g., Huawei, H3C) for specialized hardware
ROUGE-L overlap between newly generated instructions and and protocols, offering richer technical semantics. Due to rapid
existing instructions for the same log. For different instruction product iterations and customized development, vendor-specific
questions on the same log, only instructions with a ROUGE-L logs are rarely included in publicly available LLM pre-training
overlap score less than 0.5 are retained, ensuring sufficient datasets.
similarity between questions. If ROUGE-L exceeds 0.5, the We manually collect 13,161 unique logs and related docu-
LLM is prompted to rewrite the instructions. The rewriting pro- mentation from the latest publicly available technical references
cess emphasizes semantic variation while maintaining logical provided by Huawei1 and H3C2 (Detailed statistics are provided
consistency with the original instruction. in Table I). All raw logs and documentation are also publicly
 3) Correctness: The correctness evaluates the accuracy of the available in our repository for subsequent research, where each
responses generated for each instruction question. The correct- log entry is accompanied by a corresponding documentation
ness of responses is critical for ensuring the reliability of the page, providing an explanation of the log, descriptions of its
instruction dataset. Each instruction-response pair is verified parameters, potential causes, and recommended handling proby the LLM itself by re-referencing the knowledge tree, the cedures. Based on this raw data, we synthesize 88K instruction
verification determines whether the response aligns with the pro- data with GPT-4o for log analysis.
vided knowledge. If responses that deviate from the knowledge
tree or exhibit inaccuracies, the LLM is prompted to regenerate B. Implementation Details
corrected answers.
 This evaluation and refinement stage is a cornerstone of the 1) Instruction Synthesis Settings: LogInstruct requires only
LogInstruct framework, ensuring that the synthesized instruc- a single LLM to perform knowledge tree construction, instruction dataset is of high quality. tion synthesis, and instruction refinement. In the main experiments, we utilize GPT-4o as the LLM, processing 13,161
 log-documentation pairs to synthesize instructions. We utilize
D. Finetuning the LLM with Instructions
 HTTP requests to invoke the OpenAI APIs and interact with
 After the creation of the instructions, we merge all datasets GPT-4o (gpt-4o-2024-08-06). To enhance the diversity of the
with different difficulty levels to fine-tune the open-source LLM. instructions, the temperature is set to 0.8 during synthesis.
Following the standard instruction-tuning process, it takes one 2) Instruction Tuning Setting: Following the paradigm shift
foundation LLM as the backbone, then the LLM gradually aligns towards generative large language models pioneered by the GPT
its output with ideal log analysis results by predicting the next series, the decoder-only architecture has emerged as the domtokens in the Response conditioned on an input Instruction. inant and often more performant framework in contemporary
Specifically, we concatenate the instruction and input log as a NLP [52], [53]. In line with this trend, our instruction tuning exprompt and train the model to generate the instance output in a periments utilize open-source LLMs based on the decoder-only
standard supervised way. Transformer architecture.
 Denote the instruction instance by {(xi , yi )|xi = We employ the LLaMA-Factory [54] to fine-tune the
instructioni + inputi , yi = outputi , i ∈ [1, N ])}, which Qwen2.5-Instruct [55] series of models, including 1.5B and 7B
represents elements in the constructed instruction data set I. versions. This allows us to compare the performance of LLMs
The optimization objective of SFT is to make the foundation with different sizes on the synthesized instruction datasets. For
LLM θ reasoning with professional analysis for each instruction fair evaluation, we set the batch size to 32, the learning rate
and input log, which can be formulated as: to 3.0e-5 with a cosine learning rate scheduler, and train for 5
 N
 
 LSF T = argmax logP (yi |xi ; θ) (1) 1 https://support.huawei.com/enterprise/en/index.html
 2 https://www.h3c.com/en/Support
 i=1
1368 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II manually filtered, retaining only concise, key-information-
 DATASETS OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS LOG FOR EVALUATION
 centric explanations. The final datasets employ raw logs as
 input and their verified explanations as ground truth, which
 is a generation task.
 We employ BLEU and BERTScore as the evaluation metrics to capture lexical overlap semantic similarities, where
 BLEU measures n-gram (n = 1 to 4) overlap between
 generated and reference texts, and BERTScore evaluates
 semantic similarity using contextual embeddings.
epochs in all experiments. Our fine-tuning process is conducted
 r Log Summarization (LS): The Log Summarization task
on a Linux server with a single NVIDIA A100 GPU. aims to extract and condense the essential information from
 3) Evaluation Setting: We leverage vLLM3 to accelerate raw logs into concise summaries, evaluating the model’s
the inference process on open-source LLMs. To increase the ability to identify essential information.
stability of LLM’s output, we set the temperature of LLMs to 0 Dataset and Metric: We build datasets from the collected
during evaluation. For fairness in comparison, all LLMs follow network device logs, where the structure of each network
the same in-context learning setting with 4 examples and provide device log contains a brief “summary” field (e.g., Brief:
the same prompt and examples during inference. AS_PATH_EXCEED_MAXNUM) and a “log message”
 field. To prevent data leakage, we remove the summary
C. Downstream Tasks field and use the log message as input, with the summary
 field serving as ground truth.
 Traditional log analysis tasks, such as log parsing and anomaly We adopt BLEU and ROUGE-1 as the evaluation metrics.
detection, have been extensively studied in the past decade, with BLEU emphasizes lexical precision, ROUGE-1 measures
many datasets sourced from LogHub [56]. However, as recently the recall of overlapping single words between generated
demonstrated in benchmark studies on LogHub, many methods texts and reference texts. These metrics are widely used
[10], [15], [16], [18], [43] have already achieved perfect or near- in summarization tasks [57] to balance conciseness and
perfect parsing accuracy on these datasets. Similarly, datasets informativeness.
for anomaly detection often feature relatively simple anomaly 2) Log Application Tasks:
patterns [12], [38], allowing simple machine learning models r Solution Recommendation (SR): The Solution Recommen-
(e.g., KNN) to achieve nearly perfect performance. This leaves dation task provides actionable solutions to address issues
limited room for further improvement and fails to sufficiently indicated in logs. It evaluates a model’s ability to analyze
evaluate the capabilities of advanced models. logs comprehensively and recommend relevant commands
 To address these limitations and comprehensively evaluate or steps for troubleshooting, which is a critical requirement
model performance, we construct five downstream tasks based in real-world operational scenarios.
on network device logs, spanning two dimensions: log under- Dataset and Metric: We collect logs paired with troustanding and log analysis applications. Specifically, log under- bleshooting solutions from Huawei and H3C public forums
standing tasks include two tasks and focus on semantic un- as datasets. Specifically, user-submitted issues containing
derstanding capabilities, which serve as the foundational skills error logs are collected as input, and the highest-voted
required for log analysis. And application tasks include three solutions are used as ground truth.
tasks grounded in real-world operational scenarios, which aim We employ BLEU and ROUGE-L as the evaluation metrics,
at evaluating the practical application capabilities of models in where BLEU emphasizes exact command/term matching,
analyzing logs. Table II provides detailed statistics for each task and ROUGE-L measures the longest common subsequence
dataset. All publicly available datasets are hosted in our GitHub (LCS) between generated and reference texts, capturing
repository to facilitate reproducibility and future research. In structural coherence at the sentence level.
the following sections, we introduce the five tasks and their r Potential Failure Prediction (PFP): This task focuses on
evaluation metrics. predicting whether a given log indicates a potential system
 1) Log Understanding Tasks:
 r Log Interpretation (LI): The Log Interpretation task aims or device failure. It is framed as a binary classification problem to distinguish failure-indicative logs and notificationto convert raw log data into clear, human-readable insights indicative logs.
 that highlight the key issues indicated in the logs. This Dataset and Metric: The datasets are collected from
 task evaluates a model’s ability to semantically understand Huawei and H3C Reference Guides, which annotate logs
 the critical information embedded in logs and generate with risk levels (e.g., Emergency, Informational). Logs
 coherent explanations. indicating failure to the system are marked as True, while
 Dataset and Metric: Following KnowLog, we build others are labeled as False.
 datasets from public product documentation containing As the binary classification task, we report Precision, Relog entries paired with expert-written explanations. To en- call, and F1-score on the True (anomaly) class as evaluasure high-quality, redundant or unfocused explanations are tion metrics.
 r Root Cause Analysis (RCA): Root Cause Analysis identi-
 3 https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm fies the underlying causes of anomalies based on log data,
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1369

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT LLMS ON GENERATION TASKS

 which is framed as a multi-class classification problem 4) Task-specific fine-tuned (FT) LLM: Instruction tuning is
 where the model must assign logs to one of several pre- a common approach to adapt open-source LLMs for domaindefined error categories. specific tasks [20], [31]. For this baseline, we manually annotate
 Dataset and Metric: The datasets are constructed by col- 200 training samples for each task and combine them into an
 lecting user-submitted issues from Huawei’s public fo- instruction dataset for fine-tuning. For fair comparison, we finerums. Only discussions analyzing the causes of errors are tune it on the same open-source LLM (Qwen2.5-Instruct).
 included. The final dataset consists of five error categories,
 such as communication or device failures.
 E. Evaluations
 As an unbalanced multiclass classification task and considering the importance of different classes, we report We evaluate LogInstruct by answering the following research
 Accuracy and Weighted-F1 as evaluation metrics. questions (RQs):
 1) RQ1: How effective is LogInstruct compared with the
 current mainstream LLMs on downstream tasks?: We conduct
 extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of LogInstruct, comparing it with baselines across a range of log anal-
D. Baselines
 ysis tasks. As shown in Tables III–IV, LogInstruct achieves
 We evaluate LogInstruct against the following baseline: SOTA performance across all tasks except log Summarization,
 1) Pre-trained Language Models: We include BERT [8], where proprietary LLMs exhibit marginally superior results.
[58], Biglog [59], and KnowLog [17] as baselines, where Notably, LogInstruct surpasses the best baseline by an average
BERT is the first and most widely used pre-trained model for of 16.88% F1-score on the Potential Failure Prediction task.
log analysis, Biglog excels in capturing essential features with This significant improvement validates the effectiveness of our
pre-training on logs, and KnowLog enhances its performance knowledge-driven instruction synthesis framework in enhancing
with knowledge-enhanced pre-training on log corpus. These LLMs’ capacity for log analysis.
pre-trained models are fine-tuned on specific tasks before predic- First, while pre-trained models (BERT, BigLog, and
tion. For each task, we manually annotate 200 training samples KnowLog) achieve reasonable performance on classification
for fine-tuning. However, since these models are not designed tasks, their performance plateaus when faced with tasks requirfor text generation, we limit their evaluation to classification ing deeper semantic understanding and reasoning. The results
tasks. For generative log analysis tasks, we employ Flan-T5 from FLAN-T5 indicate a noticeable performance gap when
(version: flan-t5-large) [60] as a baseline. It is a widely used compared to current mainstream LLMs. This gap can be primarsequence-to-sequence model that has undergone large-scale ily attributed to its more limited knowledge base and comparainstruction tuning, endowing it with instruction-following and tively weaker instruction-following proficiency. Second, propritext-generation capabilities suitable for our evaluation. etary LLMs exhibit remarkable semantic understanding across
 2) General proprietary LLMs: We select two proprietary general domains. While they excel in tasks like Log Summariza-
LLMs (ChatGPT (version: gpt-3.5-turbo-0613) and GPT-4o tion, where semantic understanding plays a dominant role, they
(version: gpt-4o-2024-08-06)) as baselines due to their amazing fall short in other knowledge-intensive analysis tasks when comapplication potential in multiple domains, where we query them pared to LogInstruct. Notably, Qwen2.5-1.5B fine-tuned with
with OpenAI APIs. LogInstruct consistently outperforms proprietary LLMs in most
 3) General open-source LLMs: Considering practical de- log analysis tasks. This suggests that domain-specific instruction
ployment resources, we include several open-source LLMs tuning can compensate for smaller LLM sizes by aligning LLMs
(under 8B parameters) spanning diverse model architectures, with log analysis tasks and domain knowledge. General openincluding Qwen2.5-Instruct-[1.5B, 3B, 7B][55], Mistral-7B- source LLMs underperform due to their lack of log-specific
Instruct, and Llama3.1-8B-Instruct[61]. knowledge, which confirms that our synthesized instructions
1370 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH DIFFERENT LLMS ON CLASSIFICATION TASKS

effectively bridge the domain knowledge gap in open-source gain becomes more pronounced with a stronger base model:
LLMs. Third, the task-specific fine-tuned (FT) LLM exhibits the fine-tuned 7B model attains a win rate of over 65% . These
limited improvements, primarily due to the scarcity and simplic- results indicate that our instruction tuning effectively enhances
ity of annotated data. In contrast, LogInstruct leverages domain the models’ ability to follow complex instructions and produce
knowledge and hierarchical difficulty modeling, enabling signif- superior responses.
icant performance improvements across all tasks. This highlights In conclusion, the performance gains highlight the effecthe critical role of incorporating domain knowledge and varying tiveness of LogInstruct in synthesizing high-quality instruction
cognitive complexity in developing LLMs capable of handling data for log analysis tasks. By incorporating systematic domain
complex log analysis scenarios. Finally, Qwen2.5-7B tuned knowledge and hierarchical difficulty modeling, LogInstruct
with LogInstruct consistently outperforms its 1.5B counterpart, empowers LLMs to tackle a wide range of log analysis tasks
indicating that stronger base models better utilize synthesized with enhanced reasoning capabilities.
instructions. This suggests that selecting open-source LLMs 2) RQ2: How effective is LogInstruct in generalization abilwith robust foundational capabilities can further amplify the ity?: To evaluate the generalization ability of the instructions
benefits of instruction tuning. synthesized by logInstruct, we design experiments with a focus
 To further evaluate the quality of responses generated by on its performance in analyzing unseen logs. While the synthetic
models fine-tuned with LogInstruct, we conduct a comparative instructions are derived from logs of Huawei and H3C, including
analysis of their outputs. Specifically, we focus on the Solution two devices: Switches and Routers, we additionally collect logs
Recommendation task for this analysis, as it demands longer, from Security devices, which are not part of the instruction
more coherent, and highly readable responses. Considering eval- synthesis process. This setup ensures that our evaluation meauation costs, we randomly sample 200 queries from the Huawei sures the model’s ability to generalize in an unseen domain.
dataset for evaluation. For the evaluation of LogInstruct’s practicality, we focus on
 For each query, we collect responses from both the base LLM the log application tasks, as they reflect real-world operational
(before fine-tuning) and its counterpart fine-tuned with LogIn- scenarios. Specifically, we evaluate three log application tasks
struct. An LLM-as-a-Judge approach [50] is then employed to and one log understanding task using Security device logs. Of
compare these paired responses. The judge model is instructed to these tasks, the RCA task is evaluated using Huawei Security
select the better response based on a comprehensive evaluation device logs only, as data from other vendors was unavailable.
across three dimensions: Usefulness, Relevance, and Accuracy. For the remaining tasks, we report the average results across the
To mitigate potential evaluation bias, we report results using two HW and H3C Security datasets.
distinct judge models: GPT-4 and DeepSeek-R1. Considering The results of the experiments are shown in Fig. 4, which
that LLMs may be sensitive to the order of presented options, indicates that across all tasks, LLMs fine-tuned on our synwe follow the calibration method introduced by Wang et al. [62]. thesized instruction data consistently achieved the best per-
For each test case, we query the judge model twice: once with the formance, significantly outperforming the baselines. Notably,
LogInstruct response first, and once with the baseline response the improvement on the Potential Failure Prediction task is
first. The final comparative result is aggregated from these two particularly pronounced, where the F1-score of LogInstruct exprompts. ceeded the best-performing baseline, GPT-4o, by an impressive
 The experimental results are shown in Fig. 3, which shows 23.36% . First, when compared to the general LLMs, LogInthe win rate of the LogInstruct-tuned models against their base struct exhibits substantial improvements, which demonstrates
counterparts. The fine-tuned models demonstrate significantly that the knowledge-driven instructions endowed the models
higher response quality. The 1.5B model fine-tuned with LogIn- with domain-specific insights, enabling them to generalize efstruct achieves a win rate exceeding 45% . This performance fectively to diverse scenarios. Second, task-specific fine-tuned
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1371

Fig. 2. The framework of Instruction Synthesis, which comprises two components: LLM-based Instruction Generation and Evaluation and Refinement. The first
component synthesizes instruction data of different difficulty levels with the knowledge tree. The last component evaluates and refines the synthesized instructions
to ensure the quality.

 Fig. 4. Performance of LogInstruct on unseen logs.

Fig. 3. Evaluation results of LogInstruct on Solution Recommendation task.
 effectively, alleviating inherent gaps in understanding logs and
 tasks.
 A critical requirement for log analysis models in production
LLMs (FT-LLMs) show limited improvements due to the lack of is robust generalization, as real-world system logs are inherdiverse data, and LogInstruct shows consistently better perfor- ently unstable. Logging statements are frequently updated by
mance. The diverse and hierarchical instructions synthesized by developers during software evolution, leading to the continu-
LogInstruct equipped LLMs to handle diverse domain logs more ous emergence of new yet semantically similar log messages.
1372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 5. Performance of LogInstruct on evolved logs.

Studies indicate that approximately 20% –45% of logging statements may change throughout a system’s lifetime [6]. To assess
whether models fine-tuned with LogInstruct merely memorize
static log patterns or learn to perform generalized reasoning,
we evaluate their performance on evolved logs. We conduct this Fig. 6. Performance of LogInstruct with different proportions of knowledge
evaluation on two tasks: Potential Failure Prediction and Root injection.
Cause Analysis. Following prior works [6], [63], we simulate
log evolution by applying semantics-preserving transformations
to the original Huawei log data. Specifically, we perform syn- for complex log analysis tasks. Second, different log analysis
onym replacement on the original log messages using WordNet, tasks exhibit varying levels of dependency on domain knowlsubstituting certain tokens with their synonyms while strictly edge. For relatively simpler tasks such as Log Interpretation,
preserving the original semantic meaning and associated la- injecting 20% of the domain knowledge already leads to a signifbels. To test varying degrees of change, we apply different icant performance boost. Beyond this threshold, the performance
replacement ratios based on the token count of the original plateaus. In contrast, more complex tasks such as Root Cause
logs. Analysis, which involve reasoning and multi-step inference,
 The results are presented in Fig. 5, which demonstrates that show continuous performance improvements as the proportion
models fine-tuned with LogInstruct maintain stable performance of injected knowledge increases. Third, domain knowledge must
on the evolved logs across both tasks, with no noticeable degra- reach a critical mass before the model exhibits a breakthrough
dation. This consistency indicates that the models’ effectiveness in performance. For example, in the Potential Failure Prediction
does not rely on memorizing specific log instances. Instead, it task, the model demonstrates slow performance gains when the
suggests that the synthetic instruction data enhances the model’s knowledge proportion is below 40% . However, when the proability to generalize understanding, enabling it to perform pre- portion increases to 60% , the model’s performance experiences
cise analysis. This provides strong evidence for the effectiveness a breakthrough, with an F1 score improvement of 17.1% on
of this framework in boosting model generalization capabilities. average. This suggests that insufficient domain knowledge fails
 Consequently, the results affirm that LogInstruct exhibits to unlock the model’s full potential, while a more comprehensive
strong generalization capabilities, synthesizing transferable do- knowledge coverage enables the model to achieve significant
main knowledge and diverse instructions. This adaptability capability gains.
makes LogInstruct a promising tool for tackling diverse real- In conclusion, domain knowledge is essential for boosting
world log analysis scenarios. model performance, particularly for complex reasoning tasks.
 3) RQ3: How effective is LogInstruct with different propor- While simpler tasks benefit from minimal knowledge injection,
tions of knowledge injection?: To investigate the impact of more complex tasks require a critical mass of domain knowledge
knowledge coverage density on the effectiveness of synthetic to unlock the model’s full potential.
instructions, we conduct experiments by sampling instruction 4) RQ4: How effective is LogInstruct at different difficulty
data for the same log entry at varying proportions and training levels of instruction?: To investigate how instruction difficulty
Qwen2.5-7B on these subsets. This allows us to control the impacts the fine-tuning of log analysis LLMs, we systematiproportion of domain knowledge accessible for each log entry. cally evaluate the LLM trained on instruction sets of varying
Given that the log summarization task primarily focuses on complexity: Easy, Medium, Hard, and their combinations. The
semantic understanding with minimal reliance on knowledge, evaluation is performed on four downstream tasks, focusing on
we exclude it from the evaluation and focus on the remaining the log application task given its practicality.
four tasks. The results are shown in Fig. 7, which reveals that different
 As shown in Fig. 6, the results reveal several insights regarding difficulty levels of instructions play complementary roles in
the relationship between knowledge injection proportions and enhancing log analysis capabilities. First, we find that easy
model performance. First, as the proportion of injected domain instructions yield the most significant improvement and outperknowledge increases, the model’s performance improves consis- form those fine-tuned on medium or hard instructions, unlike
tently across all tasks. This underscores the importance of do- prior findings in mathematical reasoning and code generation
main knowledge in synthetic instruction generation, especially [64], [65], [66], [67], where complex instructions are critical for
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1373

 Fig. 8. Performance of different open-source LLMs for instruction Synthesis
 with LogInstruct framework.

Fig. 7. Performance of different difficulty levels of instruction.

enhancing reasoning. Especially in the RCA task, the model
fine-tuned only on hard instructions exhibits a performance
drop. Even hybrid medium or hard instruction sets underperform Fig. 9. Ablation studies for LogInstruct.
easy instructions alone, highlighting the foundational role of
basic domain knowledge in bridging the inherent knowledge
gap of general LLMs. Hence, we can infer that easy instructions
 can effectively replace proprietary models for instruction synexplicitly incorporate domain knowledge, which serves as a prethesis, addressing concerns around data privacy and API costs.
requisite for advanced reasoning. Without this grounding, com-
 On the other hand, Qwen2.5-7B synthesized instructions unplex instructions become ambiguous, leading to hallucinated or
 derperformed the other two models. The performance gap beincoherent responses. Second, while easy instructions provide
 tween Qwen2.5-7B and R1-Distill-Qwen-32B highlights the
the foundational knowledge, combining them with medium and
 importance of choosing a base model with sufficient semanhard instructions further enhances the model’s reasoning capatic understanding and reasoning capabilities for instruction
bilities. Easy instructions establish the knowledge infrastructure,
 synthesis.
while complex instructions utilize and connect this knowledge
 In conclusion, LogInstruct can effectively utilize open-source
for advanced inference tasks.
 LLMs to synthesize instructions for log analysis tasks, which
 In summary, easy instructions are indispensable for addresshighlights the practicality of open-source LLMs as replacements
ing the domain knowledge gap in general LLMs, serving as
 for proprietary LLMs, addressing privacy concerns and reducing
prerequisites for complex log analysis capabilities. Furthermore,
 API costs without compromising performance.
combining easy and complex instructions ensures balanced improvements in foundational knowledge and reasoning capabil-
 F. Ablation Studies
ities, highlighting the importance of instruction diversity and
progression in fine-tuning LLMs for log analysis. LogInstruct To further validate the importance of domain knowledge and
ensures that the model is both knowledgeable and capable of instruction quality during instruction synthesis, we analyze the
handling complex reasoning tasks. effects of removing key components in the instruction synthesis
 5) RQ5: How effective is LogInstruct based on open-source process and evaluate their impact on Qwen2.5-7B’s perfor-
LLMs for instruction synthesis?: To address enterprise concerns mance. After fine-tuning Qwen2.5-7B with different instrucaround data privacy and proprietary LLMs dependencies, we tions, we report results on three log application tasks.
evaluate whether LogInstruct can synthesize high-quality in- 1) Domain Knowledge Ablation: We remove domain knowlstructions using open-source LLMs as substitutes. Specifically, edge from the instruction synthesis process, and the LLM is
we evaluate two open-source LLMs of varying capabilities only provided with raw log data and tasked with designing
(Qwen2.5-7B and DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B) to analyze multiple instructions directly. As shown in Fig. 9, results show
the impact of LLM’s capacity on instruction synthesis quality. that removing domain knowledge leads to a significant per-
For the evaluation, we fine-tune the Qwen2.5-7B model and re- formance drop across all tasks. For example, on the Potential
port results on three application tasks due to their comprehensive Failure Prediction task, the F1 score dropped by an average
requirements for both semantic understanding and reasoning of 20.13% . This highlights the indispensable role of domain
capabilities. knowledge in guiding the instruction generation process. With-
 As shown in Fig. 8, models fine-tuned on instructions syn- out domain knowledge, the synthetic instructions often contain
thesized by R1-Distill-32B achieve comparable results with hallucinated responses and fail to address critical aspects of log
GPT-4o synthesized data, demonstrating that open-source LLMs analysis.
1374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Fig. 11. Distribution of Leaf Nodes and Rouge-L among instruction questions.

Fig. 10. Statistical analysis of instruction data.
 To further evaluate the overall diversity of synthesized instructions, we first plot the distribution of semantic embeddings for all
 instruction questions (in Fig. 10(b)) and analyze their verb-noun
 2) Instruction Quality Ablation: Since the effect of knowl- structure using the Berkeley Neural Parser [68]. Specifically,
edge coverage was already studied in RQ3, here we focus on we extract the root verbs and their first direct noun objects,
the diversity and correctness of instructions and remove the and plot the top 6 most common root verbs and their top 5
corresponding evaluation modules in LogInstruct. It can be direct noun objects in Fig. 10(a). The results demonstrate diverse
found that the removal of specific modules consistently leads intents and textual formats in the instructions. In Fig. 10(c), we
to performance degradation, which highlights the importance of also present the length distributions of the instruction questions
each evaluation module. However, the degree of performance and output responses, where we observe a positive correlation
decline varies, where the removal of correctness validation between instruction difficulty and the length of questions and
leads to a more pronounced performance decline compared to responses. These findings underscore the ability of LogInstruct
the removal of diversity validation. This result highlights that to synthesize high-quality, diverse instruction data. In addition,
while diverse instructions contribute to broader task coverage, we manually verified 200 cases from the synthesized dataset and
correctness is fundamental for ensuring reliable and accurate found no significant errors.
model outputs.
 C. Case Studies
 V. DISCUSSION
 1) Instructions with Different Difficulty Levels: To illustrate
A. Cost Analysis the effectiveness of instruction synthesis with varying difficulty
 To analyze the cost of synthesis instructions with LLMs, we levels, we present a case study analyzing three log analycount the API cost of GPT-4o. The average cost of constructing sis instructions of increasing complexity: easy, medium, and
multiple instruction data for one log entry using GPT-4o is hard.
$0.1, with the cost of synthesizing one single instruction data As shown in Fig. 12, the easy instruction focuses on extractaveraging $0.013. This demonstrates that LogInstruct is both ing parameters from the log (e.g., site ID, IP address, route
cost-efficient and scalable, making it a feasible solution for distinguisher). This foundational task provides explicit domain
large-scale instruction generation. knowledge, bridging the domain knowledge gap of generalpurpose LLMs and enabling them to understand log syntax and
 semantics. The medium instruction requires reasoning about the
B. Instruction Diversity
 potential consequences of ignoring the log alert, such as service
 To quantitatively characterize the synthesized dataset, we disruptions or network instability. This level of complexity
first conduct an empirical analysis focusing on two aspects: the connects foundational knowledge to domain-specific reasoning,
granularity of the constructed knowledge trees and the diversity training the model to analyze operational impacts. The hard
of the generated instructions. First, we calculate the number instruction demands a comprehensive action plan to mitigate
of leaf nodes for each log entry in both the Huawei and H3C service interruptions (e.g., scheduling changes, implementing
datasets, which reflects the amount of atomic knowledge ex- redundancy, and monitoring traffic). It emphasizes strategic
tracted per log. The distribution is presented in Fig. 11(a). The planning and multi-step reasoning, preparing the model for
result reveals that most logs in the Huawei and H3C datasets complex troubleshooting scenarios.
are associated with approximately 8 leaf nodes, demonstrating These examples highlight how hierarchical instructions prorich knowledge granularity. Second, we compute the ROUGE-L gressively enhance LLMs’ log analysis capabilities. Easy inscore between instruction questions generated for the same log. structions inject essential knowledge, medium and hard instruc-
The distribution of these scores is shown in Fig. 11(b). The tions enable advanced reasoning capabilities. By synthesizing
average ROUGE-L score is below 0.2, indicating low textual instructions across these difficulty levels, we ensure the prooverlap among instructions derived from the same knowledge gressive enhancement of LLM capabilities, enabling them to
source. address diverse and complex log analysis tasks effectively. This
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1375

 Fig. 13. Examples of instructions about whether introducing knowledge.

 domain knowledge is indispensable for synthesizing highquality instructions.
Fig. 12. Examples of instructions with different difficulty levels.
 D. Threats to Vadility
 1) Privacy Issue: Log data often contains sensitive informahierarchical framework not only improves task performance tion, raising privacy concerns when using proprietary LLMs.
but also highlights the value of combining foundational knowl- To address this, LogInstruct is designed as a general framework
edge with advanced reasoning in developing robust log analysis that supports integration with both proprietary and open-source
LLMs. LLMs, enabling local data processing and avoiding risks asso-
 2) Instructions about Whether Introducing Knowledge: To ciated with external APIs.
illustrate the importance of domain knowledge in synthesizing 2) Randomness: Randomness in LLM inference and prompt
effective log analysis instructions, we provide a comparative construction may pose a threat to the validity of our experiments.
case study involving three examples of instruction synthesis: To ensure stability, we set the temperature to 0 for all LLMs
one generated by our LogInstruct framework, which integrates during evaluation, ensuring stable and deterministic outputs.
domain knowledge, and two generated by GPT-4o without ac- Furthermore, all LLMs are evaluated using the same prompt
cess to domain knowledge. templates and examples. This consistency minimizes bias intro-
 As shown in Fig. 13, the first example demonstrates the duced by prompt variation and ensures fairness in comparative
effectiveness of LogInstruct in synthesizing accurate and ac- evaluations.
tionable instructions. By leveraging domain knowledge such as 3) Data Leakage: Data leakage is also a potential threat to
command usage and diagnostic procedures, the generated in- validity in studies employing LLMs to evaluate, wherein LLMs
struction aligns with real-world log analysis practices, enabling may have inadvertently memorized content from their extensive
engineers to address the issue efficiently. The second exam- pre-training corpora. This could compromise the authenticity of
ple shows that the absence of domain-specific understanding their performance on evaluation data. In our work, we argue that
leads to an instruction that deviates from the actual problem this risk is minimal. The pre-training data for general-purpose
context. The instruction assumes that configuring the port as LLMs primarily consists of web texts, news, books, and encya backup will resolve the speed difference issue, but this so- clopedias (e.g., Wikipedia) [52]. In contrast, the network device
lution is irrelevant to the actual problem. Such outputs can logs used in our study are vendor-specific and collected from
mislead engineers, resulting in wasted effort and delayed trou- recent software versions, making their appearance in general
bleshooting. The third example shows that the output contains public corpora highly unlikely.
hallucinated information. The log message does not indicate a To empirically support this claim, we conduct a comparative
complete failure of the stack port, nor does it mention commu- analysis between 1,000 randomly sampled Wikipedia passages
nication loss. Such inaccuracies arise from the lack of domain (representing a common pre-training corpus) and 1,000 log
knowledge and can lead to critical misunderstandings in log messages from our dataset. First, we compute the perplexity
analysis tasks. This case study demonstrates that incorporating of a general LLM on both datasets. As shown in Fig. 14, the
1376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 of our synthesized data on encoder-decoder architectures (e.g.,
 T5-based models). A broader comparative study across different
 model architectures in the future could yield more generalizable
 insights into the framework’s effectiveness.

 VI. CONCLUSION
 In this paper, we introduce LogInstruct, a knowledge-driven
 instruction synthesis framework designed to enhance LLMs’
 capabilities in automated log analysis. By incorporating domain
 knowledge through a carefully constructed knowledge tree and
 leveraging Bloom’s Taxonomy to design hierarchical instructions, LogInstruct improves the capabilities of LLMs in log
 analysis. Through the synthesis of 88K high-quality instructions
 and fine-tuning of Qwen2.5 models, we achieve state-of-the-art
 performance across five log analysis tasks, demonstrating the
 critical role of domain knowledge and hierarchical instruction
Fig. 14. Distribution of Perplexity and BLEU scores for LLMs on Wikipedia
and Log corpus. design in improving LLM performance.

LLM exhibits significantly lower perplexity on Wikipedia text, REFERENCES
indicating high familiarity. Conversely, the perplexity on log data [1] S. He, P. He, Z. Chen, T. Yang, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “A survey on
is markedly higher, suggesting the LLM is far less exposed to automated log analysis for reliability engineering,” ACM Comput. Surv.,
 vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–37, 2021.
such content. Second, we assess the LLM’s ability to complete [2] S. Zhang et al., “Failure diagnosis in microservice systems: A comprehenpartial sequences. We provide the first 30% of tokens from each sive survey and analysis,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 2024.
sample and prompt the LLM to complete the following content. [3] S. Zhang et al., “No more data silos: Unified microservice failure diagnosis
 with temporal knowledge graph,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 17, no.
We then calculate the BLEU score between the generated content 6, pp. 4013–4026, Nov./Dec. 2024.
and the original ground truth. As shown in Fig. 14, the average [4] X. Zhang et al., “Onion: Identifying incident-indicating logs for cloud
BLEU score is high for Wikipedia completions but negligible systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
 Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1253–1263.
(below 0.01) for log completions, further confirming the LLM’s [5] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
lack of prior exposure to the specific log patterns. and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. 2017
 These results indicate a very low risk of data contamination ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
 [6] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
from pre-training, thereby strengthening the validity of our data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
experimental findings. Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817.
 [7] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “SwissLog: Robust and unified
 deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in Proc.
E. Limitation IEEE 31st Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 92–103.
 [8] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log pars-
 First, the current experiments in this work focus on network ing,” in Proc. 36th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Automated Softw. Eng., 2021,
device logs. Although the results are encouraging, the appli- pp. 492–504.
cability of LogInstruct to other domains remains unexplored. [9] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep learning: How far are we?,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
Real-world systems often generate diverse types of logs across pp. 1356–1367.
different industries, such as cloud services, financial systems, [10] Y. Liu et al., “UniParser: A unified log parser for heterogeneous log data,”
and IoT environments. Future work will expand the evaluation in Proc. ACM Web Conf.2022, 2022, pp. 1893–1901.
 [11] S. Yu, P. He, N. Chen, and Y. Wu, “Brain: Log parsing with bidirectional
to a broader range of log domains to validate the framework’s parallel tree,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3224–3237,
adaptability and robustness in more diverse scenarios. Sep./Oct. 2023.
 Second, LogInstruct employs the knowledge tree constructed [12] B. Yu et al., “Deep learning or classical machine learning? An empirical
 study on log-based anomaly detection,” in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf.
from publicly available documentation to guide instruction syn- Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13.
thesis. While this approach is effective in organizing domain [13] S. Zhang et al., “Robust failure diagnosis of microservice system
knowledge, fault reports in real-world environments often incor- through multimodal data,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 6,
 pp. 3851–3864, Jun. 2023.
porate diagnostic processes of experts, which are not currently [14] C. Zhang, T. Jia, G. Shen, P. Zhu, and Y. Li, “MetaLog: Generalizable
utilized. Integrating such expert-driven diagnostic processes cross-system anomaly detection from logs with meta-learning,” in Proc.
could significantly enhance the model’s reasoning capabilities IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12.
 [15] J. Xu, R. Yang, Y. Huo, C. Zhang, and P. He, “DivLog: Log parsing with
and better learn expert-level cognitive processes. In the future, prompt enhanced in-context learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf.
we hope to collaborate with companies to obtain real failure Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12.
reports for synthesizing richer, more reasoning-enhanced in- [16] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log parsing with prompt-based few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2023, pp. 2438–2449.
structions. [17] L. Ma et al., “KnowLog: Knowledge enhanced pre-trained language model
 Third, our study fine-tunes LLMs based on the prevalent for log understanding,” in Proc. 46th ieee/acm Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024,
decoder-only architecture. We have not explored the impact pp. 1–13.
MA et al.: LOGINSTRUCT: KNOWLEDGE-DRIVEN INSTRUCTION SYNTHESIS FOR ENHANCING LLM-BASED LOG ANALYSIS 1377

[18] Z. Jiang et al., “LiLac: Log parsing using LLMs with adaptive parsing [46] Y. Xiao, V.-H. Le, and H. Zhang, “Stronger, cheaper and demonstrationcache,” Proc. ACM Softw. Eng., vol. 1, no. FSE, pp. 137–160, 2024. free log parsing with LLMs,” 2024, arXiv:2406.06156.
[19] A. Zhong et al., “LogParser-LLM: Advancing efficient log parsing with [47] J. Qi et al., “LogGPT: Exploring ChatGPT for log-based anomaly deteclarge language models,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun., Data
 Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4559–4570. Sci. Syst., Smart City Dependability Sensor, Cloud Big Data Syst. Appl.,
[20] Y. Liu et al., “LogLM: From task-based to instruction-based automated 2023, pp. 273–280.
 log analysis,” IEEE/ACM 47th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Pract., pp. 401–412, [48] W. Guan, J. Cao, S. Qian, J. Gao, and C. Ouyang, “LogLLM: Log-based
 2025. anomaly detection using large language models,” 2024, arXiv:2411.08561.
[21] J. Wang et al., “LogExpert: Log-based recommended resolutions genera- [49] D. Zhang et al., “SciInstruct: A self-reflective instruction annotated dataset
 tion using large language model,” in Proc. 2024 ACM/IEEE 44th Int. Conf. for training scientific language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Softw. Eng.: New Ideas Emerg. Results, 2024, pp. 42–46. Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 1443–1473.
[22] L. Ma et al., “AdaptiveLog: An adaptive log analysis framework with the [50] C. Xu et al., “WizardLM: Empowering large pre-trained language models
 collaboration of large and small language model,” ACM Trans Softw. Eng. to follow complex instructions,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represen-
 Methodol., pp. 1–43, 2025. tations, 2024, pp. 1–22.
[23] M. Astekin, M. Hort, and L. Moonen, “A comparative study on large [51] C. Zhou et al., “LIMA: Less is more for alignment,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 language models for log parsing,” in Proc. 18th ACM/IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, vol. 36, pp. 55006–550 21.
 Empirical Softw. Eng. Meas., 2024, pp. 234–244. [52] W. X. Zhao et al., “A survey of large language models,” 2023,
[24] J. Xu et al., “OpenRCA: Can large language models locate the root cause arXiv:2303.18223.
 of software failures?,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [53] T. Wang et al., “What language model architecture and pretraining objec-
 2025, pp. 1–29. tive works best for zero-shot generalization?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
[25] V.-H. Le, H. Zhang, and Y. Xiao, “Unleashing the true potential of Learn., 2022, pp. 22964–22984.
 semantic-based log parsing with pre-trained language models,” in Proc. [54] Y. Zheng, R. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. YeYanhan, and Z. Luo, “LLaMAfactory:
 IEEE/ACM 47th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2025, pp. 711–711. Unified efficient fine-tuning of 100 language models,” in Proc. 62nd Annu.
[26] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024, pp. 400–410.
 approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. web Serv., 2017, [55] A. Yang et al., “Qwen2. 5 technical report,” 2024, arXiv:2412.15115.
 pp. 33–40. [56] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “LogHub: A large collection of
[27] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in system log datasets for AI-driven log analytics,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int.
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw. Eng. Pract., 2019, Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2023, pp. 355–366.
 pp. 121–130. [57] H. Zhang, J. Cai, J. Xu, and J. Wang, “Pretraining-based natural language
[28] Y. Sui et al., “LogKG: Log failure diagnosis through knowledge graph,” generation for text summarization,” in Proc. 23 rd Conf. Comput. Natural
 IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3493–3507, May 2023. Lang. Learn., 2019, pp. 789–797.
[29] J. Achiam et al., “Gpt-4 technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2303.08774. [58] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LanoBERT: System log anomaly detection
[30] A. Liu et al., “DeepSeek-V3 technical report,” 2024, arXiv:2412.19437. based on BERT masked language model,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 146,
[31] S. Zhang et al., “Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey,” 2023, Art. no. 110689.
 ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 1–36, 2026, . [59] S. Tao et al., “Biglog: Unsupervised large-scale pre-training for a unified
[32] Y. Wang et al., “Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self- log representation,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 31st Int. Symp. Qual. Service,
 generated instructions,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. 2023, pp. 1–11.
 Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2023, pp. 13484–13 508. [60] H. W. Chung et al., “Scaling instruction-finetuned language models,” J.
[33] Z. Chen et al., “Agent-FLAN: Designing data and methods of effective Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 25, no. 70, pp. 1–53, 2024.
 agent tuning for large language models,” in Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput. [61] A. Grattafiori et al., “The LLaMA 3 herd of models,” 2024,
 Linguistics ACL 2024, 2024, pp. 9354–9366. arXiv:2407.21783.
[34] Y. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Ding, and L. Zhang, “MagiCoder: Empowering [62] X. Wang et al., “MINT: Evaluating LLMs in multi-turn interaction with
 code generation with OSS-instruct,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., tools and language feedback,” Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Learn. Representa-
 2024, pp. 52632–52 657. tions, 2025, pp. 1–35.
[35] W. U. Ahmad et al., “OpenCodeInstruct: A large-scale instruction tuning [63] L. Ma et al., “Luk: Empowering log understanding with expert knowledge
 dataset for code LLMs,” 2025, arXiv:2504.04030. from large language models,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 51, no. 10, pp.
[36] X. Zhang, C. Tian, X. Yang, L. Chen, Z. Li, and L. R. Petzold, “AlpaCare: 2764–2786, Oct. 2025.
 Instruction-tuned large language models for medical application,” 2023, [64] K. Zhou et al., “JiuZhang3. 0: Efficiently improving mathematical reaarXiv:2310.14558. soning by training small data synthesis models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
[37] Z. Zhou et al., “LawGPT: A chinese legal knowledge-enhanced large Process. Syst., 2024, vol. 37, pp. 1854–1889.
 language model,” 2024, arXiv:2406.04614. [65] Y. Huang et al., “Key-point-driven data synthesis with its enhancement on
[38] N. Zhao et al., “An empirical investigation of practical log anomaly mathematical reasoning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, no.
 detection for online service systems,” in Proc. 29th ACM Joint Meeting 23, 2025, pp. 24176–24184.
 Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Found. Softw. Eng., 2021, pp. 1404–1415. [66] Z. Tang, X. Zhang, B. Wang, and F. Wei, “MathScale: Scaling instruction
[39] Z. Tan et al., “Large language models for data annotation and synthesis: A tuning for mathematical reasoning,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 survey,” in Proc. 2024 Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2024, pp. 47885–47 900.
 2024, pp. 930–957. [67] Z. Bi, N. Zhang, Y. Jiang, S. Deng, G. Zheng, and H. Chen, “When do
[40] K. Wang et al., “A survey on data synthesis and augmentation for large program-of-thought works for reasoning?,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 language models,” 2024, arXiv:2410.12896. Intell., vol. 38, no. 16, 2024, pp. 17691–17 699.
[41] M. T. Chandio, S. M. Pandhiani, and R. Iqbal, “Bloom’s taxonomy: [68] N. Kitaev and D. Klein, “Constituency parsing with a self-attentive en-
 Improving assessment and teaching-learning process,” J. Educ. Educ. coder,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2018,
 Develop., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 203–221, 2016. pp. 2676–2686.
[42] S. Elkins, E. Kochmar, J. C. Cheung, and I. Serban, “How teachers
 can use large language models and Bloom’s taxonomy to create educational quizzes,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 38, no. 21, 2024,
 pp. 23084–230 91. Lipeng Ma received the BS degree in information
[43] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “LLMParser: security from the Nanjing University of Posts and
 An exploratory study on using large language models for log parsing,” in Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, in 2019. He is
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–13. currently working toward the PhD degree in computer
[44] Y. Liu et al., “Interpretable online log analysis using large language science with Fudan University. His research interests
 models with prompt strategies,” in Proc. 32nd IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Prog. include knowledge graph applications, large language
 Comprehension, 2024, pp. 35–46. models, software engineering, and AIOps.
[45] C. Pei et al., “Self-evolutionary group-wise log parsing based on large
 language model,” in Proc. IEEE 35th Int. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2024,
 pp. 49–60.
1378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Yixuan Li received the master of Science (MSc) Ben Fei (Member, IEEE) received the MS degree
 degree in applied mathematics from The Hong Kong from the Department of Materials Science, Fudan
 Polytechnic University, in 2024. She is currently University, Shanghai, China, in 2021, and the Ph.D.
 working toward the PhD degree with the College of degree from the School of Computer Science, Fudan
 Computer Science, Fudan University. Her research University, in 2024. He is currently a postdoc with
 interests include code intelligence, large language the Chinese University of Hong Kong. His research
 models (LLMs), and point cloud completion (her interests include generative models, large language
 MSc degree research focus). models, 3D computer vision, and AI for science. He
 is also an IEEE Young professional.

 Weidong Yang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD Shuhao Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) redegree in software engineering from Xidian Univer- ceived the master’s degree in computer technology
 sity, in 1999. From 1999 to 2001, he was a postdoc- from Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China, in
 toral researcher with the School of Computer Sci- 2023. He is currently working toward the PhD degree
 ence, Fudan University. He is currently a professor with the School of Computer Science, Fudan Univerwith the School of Computer Science, Fudan Univer- sity, Shanghai, China. His research interests include
 sity, Shanghai, China. His research interests include spatio-temporal data mining, anomaly detection, and
 Big Data, knowledge engineering, database and data large language models.
 mining, and software engineering.

 Sihang Jiang received the BSc degree in information
 Mingjie Zhou is currently working toward the PhD security and the PhD degree in software engineering
 degree with Fudan University, Shanghai, China. His from Fudan University, in 2017 and 2024, respecwork has been authored or coauthored in data mining tively. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher with
 and software engineering international conferences. Fudan University. His research interests mainly in-
 His research interests include AIOps and knowledge clude knowledge graph, large language models, and
 graph. AIOps.

 Mingyu Zhao received the PhD degree in computer Yanghua Xiao received the PhD degree in software
 science from Fudan University, China, in 2024. He theory from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in
 is currently an assistant professor with Northwestern 2009. He is currently a professor of computer science
 Polytechnical University, China. His research inter- with Fudan University, where he is also the direcests include data mining and machine learning. tor with Knowledge Works Laboratory. His research
 interests include Big Data management and mining,
 graph database, knowledge graph. He was a visiting
 professor with Human Genome Sequencing Center,
 Baylor College Medicine, and visiting researcher
 with Microsoft Research Asia.