This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 1

LogMUSE: Log Anomaly Detection via Multi-Scale
 Semantic Representation
 Mengyao Liu, Tianbo Wang, Member, IEEE, Yuan Zhao, Chunhe Xia, Yingming Zeng, and Yuan Tao

 Abstract—Logs serve as an effective data source for recording concurrency, and heterogeneity of these systems introduce
and judging system states and abnormal events in complex unprecedented challenges in system operation, fault diagnosis,
systems. Current deep learning-based methods have proven and security management.
effective in detecting anomalies in these system logs. However,
existing anomaly detection methods, which predominantly rely System logs play a vital role in monitoring system behavior
on template-based and global window-based approaches, still and diagnosing operational issues. They record both highface challenges in terms of flexibility and practicality. Template- level user activities and low-level system events, capturing
based methods, while widely adopted for their simplicity and critical information about state transitions, execution flows,
efficiency, overlook parameter information and fail to capture and fault symptoms. However, as system scales grow, the
the true execution semantics. And global window-based methods,
despite their effectiveness in modeling global dependencies, can- volume of log data has expanded dramatically. Public data
not simultaneously capture both global and local dependencies, indicate that Alibaba’s production environment can generate
leading to the obscuration of important local features. To address over 10 PB of logs daily [1], while major internet companies
these issues, we propose a Log anomaly detection method based like Google process billions of events per day [2]. Manual
on MUlti-scale SEmantic representation, LogMUSE. Specifically, analysis of such massive log data is labor-intensive, error-
LogMUSE obtains template and parameter information through
log parsing, employs a pre-trained Bidirectional Encoder Rep- prone, and incapable of providing timely responses. As a
resentations from Transformers (BERT) model for template result, log analysis has become a fundamental technique for
semantic embedding, and enhances log entry representations ensuring system reliability and identifying potential security
via cross-attention mechanisms to effectively capture different threats.
parameter features under the same template. Additionally, we Early approaches to log anomaly detection leveraged shaldesign the multi-scale Transformer model to capture global and
local anomaly patterns, which enable fixed-length log sequences low machine learning models such as Support Vector Machines
to focus on features at different scales. Extensive experiments (SVM) [3], Logistic Regression (LR) [4], and Informationon real-world benchmark datasets, including BGL, Thunderbird Theoretic Methods (IM) [5], using statistical features extracted
and Spirit, show that LogMUSE outperforms existing methods in from log sequences. However, these methods struggle to
log anomaly detection, achieving F1-scores of 98.62%, 94.32%, capture complex temporal dependencies and semantic
and 99.20% respectively. These results surpass the performance
of current state-of-the-art methods and demonstrate the strong patterns in logs, limiting their detection performance in
generalization across different system scenarios. dynamic environments.
 Subsequent studies introduced deep learning-based models
 Index Terms—Log analysis, log parsing, anomaly detection,
multi-scale, deep learning. that leverage sequential modeling capabilities. For instance,
 DeepLog [6], LogAnomaly [7], and LogRobust [8] utilize
 Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) or Long Short-Term Mem-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ory (LSTM) architectures to capture dependencies across log

W ITH the rapid advancement of cloud computing, distributed architectures, and microservice technologies,
modern computing systems are becoming increasingly comsequences. While effective in certain scenarios, these models
 are sensitive to sequence interleaving caused by concurrent
 tasks. In practice, system logs are recorded as a single
plex and large-scale. A typical production environment may chronological stream, where entries from multiple tasks may
consist of thousands of interconnected components deployed be interleaved, breaking the semantic continuity of individual
across hybrid cloud infrastructures. The increasing dynamism, execution paths and impairing sequence modeling.
 The Transformer architecture has emerged as a promising
 Manuscript received 2025. The work was supported by National Engineering Research Center of Classified Protection and Safeguard Technology for alternative for log anomaly detection due to its ability to model
Cybersecurity under Grant C24640-XD-04 and the Fundamental Research long-range dependencies without sequential bottlenecks. Log-
Funds for the Central Universities. (Corresponding author: Tianbo Wang). BERT [9] represents each log message by mapping it to a
 M.Y. Liu and T.B. Wang are with the School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China. E-mail: {liumengyao, unique log event template (with parameters removed), and
wangtb}@buaa.edu.cn. models the resulting sequence of template identifiers as a
 Y. Zhao and C.H. Xia are with the School of Computer Science natural language sequence. Based on this abstraction, it applies
and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China. E-mail: {zhaoyuan ,
xch}@buaa.edu.cn. the BERT framework with masked token prediction to detect
 Y.M. Zeng is with Beijing Institute of Computer Technology and Applica- log anomalies. NeuralLog [10] directly tokenizes raw log
tions, Beijing, China. E-mail:zengyingming@163.com messages using natural language processing techniques and
 Y. Tao is with National Engineering Research Center of Classified Protection and Safeguard Technology for Cybersecurity, the Third Research Institute embeds them with a pre-trained language model. It then
of Ministry of Public Security, Shanghai, China. E-mail:taoyuan@gass.ac.cn. applies a Transformer-based classification model for training

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 2

and anomaly detection. LogFormer [11] decomposes each log Users Service Application Raw Logs (Content field）

message into a template and its corresponding parameters, command record
 : total of 3 ddr error(s) detected and corrected
 : machine check interrupt (bit=0x06): L3 major internal error
and encodes them separately. The parameter embeddings are : instruction address: 0x00000760

injected as attention biases, thereby implicitly influencing the Parsing
 Log Templates Parameters
representation of the log template. The model is trained using : total of <*> ddr error(s) detected and corrected :3
a two-stage strategy comprising pre-training and fine-tuning : machine check interrupt (bit=<*>): <*> <*> <*> <*>
 : instruction address: <*>
 : 0x06, L3, major, internal, error
 : 0x00000760
to perform anomaly detection on log sequences. Detection
 While these methods show promise, they still face two
 Normal
major limitations that hinder real-world effectiveness: Sequence
 …

 First, parameter values, such as IP addresses, file paths, Abnormal …
block identifiers, and hardware status codes, often encode Sequence

context-specific semantics that are crucial for determining Local sequence anomaly Parameter anomaly

the nature of an event. For example, two log messages may
 Global-only Multi-Windows Without Parameters High-quality Parameters
share the same parsed template after parameter abstraction, but
 With same embedding With different embedding
their parameter values may correspond to different execution Normal Normal

contexts, such as different accessed files, affected nodes, or
 Abnormal Abnormal
abnormal resource identifiers. Methods that discard parameters
or incorporate them only implicitly may therefore assign
nearly identical representations to semantically different log Fig. 1: Illustration of the real-world log processing workflow
instances, making it difficult to detect parameter-sensitive and key challenges in anomaly detection
anomalies.
 Second, anomalies can manifest across diverse temporal
spans. Some anomalies appear as short-term bursts involving 2) We design a multi-scale attention-based Transformer aronly a few adjacent log entries, such as consecutive I/O chitecture that integrates representations across different
failures, repeated timeout messages, or machine-check errors window scales. This architecture captures both global and
within a short sequence. In contrast, other anomalies evolve local dependencies in log sequences, thereby improving
gradually over longer sequences, such as progressive resource the model’s sensitivity to diverse anomaly patterns. Conseexhaustion, repeated retry-failure patterns, or slowly accumu- quently, it addresses the challenge of temporal heterogenelating hardware error reports. Existing methods often divide ity in anomaly manifestation.
log streams into fixed-length windows and apply a uniform 3) We conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation on
modeling scope to the entire sequence. As a result, local ab- three real-world datasets, including BGL, Thunderbird, and
normal bursts may be smoothed out by global representations, Spirit. The results demonstrate that LogMUSE outperforms
while long-range behavioral drifts may be missed by overly representative state-of-the-art baselines, validating the eflocal modeling. Therefore, an effective log anomaly detection fectiveness and generalizability of our method.
model should capture both local and global dependencies. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section
 To address these challenges, we propose a Log anomaly II introduces the background of log parsing and the model
detection method based on MUlti-scale SEmantic representa- assumptions. Section III presents the details of LogMUSE.
tion, LogMUSE. Specifically, we explicitly encode both the Section IV reports the experimental evaluation. Section V
static template and dynamic parameter components of each discusses the effects, limitations, and future work. Section VI
log entry, and use a cross-attention mechanism to model reviews related work, and Section VII concludes this paper.
their structural dependencies. Furthermore, considering the
diversity and abruptness of anomaly patterns in temporal II. BACKGROUND AND M OTIVATIONS
behavior, we introduce a multi-scale windowing mechanism
that segments log sequences into subsequences of different A. System Logs and Log Parsing
granularities. This allows the model to capture both global As illustrated in Figure 1, log entries are typically produced
and local dependencies within the sequence, thereby enhancing in response to user commands or internal system triggers,
its ability to detect various types of anomalies. Experiments capturing diverse runtime events such as memory errors,
on real-world datasets demonstrate that LogMUSE achieves processor interrupts, or I/O activities.
superior performance in log sequence anomaly detection. These raw logs are unstructured, with the core seman-
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as tic content embedded in the Content field, usually a freefollows: text description of system events. To facilitate downstream
1) We propose a novel semantic modeling strategy that ex- analysis, log parsing is applied to convert unstructured log
 plicitly aligns parameters with templates through a cross- messages into structured forms. As shown in Figure 1, log
 attention mechanism. This design enables fine-grained, parsing replaces dynamic parameters (i.e., variable tokens
 instance-specific log representations, enhancing robustness such as IP addresses, file names, or numeric values) with
 to parameter-sensitive anomalies. In this way, our approach wildcards (e.g., <*>), while preserving the constant parts
 effectively addresses the challenge of semantic degradation of the message. The resulting sequence, composed of static
 caused by template-parameter abstraction. tokens and wildcards, is referred to as a “log keys” or “log

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 3

 1 Log Semantic Representation 2 Multi-scale Model Training 3 Anomaly Detection
 History Raw Log Sequence Transformer layer New Raw Log Sequence

 Layer Norm

 residual
 connection
 Log Parsing known template
 Feed Forward Network Log Parsing Embedding
 Template 1 Parameters 1
 unknown template
 Template 2 Parameters 2 Layer Norm
 Direct Embedding
 residual
 connection
 Template n Parameters n
 Multi-Scale Attention
 sentence-BERT char encoding
 encoding position encoding Multi-Scale Window Partition
 detection model
 Cross Attention

 Abnormal Normal
 Log representation Log Sequence

 Fig. 2: Architecture of LogMUSE

template”, which serves as a structured representation of the C. Model Assumption
original message for downstream modeling. Numerous parsing In this study, we assume that the log data used for training
methods, such as Drain [12], Spell [13], MoLFI [14], IPLoM and testing is complete, authentic, and free from tampering.
[15], and LLMParser [16] have been proposed to automate Specifically, we assume that the log data has not been suband optimize this process. In anomaly detection scenarios, log jected to any form of attack (e.g., tampering, poisoning, or
parsing is widely adopted to enable sequence learning based deletion) during collection, storage, or transmission, and that
on log templates [6], [7], [9]. the log entries accurately reflect the true state and behavior
 of the system. Therefore, the abnormal patterns we can detect
 include:
B. Challenges • Abnormal behaviors caused by improper or erroneous
 user operations during system runtime. These behaviors
 While log parsing helps extract structured representations
 may deviate from the system’s normal operational norms,
from unstructured messages, it also introduces new challenges
 leading to discrepancies between the system state or exwhen building effective representations for anomaly detection,
 ecution flow and the expected outcomes, thereby leaving
especially in the presence of complex semantics and temporal
 anomalous information in the logs.
dynamics, as shown in Figure 1.
 • Abnormal system executions caused by attacks. These
 Semantic degradation from template-parameter abstrac- attacks can compromise system integrity, bypass security
tion. Log parsing separates log content into templates and mechanisms, or exploit system resources, leading to sigparameters, where parameters are abstracted as wildcards (e.g., nificant deviations from expected behavioral patterns and
<*>). This abstraction enables structural generalization but resulting in anomalous log patterns.
discards rich semantic information embedded in parameter
values, such as IP addresses or process IDs. Moreover, the
 III. D ESIGN OF L OG MUSE
alignment between template tokens and their corresponding
parameters is often lost, resulting in incomplete semantics A. Overview
for downstream modeling. Since many anomalies arise from To effectively detect anomaly log sequences, we propose
subtle shifts in parameter usage rather than structural changes, LogMUSE, a novel log anomaly detection method based on
such degradation hampers the accurate detection of parameter- log semantics representation and multi-scale feature training.
sensitive anomalies. The framework of LogMUSE, as shown in Figure 2, consists
 Temporal heterogeneity of anomalies. Anomalies may of three main components: log semantic representation, Multiemerge at different temporal resolutions - some as sudden scale model training, and anomaly detection.
bursts, or others as slow behavioral drifts. However, many The log sequence is used as input. For each log, we first
existing methods model log sequences using fixed-size win- extract the template and corresponding parameter information.
dows and global representations, which tend to smooth out Then, we preprocess the template and parameter data sepalocal variations or overlook long-term correlations. This uni- rately to obtain their semantic embeddings. In anomaly detecform modeling limits their ability to detect diverse temporal tion, our goal is to detect both sequence order anomalies and
patterns. parameter value anomalies. Therefore, we handle the semantic

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 4

 TABLE I: Notations used in LogMUSE
 Symbol Definition
 S A single raw log entry
 Cross Attention
 XE Log template embedding
 PE Parameter embedding
 XfEinal Log entry embedding
 position
 Seq Log sequence encoding
 d Embedding dimension char
 encoding
 N Length of log sequence
 ω Attention radius : [1, 7503483334202473044, terminating]
 : PacketResponder <*> for block blk_<*> <*>
 Ψ Set of multi-scale attention radii
 log keys log parser parameters
 N′ The number of different attention scales
 081109 203521 145 INFO dfs.DataNode$PacketResponder:
 Attnf used (Seq) Multi-scale attention output for the sequence :
 PacketResponder 1 for block blk_7503483334202473044 terminating
 Zoutput Logits vector for binary classification raw log message

 Fig. 3: Detailed view of log message embedding using Crossembeddings of log templates and parameter embeddings sepa- Attention
rately to achieve a complete log semantic representation. Since
the focus of our work is log anomaly detection rather than log
parsing, we utilize the state-of-the-art log parser, Drain [12], to variations arising from parameter content. Figure 3 illustrates
extract the templates and corresponding parameter information the semantic representation process: the parameter and temfrom the logs. plate representations are obtained individually and then fused
 For the log templates, we directly use a pre-trained BERT using a cross-attention mechanism to produce the final log
model to obtain their semantic information, while the param- representation.
eter embeddings are obtained through a joint embedding of Specifically, we first perform log parsing to separate the
characters and positions. After acquiring the semantic em- template and its corresponding parameters. The template can
beddings of the log templates and parameter embeddings, we be represented as X = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xn }, where xi is the
design a cross-attention mechanism to enhance the semantic i-th token, and n represents the length of the log template.
representation of the log templates using log parameters. Here, we use the pre-trained sentence-BERT [17] to get the
This approach allows the model to increase its sensitivity template embedding, which is chosen for its capability to
to parameter features without deviating from the sequence generate semantically meaningful sentence-level embeddings
semantics. while preserving computational efficiency. The embedded log
 Finally, we propose a log sequence anomaly detection model template vector can be expressed as:
based on multi-scale features, where different scale-specific
attention ranges are used within the Transformer attention X E = f (X) (1)
mechanism. The motivation behind this design is that anomawhere X ∈ R , and f (·) is the encoder of sentence-BERT.
 E 1×d
lies in log sequences are not always determined by the entire
 The log template embedding captures the constant structure
sequence; by using attention ranges of varying scales, we can
 of the log messages, offering rich semantic representation and
capture different dependency relationships more effectively.
 addressing issues related to unseen log templates. However,
Relying solely on global sequence features may smooth out
 relying solely on template embeddings overlooks the dynamic
the overall patterns, making it difficult to extract local features.
 information contained in parameters, making it challenging to
In contrast, smaller scales enhance local sharpness, thereby
 detect anomalies arising from abnormal parameter changes.
improving detection performance. Table I summarizes the
 Therefore, we separately encode the parameters and integrate
main notations employed in this work.
 them with the template embedding to construct a complete
 semantic representation.
B. Log Semantic Representation Given a log entry, we extract its parameter list P aram =
 Log entries consist of static templates and dynamic param- {param1 , param2 , · · · , paramm } through log parsing, where
eters, capturing fixed execution patterns and runtime-specific m represents the number of parameters. Since parameters are
contexts, respectively. Effectively modeling their combined often variable-length strings (e.g., file paths, IP addresses), we
semantics is crucial for accurate anomaly detection. However, represent each parameter as a sequence of character embedexisting methods often underutilize parameter information, dings and apply mean-pooling to obtain a fixed-dimensional
limiting their ability to detect anomalies driven by parameter vector Pj = C(parami ), Pj ∈ R1×d , and the encoding of
variations. To address this, we design a semantic representation each parameter has the same dimension d as the log template
module that explicitly incorporates parameter content and po- embedding.
sition into the template embedding, enabling instance-specific However, parameters are encoded independently of the log
log representations. template, and relying solely on their relative order in the
 In log anomaly detection, abnormal behavior may manifest parameter list fails to capture their true contextual roles. For
as point anomalies and sequential deviations. Given a log entry example, whether a token represents a user ID or a host
S, our objective is to generate an embedding that preserves ID depends on its absolute position within the original log
the structural semantics of the template while distinguishing message, rather than its index among parameters. Therefore,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 5

we introduce absolute positional encoding based on each
parameter’s starting character offset in the raw log text. Multi-Transformer
 ...
 Following the sinusoidal encoding scheme in [18], we Add & Norm
define the positional encoding T ∈ R1×d . The encoding weighted mean
 Feed
can be defined as: Tt,2l = sin(t/100002l/d ), Tt,2l+1 =

 ...
 Forward

cos(t/10000(2l+1)/d ), where t represents the position of the
word in the original vector, and l represents the encoding of Add & Norm Self-Attention

the l-th dimension position. For a given parameter parami , Multi-Scale
we locate its start index in the original log string using Attention
 Linear Linear Linear
x = S.index(parami ). The absolute position embedding
 Q K
vector for this parameter is then Tx ∈ R1×d , i.e., the entire V

vector at position x. We combine this position vector with the multi-head

 ...
parameter’s content embedding: Input
 Embedding
 ... ...
 PiE = Pi + Tx=S.index(parami ) (2)
 scale window scale window ... scale window
where PiE represents the embedding of the i-th parameter. Log Sequence

Then the encoding of all parameters can be expressed as
 E Fig. 4: Log sequence embedding with Multi-Scale Transformer
Pseq E
 = [P1E , P2E , · · · , Pm ].
 blocks
 To effectively integrate the semantic information of the log
template and its parameters, we design a multi-head crossattention mechanism, where the log template embedding X E anomaly features at a global level. However, in real-world
serves as the query source, and the parameter embeddings Pseq E
 systems, anomalies often exhibit diverse temporal patterns:
serve as the key and value sources. Specifically, for each atten- some manifest as local bursts (e.g., sudden surges in error
tion head, we compute the attention-enhanced representation events), while others develop gradually over extended periods
of the log template as follows: (e.g., progressive resource exhaustion). This diversity poses
 󰀣 󰀤 a significant challenge, as global modeling tends to smooth
 T
 QKseq
 (h)
 Attention = sof tmax 󰁳 Vseq (3) out localized anomalies, reducing detection sensitivity and
 d/h accuracy.
 (h) (h) To address these challenges, we propose a multi-scale
where the query Q = X E WQ + bQ is derived from the log
 Transformer-based framework for log sequence anomaly detemplate, and the key and value are derived from the parameter
 (h) (h) (h) (h) tection, as shown in Figure 4. This framework explicitly
sequence: Kseq = PseqE
 WK + bK , Vseq = Pseq E
 W V + bV .
 models log subsequences at multiple granularities in parallel,
 This design allows the log template to selectively attend
 enabling the detection of both short-term bursts and longto different parts of the parameter sequence, enriching its
 range dependencies. While previous Transformer-based methsemantic representation with contextually relevant information
 ods [10], [11], [19]–[21] primarily model global dependencies,
from the parameters.
 our design extends the standard Transformer architecture by
 Multi-head attention uses a parallel combination of multiple
 incorporating multiple scale-aware attention mechanisms opattention mechanisms to capture different aspects of inforerating at different temporal scales.
mation between log templates and parameters. We connect
 Specifically, given a log sequence Seq =
H heads of multi-head attention and map them to the final
 {XfEinal1 , XfEinal2 , · · · , XfEinalN } ∈ RN ×d , where N denotes
template enhancement vector Xcontext
 E
 through a linear layer:
 the sequence length and d denotes the embedding dimension,
 we introduce a set of scale parameters Ψ = {ω1 , ω2 , · · · , ωN ′ }
 E
 Xcontext = Concat(Attention(1) , · · · , Attention(H) )WO to define different attention radii for scale-aware self-attention.
 (4) Each ωn′ controls the receptive field around the current log
 Finally, the original template semantic embedding is super- entry. A larger ωn′ allows each log entry to attend to a
imposed with the enhanced template representation to obtain broader contextual range and is suitable for capturing longthe final log semantic representation: range behavioral dependencies, while a smaller ωn′ restricts
 the attention range to neighboring entries and emphasizes
 E
 XfEinal = X E + Xcontext (5)
 relatively local deviations.
 We adopt dyadic scales (i.e., Ψ = {N/(2k )} for rele-
C. Multi-scale Model Training vant k) as candidates. This choice follows the principle of
 While modeling individual log entries effectively captures multiresolution analysis [22], where powers of two provide
deep semantic features, robust log anomaly detection also a natural logarithmic coverage of the scale space, ensuring
requires modeling the overall semantic patterns across se- that dependencies ranging from short-term bursts to longquences of logs to better understand system behaviors. Tra- term drifts are captured efficiently. Moreover, dyadic scaling
ditional methods typically perform unified modeling over the achieves higher computational efficiency and implementation
entire sequence within a fixed-size window, aiming to capture simplicity compared with arbitrary partitions, while preserving

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 6

complementary information across scales. where htrans denotes the sequence representation after global
 At each scale ωn′ , the entire sequence is processed us- average pooling. This aggregated representation is then fed
ing a dedicated scale-aware self-attention module. For a into a fully connected layer for binary classification:
log entry at position n, the attention range is restricted to
Wn = [max(0, n−ωn′ ), min(N, n+ωn′ )]. Specifically, when Zoutput = Wf c × hTtrans + bf c (11)
ωn′ = N , the attention range covers the entire sequence,
recovering standard Transformer behavior. Within this scale- where Zoutput is a 2-dimensional vector representing the
specific attention range, the multi-head attention scores are final classification result, distinguishing between normal and
computed as: anomalous log sequences.
 Finally, during training, we compute the cross-entropy loss
 T
 Qn,i KW between the predicted results and the ground truth labels to
 Attnωn′ (Seq)n = sof tmax( √ n ,i )VWn ,i (6) optimize the model, which in turn helps adjust the model
 dk
 parameters for the final classification task.
where i represents the i-th attention head, Q = SeqWQ , K =
SeqWK , V = SeqWV , and Qn,i is the query vector at
position n, while KWn ,i , VWn ,i are the key and value vectors
within the attention range Wn . This scale-aware attention D. Anomaly Detection
mechanism enables the model to focus on different tempo- Through the aforementioned steps, we can train a multiral ranges of the sequence, capturing localized dependencies scale Transformer-based model for log anomaly detection.
under smaller radii while preserving broader contextual in- When a new set of log sequences arrives, each log message is
formation under larger radii, thereby alleviating the issue of first preprocessed to extract its log template. The extracted
feature smoothing in long sequences. template is then embedded using sentence-BERT, and its
 To integrate information across all temporal scales, we perrepresentation is further enhanced by incorporating parameter
form multi-scale fusion. Each scale ωn′ produces an attention
 semantics. For unseen or rare templates that cannot be matched
output Attnωn′ (Seq) for the entire sequence. The outputs
 by the parser, we directly embed the entire log message
from all N ′ scales are then combined through a learnable
 using sentence-BERT, without applying template-parameter
weighted summation:
 separation:
 ′
 N
 󰁛 E
 Attnf used (Seq) = αn′ · Attnωn′ (Seq) (7) Xoov = f (Sequnknown ) (12)
 n′ =1

where α = softmax([α1 , · · · , αN ′ ]) are learnable parameters This design ensures robustness in real-world deployments,
that determine the relative importance of each temporal scale where new log templates frequently emerge. Although these
for anomaly detection. It should be noted that these fusion embeddings may lack the fine-grained parameter enhancement,
weights are learned globally over the training distribution, they still provide a semantic representation consistent with the
rather than dynamically generated for each individual sample. overall embedding space, thus allowing the model to handle
Nevertheless, per-instance adaptivity is still implicitly achieved unseen patterns without retraining.
through the multi-head attention mechanism within each scale, Subsequently, the trained model is employed to learn the
where each log entry attends to different contextual entries sequence features of the log sequence, enabling the determiaccording to its own query representation. nation of whether the sequence is normal or anomalous.
 We replace the standard self-attention layer in the Transformer with our multi-scale attention mechanism to form the result = sof tmax(Zoutput ) (13)
Multi-Scale Transformer layer. The complete layer follows the
standard Transformer architecture with residual connections
and layer normalization: IV. E VALUATION

 In this section, to discuss the effectiveness and advantages
 Xattn = LayerN orm(XfEinaln + Attnf used (XfEinaln )) (8) of our proposed LogMUSE in detail, we conduct a series of ex-
 Xout = LayerN orm(Xattn + F F N (Xattn )) (9) periments to evaluate it. Specifically, the Research Questions
 (RQs) below guided the experiments we evaluated.
 Each sequence embedding is augmented with sinusoidal
positional embeddings to retain sequential information. After • RQ1: How effective is LogMUSE in detecting anomaly
passing through the stacked Multi-Scale Transformer layers, log sequences in comparison with other state-of-the-art
we obtain the output sequence representation. To produce the techniques?
final classification, we apply global average pooling across the • RQ2: How does LogMUSE perform in terms of log

sequence dimension to aggregate features from all time steps semantic embedding?
into a single sequence vector: • RQ3: What is the impact of multi-scales on LogMUSE’s

 N
 performance?
 1 󰁛 • RQ4: Which model configuration leads to the best perhtrans = T rans(Seq)n (10)
 N n=1 formance of LogMUSE?

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 7

A. Experiment Setup log sequences in a high-dimensional space.
 • DeepLog [6]: DeepLog uses LSTM to model system logs
 Datasets. We evaluate the proposed LogMUSE on the
 as natural language sequences, learning normal patterns
three most commonly-used real-world datasets [23], BGL,
 and detecting anomalies when log patterns deviate from
Thunderbird, and Spirit. The BGL dataset is collected from
 the model.
the BlueGene/L supercomputer system at Lawrence Livermore
 • LogBERT [9]: LogBERT combines a masked language
National Labs (LLNL). This dataset contains 4,747,936 log
 model with a hypersphere volume minimization task to
messages labeled as anomalous or normal. The Thunderbird
 learn log event representations, and detects anomalies
dataset is collected from a real-world supercomputer system
 by checking if a sequence embedding lies outside of a
at Sandia National Labs (SNL), with the log data labeled as
 learned hypersphere.
anomalous or non-anomalous. In this experiment, we leverage
 • LogAnomaly [7]: LogAnomaly combines log sequence
10 million continuous log messages from the Thunderbird
 features and statistical features, utilizing an LSTM-based
dataset, as previous work did [10], [11]. The Spirit dataset
 deep learning model for anomaly sequence detection.
is collected from the Spirit supercomputer system at LLNL,
 • LogCAE [27]: LogCAE combines active learning and
spanning a period of 2.5 years. This dataset contains a total
 contrastive learning to enhance log anomaly detection by
of 272,298,969 log messages, with labels for anomalous or
 efficiently incorporating limited human labels to optimize
normal entries [24]. In these three datasets, since there is no
 log representation in the feature space.
predefined target partitioning criterion, we adopt the same
 • LogFormer [11]: LogFormer improves the Attention
partitioning method as in previous work [6], [25], using a
 module by supplementing it with parameter semantic
window size of 20 for data segmentation. We further analyzed
 information and employs a Transformer-based approach
the effect of this setting on anomaly composition. For the BGL
 to perform sequence anomaly detection.
dataset, a window size of 20 contains at most four anomaly
types, and only 18 windows contain more than two anomaly Implementation Details. In the experiment, LogMUSE
types. Larger windows, such as a fixed size of 50 or time-based uses a two-layer Transformer encoder, with 12 attention heads
windows, increase the number of multi-type anomaly windows in each layer. The attention scales are set to {N, N/2, N/4},
to 37 and 138, respectively, which may dilute anomaly signals where N represents the length of the divided log sequence.
and make precise localization more difficult. This issue may The Feed-Forward Network (FFN) layer has a size of 3072.
also occur on Thunderbird and Spirit, since larger windows During training, the Adam optimizer is used, with the learnare more likely to mix heterogeneous abnormal events within ing rate controlled by OneCycleLR. The training process is
the same sequence. Thus, a fixed window size of 20 provides controlled by early stopping, where training is terminated if
a practical balance for the tasks in this study. Finally, for all no improvement is observed over 5 consecutive epochs. The
log sequences, the first 80% of the data is used for training, model that performs best on the validation set is saved and
while the remaining 20% is used for testing. used for testing.
 Baselines. We compare LogMUSE with seven represen- All experiments are conducted in a Linux environment
tative baseline methods. We select these methods based on (kernel version 3.10.0) with Python 3.8.0 and PyTorch 2.4.1.
three criteria. First, they cover the main types of log anomaly The hardware platform consists of dual-socket Intel(R)
detection methods, including traditional feature-based meth- Xeon(R) Platinum 8180 CPUs (112 cores, 2.50GHz), 384
ods, sequence-based methods, Transformer-based methods, GB RAM, and NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000 GPUs (32 GB
and semantic-enhanced methods. Second, they are widely used memory). The batch size is set to 64, with an initial learning
in prior studies and are suitable for direct comparison with rate of 1e-4.
our sequence-level detection setting. Third, their source code
or clear implementation details are available, which allows Evaluation Metrics. To evaluate the effectiveness of Logus to reproduce them under the same datasets, windowing MUSE in log anomaly detection, we use three evaluation
strategy, and evaluation metrics. Methods with different task metrics: Precision, Recall, and F1-score. These metrics are
settings, detection granularity, or unavailable implementation defined as follows:
details are not included in the main comparison to ensure a fair • P recision = T PT+F P
 P : It represents the proportion of
and reproducible evaluation. The experimental results for all true anomalous sequences among all sequences identified
baselines were obtained by reproducing the open-source code as anomalous. Higher precision indicates a lower false
from their original papers, all within our identical experimental positive rate for anomalous sequences.
environment. For each baseline model, we adopted the optimal • Recall = T P +F N : It represents the proportion of cor-
 TP

parameter settings reported in their respective papers for rectly identified anomalous sequences among all actual
training and evaluation. anomalous sequences. Higher recall indicates a lower
 • Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [26]: PCA detects false negative rate for anomalous sequences.
 P recision+Recall : It represents the
 2×P recision×Recall
 • F 1 − score =
 anomalies by projecting a log sequence count matrix onto
 a lower-dimensional space and identifying outliers based harmonic mean of Precision and Recall.
 on the projection length in the anomaly space. In these definitions, TP (True Positive) refers to the number
 • Support Vector Machines (SVM) [3]: SVM learns a of sequences correctly identified as anomalous, FP (False Poshyperplane to distinguish between normal and anomalous itive) refers to the number of sequences incorrectly identified

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 8

 TABLE II: Model comparison on BGL, Thunderbird and Spirit

 BGL Thunderbird Spirit
 Method
 Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score
 PCA 9.08% 98.23% 16.61% 37.35% 100.00% 54.39% 55.21% 98.32% 70.71%
 SVM 10.60% 52.24% 17.63% 18.89% 79.11% 30.50% 56.62% 97.31% 71.59%
 DeepLog 89.31% 76.52% 82.42% 80.72% 95.42% 87.46% 39.17% 96.32% 55.69%
 LogAnomaly 82.72% 90.00% 86.21% 82.73% 97.61% 89.56% 48.62% 96.13% 64.58%
 LogBERT 90.10% 90.69% 90.40% 91.75% 94.43% 93.07% 91.02% 97.22% 94.02%
 LogCAE 91.12% 67.76% 77.72% 96.12% 82.12% 88.57% 96.06% 92.12% 94.04%
 LogFormer 97.44% 97.31% 97.37% 98.73% 87.66% 92.87% 98.61% 99.40% 99.01%
 LogMUSE 99.73% 97.54% 98.62% 94.33% 94.31% 94.32% 99.99% 99.60% 99.20%

as anomalous, and FN (False Negative) refers to the number
of anomalous sequences that were not correctly identified.
Accuracy is not used to evaluate the effect of the model
because the distribution of anomaly and normal is extremely
unbalanced in the log sequence.

B. Evaluation of the Overall Performance
 To demonstrate the effectiveness of LogMUSE, we com- (a) UMAP of BGL (b) UMAP of Thunderbird
pared it with other state-of-the-art log anomaly detection
methods on the BGL, Thunderbird and Spirit datasets, with
the results shown in Table II. All test results are averaged
over 20 repeated trials. The results reveal that traditional
machine learning methods, such as PCA and SVM, perform
poorly in log anomaly detection tasks. While these methods
achieve high precision or recall, they come with high false
positives or false negatives, resulting in a low F1-score. This
is primarily because these methods rely solely on count-based (c) UMAP of Spirit
features and fail to capture key dependencies such as temporal
 Fig. 5: BGL, Thunderbird and Spirit embed UMAP visualizarelations, making it difficult to distinguish between normal and
 tions using enhanced templates
anomalous sequences.
 In contrast, sequence-based deep learning methods, such
as DeepLog and LogAnomaly, model sequential dependencies and normal log sequences. Finally, LogMUSE achieves an F1-
using LSTM and significantly outperform traditional machine score of 98.62%, 94.32% and 99.20% on the BGL, Thunlearning methods. This highlights the importance of sequence derbird and Spirit datasets, outperforming the current basedependencies in log anomaly detection, with deep learning line methods. These results indicate that LogMUSE, through
methods effectively capturing log sequence patterns. However, multi-scale modeling and parameter enhancement, effectively
LogBERT and LogFormer, which are based on Transformer captures more sequence-level differences, resulting in superior
models, differ in feature modeling. LogBERT uses only anomaly detection performance.
the log template indices as input, while LogFormer learns We also report ROC-AUC as a supplementary reference
the inherent semantic features of the templates themselves. metric. LogMUSE achieves ROC-AUC values of 99.24%,
Despite LogBERT employing advanced sequence modeling 99.46%, and 100.00% on BGL, Thunderbird, and Spirit,
techniques, its performance is comparable to that of DeepLog respectively, which further supports its ability to distinguish
and LogAnomaly on the Thunderbird dataset, indicating that anomalous sequences from normal sequences under different
reliance on template indices alone fails to capture some decision thresholds.
anomaly patterns effectively. LogCAE attempts to enhance the
separability of log sequences through a two-stage refinement
process; however, its reliance on a conventional autoencoder C. The Effectiveness of Log Semantic Embedding
for shallow encoding limits its semantic modeling capacity. To demonstrate that the semantic representation with param-
As a result, it tends to memorize normal sequence patterns at eter enhancement still effectively retains the original semantic
a global level rather than effectively adapting to diverse and information, while exhibiting some degree of variation based
evolving anomaly scenarios. on the parameters, we apply Uniform Manifold Approximation
 In comparison, LogFormer enhances template-to-template and Projection (UMAP) for dimensionality reduction and
dependencies by learning template semantics, leading to im- visualization of both the original template semantics and the
proved detection accuracy. Moreover, its supervised learning parameter-enhanced semantics. The results, as shown in Figure
approach allows for better differentiation between anomalous 5, indicate that all the newly generated enhanced templates

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 9

TABLE III: Comparison with different semantic embedding is slightly lower. This indicates that when the model focuses
methods only on the entire sequence, it is effective in identifying most
 Dataset Method Precision Recall F1-score of the normal logs but may miss some localized anomaly
 patterns. As the scale is adjusted, using the N/2 scale results
 Log Key Index 98.12% 92.31% 95.13%
 Log Key BERT 97.81% 97.74% 97.77% in a slight improvement in recall, while precision and F1-
 BGL
 Log Key + Parameter
 99.73% 97.54% 98.62%
 score remain largely unchanged, suggesting that the model
 BERT can capture anomaly patterns more effectively at this scale
 Log Key Index 90.16% 90.32% 90.24% without sacrificing overall precision. However, when the N/4
 Log Key BERT 93.21% 90.12% 91.64%
 Thunderbird
 Log Key + Parameter
 scale is used, precision decreases significantly, while recall
 94.33% 94.31% 94.32% remains nearly unchanged. This implies that when the scale
 BERT
 Log Key Index 96.11% 96.31% 96.21% is too small, the model can capture local anomalies but loses
 Spirit
 Log Key BERT 97.21% 96.12% 96.66% important global context information. This result also indicates
 Log Key + Parameter that most anomalies occur within localized sequences, and
 99.99% 99.60% 99.20%
 BERT
 thus, focusing on features at multiple scales is crucial for
 distinguishing between normal and anomalous sequences. By
 combining multiple scale selections, the model achieves better
cluster closely around their original templates, with a spread
 detection performance. Although the N/4 scale negatively
corresponding to the variations in parameters. Moreover, there
 impacts the detection of normal sequences, the combination
is still a clear distinction between the enhanced vectors of
 of N and N/2 results in the highest F1-score and precision,
different templates. This suggests that our method is able to
 despite a slight decrease in recall compared to using a single
effectively preserve the original semantics while incorporating
 scale. This outcome further demonstrates that the inclusion
parameter-enhanced features.
 of multi-scale features allows the model to comprehensively
 We further evaluated the impact of different embedding
 capture anomaly patterns across different scales, enhancing its
methods on the model’s performance. LogMUSE was comstability and robustness.
pared with two variations: Log Key Index, which embeds only
the index information of log keys as semantic representations, A similar trend is observed in the Thunderbird dataset,
and Log Key BERT, which uses sentence-BERT to embed log where the model’s performance stabilizes as the diversity of
templates without considering parameter information. Our pro- scale selections increases. The combination of multiple scales
posed method, Log Key + Parameters BERT, incorporates both further enhances the F1-score, achieving the highest value
log templates and parameter embeddings. The experimental when combining all scales N , N/2, and N/4 with an improveresults are shown in Table III. ment of over 1% compared to using only the global scale. The
 The results indicate that when log semantics are not consid- Spirit dataset exhibits the same trend, where the integration
ered, the model can only capture the sequential relationships of all three scales achieves the best performance, with an
of log templates, failing to accurately represent the meaning F1-score of 99.20%. These results highlight the effectiveness
of log messages. This limitation leads to significant false pos- of multi-scale feature integration. Analyzing the dataset difitives and false negatives. Incorporating log template seman- ferences, Thunderbird and Spirit contain a greater number
tics significantly improves model performance. Furthermore, of log keys and log entries compared to BGL, with more
integrating parameter information achieves the best results, dispersed anomalous entries. Consequently, smaller scales are
demonstrating the critical role of parameters in understanding more effective at capturing localized anomaly patterns in
log semantics and improving anomaly detection accuracy. Thunderbird and Spirit.
 Despite the differences in results across datasets, the benefits
 of multi-scale features remain consistent. The model demon-
D. The Effectiveness of Multi-Scale Selection strates improved accuracy and robustness in anomaly detection
 To evaluate the effect of multi-scale modeling, we test Log- across diverse datasets. By incorporating multi-scale features,
MUSE with different scale configurations, both individually the model captures both local and global characteristics, enand in combination. Following the dyadic scale design in abling better adaptation to varying data structures and anomaly
Section III.C, we use three representative scales: N , N/2, and patterns.
N/4, corresponding to global, medium-range, and relatively
local dependencies, respectively. This setting covers different
temporal ranges while avoiding redundant computation. E. Evaluation of Different Model Parameters
 Table IV presents the impact of features at different scales The number of attention heads and the size of the feedforon the model’s detection performance across the BGL, Thun- ward neural network are two critical parameters that influence
derbird and Spirit datasets. The results delineated in the model performance. To evaluate the impact of these parameters
table elucidate that the selection of varying scales exerts a on log anomaly detection, we conducted performance tests by
differential influence on the efficacy of the model. selecting different parameter combinations.
 The experimental results on the BGL dataset reveal a Figure 6a, 6b, and 6c illustrate the relationship between
consistent pattern in the impact of different scale choices on the number of attention heads and model performance. From
model performance. When selecting the global scale N , the the results, it can be observed that in the Thunderbird dataset
model achieves high precision and F1-score, but the recall (as shown in Figure 6a), F1-scores remain relatively stable,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 10

 TABLE IV: Anomaly detection results for log sequences at different scales on BGL, Thunderbird and Spirit
 BGL Thunderbird Spirit
 Scales
 Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score Precision Recall F1-score
 {N } 96.81% 97.74% 97.27% 96.63% 89.70% 93.03% 99.80% 98.00% 98.89%
 {N/2} 99.37% 97.83% 98.59% 97.37% 88.53% 92.74% 99.39% 98.00% 98.69%
 {N/4} 90.53% 97.83% 94.04% 97.88% 87.42% 92.35% 99.99% 99.39% 98.80%
 {N, N/2} 99.73% 97.54% 98.62% 97.47% 89.51% 93.32% 98.21% 98.80% 98.51%
 {N, N/2, N/4} 99.30% 97.57% 98.43% 94.33% 94.31% 94.32% 99.99% 99.60% 99.20%
 N is the length of the fixed window.

 1
 1 1
 0.9
 0.9
 0.8
 0.7 0.9
 Score

 0.8

 Score

 Score
 0.6
 0.5
 0.7 Recall 0.4 0.8
 Precision 0.3 Recall
 Recall
 F1-Score Precision Precision
 0.6 0.2
 F1-Score F1-Score
 12 8 4 2 1 0.1 0.7
 Number of Attention Heads 12 8 4 2 1 12 8 4 2 1
 Number of Attention Heads Number of Attention Heads
 (a) Different attention heads on Thunder-
 (b) Different attention heads on BGL (c) Different attention heads on Spirit
 bird
 1 1 1

 0.9 0.9 0.9
 Score

 Score

 Score
 0.8 0.8 0.8

 0.7 0.7 0.7
 Recall Recall Recall
 Precision Precision Precision
 F1-Score F1-Score F1-Score
 0.6 0.6 0.6
 3072 2048 1024 512 3072 2048 1024 512 3072 2048 1024 512
 FFN Size FFN Size FFN Size

 (d) Different sizes of feed-forward net- (e) Different sizes of feed-forward net- (f) Different sizes of feed-forward networks on Thunderbird works on BGL works on Spirit
 Fig. 6: Results of LogMUSE with different settings on BGL, Thunderbird and Spirit

ranging from 0.9341 to 0.9432, as the number of attention FFN size and model performance. From the results, it is
heads varies. Notably, when using fewer attention heads (e.g., evident that larger FFN sizes generally yield better detection
1 or 2), the model still achieves high precision but experiences outcomes. For the Thunderbird dataset (as shown in Figure
a decline in recall. This suggests that simplified attention 6d), the F1-score reaches its highest value of 0.9405 when the
mechanisms may reduce false positives but struggle to capture FFN size is set to 3072, with balanced recall and precision.
anomalies effectively. The Spirit dataset (Figure 6c) shows a Similarly, in the BGL dataset (as shown in Figure 6e), an
trend similar to Thunderbird, where performance remains rel- FFN size of 3072 achieves the best F1-score of 0.9862,
atively stable across different head configurations, suggesting indicating superior performance. And in Spirit dataset (shown
that log diversity in Spirit can be effectively modeled even in 6f), with only minor fluctuations across different FFN sizes
with fewer attention heads. and the best F1-score also observed at 3072. As the FFN
 In contrast, the BGL dataset (as shown in Figure 6b) size decreases, the F1-scores and recall rates drop slightly
exhibits a markedly different trend. When using 12 or 8 in these three datasets, but the precision remains relatively
attention heads, the model achieves an impressive F1-score stable, demonstrating a degree of robustness. Overall, selecting
of 0.9862, demonstrating exceptional performance. However, an FFN size of 3072 provides optimal performance across
as the number of attention heads decreases, the model’s perfor- both datasets, demonstrating the importance of sufficient FFN
mance significantly deteriorates, particularly in precision. This capacity in capturing complex and diverse log patterns for
indicates that the model struggles to extract critical patterns anomaly detection tasks.
in the sequence with fewer heads. The ability of attention
heads to capture diverse dependency relationships is crucial F. A Simple Illustration of Detection
for BGL, which contains a wider variety of error types. With
 To better illustrate how LogMUSE performs anomaly defewer heads, the model fails to capture these dependencies
 tection, we present a case study using a randomly selected
effectively, resulting in degraded performance.
 anomalous sequence from the Thunderbird dataset. For this
 Thus, for anomaly detection tasks, it is recommended to sequence, we iteratively replaced each log entry with an allselect 8 to 12 attention heads, balancing the trade-off between zero vector and re-evaluated the anomaly score, in order
computational efficiency and detection performance. to examine whether the model had effectively learned the
 Figures 6d, 6e, and 6f present the relationship between contribution of each entry. As shown in Figure 7a, the 9-th

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 11

 Index Label Content features, which are then balanced and combined through
 …
 1
 …
 - ntpd[2272]: synchronized to 10.100.24.250, stratum 3
 …
 weighted averaging, resulting in a more accurate and robust
 8 -
 ib_sm.x[24904]: [ib_sm_sweep.c:411]: IB node 0x0005AD0000027550
 port 21 is INIT state
 anomaly detection model. Since anomalies are often abrupt
 9 N_CPU kernel: Losing some ticks... checking if CPU frequency changed. and rare, the highly correlated segments of the sequence
 10 - ntpd[2273]: synchronized to 10.100.28.250, stratum 3 are typically limited to a small portion. Unlike standard
 … … …
 smartd[1951]: Device: /dev/sda, Temperature changed 2 Celsius to 29
 Transformer models, our method enhances these local features
 20 - Celsius since last report
 effectively, further improving anomaly detection performance.
 (a) An example of an abnormal log sequence
 1

 0.9
 B. Limitations and Future Work
 0.8
 Although LogMUSE has demonstrated strong performance
 Abnormal Score Drop

 0.7

 0.6
 in log anomaly detection, it is not without limitations, which
 0.5 also point to promising avenues for future research.
 Limitations. First, our evaluation is conducted on three
 0.4

 0.3

 0.2 benchmark datasets, i.e., BGL, Thunderbird, and Spirit. Al-
 0.1
 though these datasets are widely used, the selected multi-scale
 0
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
 Index Position
 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
 attention radii {N, N/2, N/4} may not always be optimal
 (b) The abnormal score drop after masking different log entries for logs from different systems or with different temporal
 characteristics. This may limit the direct transferability of the
 Fig. 7: A simple illustration of detection model.
 Second, LogMUSE assumes that log labels and log data
 are reliable. In practice, log annotations may contain noise,
log entry reports a loss of ticks in clock interrupts, which
 and adversarial environments may involve log tampering, fake
may indicate potential system-level instability. This entry was
 event injection, or partial data loss. These factors may affect
labeled as type N CPU, and its occurrence introduced an
 the robustness of the model. In addition, LogMUSE still relies
unexpected message that led to the sequence being classified
 on log parsing as a preprocessing step, so parsing errors may
as anomalous. Figure 7b depicts the decline in anomaly scores
 propagate to downstream detection.
when different entries were masked. Notably, when the 9-th
 Third, the current sequence partitioning strategy is based
entry was replaced with an all-zero vector, the anomaly score
 on fixed-size windows. This simple design may miss crossdropped sharply and the sequence was classified as normal.
 task dependencies or long-term correlations in interleaved log
This demonstrates that LogMUSE can accurately capture the
 streams. Moreover, the interpretability of LogMUSE remains
crucial anomalous information within the sequence, effectively
 limited, which may affect its use in operational scenarios
identifying the log entries that drive anomaly detection.
 where analysts need clear explanations.
 V. D ISCUSSION Future work. In future work, we plan to improve Log-
 MUSE in several directions. First, we will explore transfer
A. Why does LogMUSE work? learning and domain adaptation to enhance cross-system gen-
 Reasons for LogMUSE’s superior performance over state- eralization. Second, we will study semi-supervised, unsuperof-the-art methods can be summarized in two main aspects. vised, and robust learning strategies to reduce the dependence
 First, LogMUSE fully incorporates the semantic information on accurate labels and improve resistance to noisy or manipuof raw logs while introducing the impact of parameter infor- lated logs. Third, we will investigate dynamic log sequence
mation on anomaly detection. For log template embedding, we partitioning to better capture task-specific and long-range
leverage the pre-trained Sentence-BERT model to capture the dependencies. Finally, we will improve model interpretability
semantics of the template. Compared to the standard BERT and extend LogMUSE toward real-time anomaly detection in
model, Sentence-BERT, which employs the same tokenization large-scale systems.
approach, handles long sentences and complex semantics more
effectively and directly provides sentence-level embeddings,
 VI. R ELATED W ORK
making it better suited for semi-structured data like logs.
Furthermore, we embed each log entry’s parameters using a In this section, we review representative studies on log
combination of character encoding and original position en- anomaly detection and organize them into five modeling
coding. This embedding is then enhanced with cross-attention paradigms. Table V summarizes the main characteristics of
mechanisms to associate templates with parameter information several classic methods in this field.
effectively. This design increases the variability among logs Early studies mainly relied on rule-based detection stratewith the same template, enabling the detection process to gies [33], [34]. These methods identify abnormal events using
capture finer-grained differences and improve accuracy. expert knowledge, keyword matching, regular expressions, or
 Second, LogMUSE introduces a multi-scale window-based predefined rules. Although they are simple and interpretable,
feature extraction network that leverages a Transformer en- their effectiveness depends heavily on manually designed
coder to simultaneously focus on dependencies across different rules. As modern systems become larger and more dynamic,
time steps. This approach fully captures both local and global such methods are often difficult to maintain and adapt. They

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 12

 TABLE V: Comparison of Representative Log Anomaly Detection Methods Across Modeling Paradigms

 Categories Reference Supervision Embedding Method Window Division Datasets

 Chen 2004 [3] supervised statistical feature count vector SVM global BGL
 Machine
 Learning-based HDFS and private
 Xu 2009 [26] supervised statistical event count vector PCA global
 Darkstar

 DeepLog [6] unsupervised event count vector LSTM global HDFS and OpenStack
 word2vec
 LogAnomaly [7] unsupervised LSTM global HDFS and BGL
 Sequence-based template semantic vector
 Bert+Event IDF Mogrifier LSTM for global
 MLog [28] supervised HDFS and BGL
 template semantic vector LSTM+CNN CNN for local
 BERT HDFS, BGL
 LogBERT [9] unsupervised Transformer global
 template semantic vector and Thunderbird
 BERT, raw log HDFS, BGL, Thunderbird,
 Transformer-based NeuralLog [10] unsupervised
 message semantic vector
 Transformer global
 and Spirit
 sentence-BERT
 Transformer HDFS, BGL
 LogFormer [11] supervised template semantic vector global
 Adapter Tuning and Thunderbird
 with parameter
 Fine-tune BERT HDFS, BGL
 LLMeLog [29] supervised LLM global
 LLM-based and Transformer and Thunderbird
 HDFS, BGL,
 LogLLM [30] supervised BERT LLaMA global
 Liberty and Thunderbird

 HRGCN [31] unsupervised HetGNN Deep SVDD global TraceLog and FlowGraph
 Graph-based
 HDFS, BGL, Thunderbird,
 OCDiGCN [32] unsupervised graph node attributes One-class GCN global
 Spirit, and Hadoop

also have limited ability to analyze anomalies from a broader approaches [9]–[11], [19]–[21], [43]–[45] can model longcontextual perspective. range dependencies without strictly relying on sequential re-
 Machine learning-based methods were later introduced to currence. LogBERT [9] applies self-supervised Transformer
reduce the dependence on manual rules. Representative ap- learning to log sequences by treating log events in a way
proaches, such as PCA [26], SVM [3], and Isolation Forest similar to natural language tokens. LogFormer [11] further
(IF) [35], detect anomalies by extracting statistical features improves log representation through a two-stage Transformer
from log sequences. These methods can improve detection training strategy and adapts the model to different datasets with
efficiency in certain scenarios, but their performance is highly limited fine-tuning. Nevertheless, most existing Transformeraffected by log sequence segmentation and system changes, based methods still model log sequences at a single scale.
such as log format updates or the emergence of new log types. As a result, they may focus mainly on global sequence
Moreover, statistical features usually provide limited informa- patterns and fail to capture localized anomalies or temporal
tion about temporal dependencies among log events, which dependencies at different granularities. Recent studies in text
restricts their applicability in complex system environments. modeling have shown that multi-scale attention can capture
 Since logs are generated in chronological order, sequence both local and global semantics [46]. Motivated by this idea,
modeling has become a major direction for log anomaly we design a multi-scale Transformer framework tailored to the
detection. RNN- and LSTM-based methods [6]–[8], [28], heterogeneous temporal patterns of log anomaly detection.
[36]–[42] learn normal execution patterns from ordered log The use of large language models (LLMs) for log anomaly
sequences and detect anomalies when these patterns are vi- detection has also attracted attention [29], [47], [48]. These
olated. For example, DeepLog [6] converts raw logs into methods adapt general-purpose pretrained language models to
template sequences and uses LSTM to model normal exe- log analysis tasks and use their language understanding ability
cution workflows. LogAnomaly [7] considers both template to improve log representation. For instance, LLMeLog [29]
frequency and sequential dependencies, while LogRobust [8] enhances log event representations with LLMs and combines
combines TF-IDF-based template representation with BiL- fine-tuned BERT with a Transformer model for anomaly
STM for supervised anomaly detection. More recent methods, detection. LogLLM [30] extracts semantic vectors from log
such as MLog [28] and LogESP [42], further improve local- messages using BERT and employs a Transformer decoder for
global feature modeling and entry-level semantic representa- classification, with a projector used to align the representation
tion. Despite these advances, sequence-based methods remain spaces. Although these methods show the potential of LLMs
sensitive to unseen or evolving log patterns. They also tend to in log analysis, most of them still transfer existing language
underuse the semantic information contained in log templates models directly to logs. They provide limited customization
and parameters. In addition, their recurrent structures make it for the specific structures and semantics of log data, and the
difficult to capture long-range dependencies efficiently. development of log-specific large models remains an important
 Transformer-based models provide a more flexible way to direction for future research.
capture log dependencies and semantic patterns. Compared Another line of work converts log data into graph structures
with RNN- and LSTM-based methods, Transformer-based for anomaly detection. Graph-based methods [31], [32], [49],

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 13

[50] model relationships among logs, entities, and system [8] X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Q. Lin, B. Qiao, H. Zhang, Y. Dang, C. Xie,
components, which can improve the interpretability of detec- X. Yang, Q. Cheng, Z. Li et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on
 unstable log data,” in Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM joint meeting
tion results. For example, OCDiGCN [32] constructs hetero- on European software engineering conference and symposium on the
geneous graphs from parsed logs and applies graph neural foundations of software engineering, 2019, pp. 807–817.
networks for anomaly detection. Lograph [50] mines semantic [9] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “Logbert: Log anomaly detection via bert,”
 in 2021 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN).
associations in logs, builds a Log-Entity Graph, and uses a IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–8.
heterogeneous graph attention network to detect anomalous [10] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parspatterns. However, graph construction may introduce addi- ing,” in 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
 Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 492–504.
tional computational cost and can lose part of the sequential
 [11] H. Guo, J. Yang, J. Liu, J. Bai, B. Wang, Z. Li, T. Zheng, B. Zhang,
information in logs. These limitations make efficient online J. Peng, and Q. Tian, “Logformer: A pre-train and tuning pipeline for log
detection more difficult in large-scale systems. anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 1, 2024, pp. 135–143.
 [12] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 VII. C ONCLUSION approach with fixed depth tree,” in 2017 IEEE international conference
 on web services (ICWS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 33–40.
 In this paper, we propose LogMUSE, a novel log anomaly
 [13] M. Du and F. Li, “Spell: Streaming parsing of system event logs,” in
detection method based on multi-scale semantic representa- 2016 IEEE 16th International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM).
tion. LogMUSE effectively addresses the limitations of exist- IEEE, 2016, pp. 859–864.
ing anomaly detection techniques, which often fail to capture [14] S. Messaoudi, A. Panichella, D. Bianculli, L. Briand, and R. Sasnauskas,
 “A search-based approach for accurate identification of log message
the true execution semantics and struggle with balancing formats,” in Proceedings of the 26th Conference on Program Compreglobal and local dependencies. By extracting both template hension, 2018, pp. 167–177.
and parameter information through log parsing, LogMUSE [15] A. A. Makanju, A. N. Zincir-Heywood, and E. E. Milios, “Clustering
 event logs using iterative partitioning,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM
leverages a pre-trained BERT model for template semantic SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data
embedding, further enhancing the representation of log entries mining, 2009, pp. 1255–1264.
via cross-attention mechanisms to capture diverse parame- [16] Z. Ma, A. R. Chen, D. J. Kim, T.-H. Chen, and S. Wang, “Llmparser:
ter features within the same template. Moreover, the multi- An exploratory study on using large language models for log parsing,”
 in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on
scale Transformer model enables the detection of anoma- Software Engineering, 2024, pp. 1–13.
lies at different scales, allowing for simultaneous focus on [17] N. Reimers, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bertboth global and local anomaly patterns in fixed-length log networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10084, 2019.
 [18] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in Neural Information
sequences. Extensive experiments on real-world benchmark Processing Systems, 2017.
datasets, including BGL, Thunderbird, and Spirit, demonstrate [19] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. Fung, R. He, Y. Zhao, H. Yang, and Z. Luan,
that LogMUSE significantly outperforms existing methods in “Hitanomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly detection in system
 log,” IEEE transactions on network and service management, vol. 17,
terms of anomaly detection performance. Specifically, Log- no. 4, pp. 2064–2076, 2020.
MUSE achieves F1-scores of 98.62%, 94.32%, and 99.20% [20] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. Azad, “Logfit: Log anomaly
on BGL, Thunderbird, and Spirit, respectively, demonstrating detection using fine-tuned language models,” IEEE Transactions on
consistent improvements over representative baseline meth- Network and Service Management, 2024.
 [21] T. Xiao, Z. Quan, Z.-J. Wang, Y. Le, Y. Du, X. Liao, K. Li, and
ods. Furthermore, the consistent performance across different K. Li, “Loader: A log anomaly detector based on transformer,” IEEE
datasets indicates its potential applicability to diverse real- Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3479–3492,
world system scenarios. 2023.
 [22] S. Mallat, A wavelet tour of signal processing. Elsevier, 1999.
 [23] S. He, J. Zhu, P. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection of
 R EFERENCES system log datasets towards automated log analytics,” arXiv e-prints, pp.
 arXiv–2008, 2020.
[1] M. Chen, “A big data log system for millions of servers,”
 [24] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five
 Presentation at ArchSummit Shenzhen, July 2019. [Online]. Available:
 system logs,” in 37th annual IEEE/IFIP international conference on
 https://archsummit.infoq.cn/2019/shenzhen/presentation/1494
 dependable systems and networks (DSN’07). IEEE, 2007, pp. 575–
[2] Spacelift, “How much data is generated every
 584.
 day?” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://spacelift.io/blog/
 how-much-data-is-generated-every-day [25] L. Yang, J. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Dong, and W. Zhang,
[3] M. Chen, A. X. Zheng, J. Lloyd, M. I. Jordan, and E. Brewer, “Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via probabilistic label
 “Failure diagnosis using decision trees,” in International Conference on estimation,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on
 Autonomic Computing, 2004. Proceedings. IEEE, 2004, pp. 36–43. Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1448–1460.
[4] P. Bodik, M. Goldszmidt, A. Fox, D. B. Woodard, and H. Andersen, [26] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting
 “Fingerprinting the datacenter: automated classification of performance large-scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proceedings
 crises,” in Proceedings of the 5th European conference on Computer of the ACM SIGOPS 22nd symposium on Operating systems principles,
 systems, 2010, pp. 111–124. 2009, pp. 117–132.
[5] J.-G. Lou, Q. Fu, S. Yang, Y. Xu, and J. Li, “Mining invariants from [27] P. Xiao, T. Jia, C. Duan, H. Cai, Y. Li, and G. Huang, “Logcae:
 console logs for system problem detection,” in 2010 USENIX Annual An approach for log-based anomaly detection with active learning and
 Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 10), 2010. contrastive learning,” in 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on
[6] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly detection Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 144–155.
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proceedings [28] Y. Fu, K. Liang, and J. Xu, “Mlog: Mogrifier lstm-based log anomaly
 of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications detection approach using semantic representation,” IEEE Transactions
 security, 2017, pp. 1285–1298. on Services Computing, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3537–3549, 2023.
[7] W. Meng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Zhang, D. Pei, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, [29] M. He, T. Jia, C. Duan, H. Cai, Y. Li, and G. Huang, “Llmelog:
 S. Tao, P. Sun et al., “Loganomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential An approach for anomaly detection based on llm-enriched log events,”
 and quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs.” in IJCAI, vol. 19, no. 7, in 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability
 2019, pp. 4739–4745. Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 132–143.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3700403

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING 14

[30] W. Guan, J. Cao, S. Qian, J. Gao, and C. Ouyang, “Logllm: Log- association mining on log-entity graph,” IEEE Transactions on Software
 based anomaly detection using large language models,” arXiv preprint Engineering, 2025.
 arXiv:2411.08561, 2024.
[31] J. Li, G. Pang, L. Chen, and M.-R. Namazi-Rad, “Hrgcn: Heterogeneous
 graph-level anomaly detection with hierarchical relation-augmented
 graph neural networks,” in 2023 IEEE 10th International Conference Mengyao Liu received the MSc degree in the
 on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA). IEEE, 2023, pp. School of Cyber Science and Technique, Beihang
 1–10. University, Beijing, China, in 2023. She is currently
 pursuing the Ph.D. degree in the School of Cyber
[32] Z. Li, J. Shi, and M. Van Leeuwen, “Graph neural networks based
 Science and Technique, Beihang University, Beilog anomaly detection and explanation,” in Proceedings of the 2024
 jing, China. Her current research interests include
 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering:
 malware classification, log analysis, and information
 Companion Proceedings, 2024, pp. 306–307.
 security.
[33] M. Cinque, D. Cotroneo, and A. Pecchia, “Event logs for the analysis
 of software failures: A rule-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on
 Software Engineering, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 806–821, 2012.
[34] T.-F. Yen, A. Oprea, K. Onarlioglu, T. Leetham, W. Robertson, A. Juels,
 Tianbo Wang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 and E. Kirda, “Beehive: Large-scale log analysis for detecting suspicious
 degree in computer application from Beihang Uniactivity in enterprise networks,” in Proceedings of the 29th annual
 versity, Beijing, China, in 2018. He is currently
 computer security applications conference, 2013, pp. 199–208.
 an Associate Professor at Beihang University. He
[35] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in 2008 eighth has participated in several National Natural Sciieee international conference on data mining. IEEE, 2008, pp. 413–422. ence Foundations and other research projects. His
[36] A. Brown, A. Tuor, B. Hutchinson, and N. Nichols, “Recurrent neural research interests include network and information
 network attention mechanisms for interpretable system log anomaly security, intrusion detection technology, and infordetection,” in Proceedings of the first workshop on machine learning mation countermeasures.
 for computing systems, 2018, pp. 1–8.
[37] Z. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Ni, H. Liu, H. Chen, and J. Tang, “Multi-scale
 one-class recurrent neural networks for discrete event sequence anomaly Yuan Zhao received the master’s degree from Shandetection,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on dong Normal University, Jinan, Shandong, China, in
 knowledge discovery & data mining, 2021, pp. 3726–3734. 2021. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
[38] Y. Yuan, S. S. Adhatarao, M. Lin, Y. Yuan, Z. Liu, and X. Fu, “Ada: with Beihang University, Beijing, China, under the
 Adaptive deep log anomaly detector,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE supervision of Prof. Chunhe Xia. Her research inter-
 Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2020, pp. 2449– ests include information security and network traffic
 2458. analysis.
[39] R. Yang, D. Qu, Y. Gao, Y. Qian, and Y. Tang, “Nlsalog: An anomaly
 detection framework for log sequence in security management,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 181 152–181 164, 2019.
[40] X. Li, P. Chen, L. Jing, Z. He, and G. Yu, “Swisslog: Robust and unified
 deep learning based log anomaly detection for diverse faults,” in 2020 Chunhe Xia received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering application from Beihang University, Beijing, China,
 (ISSRE). IEEE, 2020, pp. 92–103. in 2003. He is currently a Supervisor and a Professor
[41] X. Wang, L. Yang, D. Li, L. Ma, Y. He, J. Xiao, J. Liu, and Y. Yang, with Beihang University and the Director of the
 “Maddc: Multi-scale anomaly detection, diagnosis and correction for Beijing Key Laboratory of Network Technology. He
 discrete event logs,” in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Computer has participated in different major national research
 Security Applications Conference, 2022, pp. 769–784. projects and has published more than 100 research
[42] Z. Ni, X. Di, X. Liu, L. Chang, J. Li, and Q. Tang, “Logesp: Enhancing papers in important international conferences and
 log semantic representation with word position for anomaly detection,” journals. His current research interests include netin 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed work and information security, information counter-
 Processing with Applications (ISPA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1917–1924. measures, cloud security, and network measurement.
[43] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. Fung, H. Wang, H. Yang, and Z. Luan, “Improving
 log-based anomaly detection by pre-training hierarchical transformers,” Yingming Zeng received the B.S. degree in com-
 IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 72, no. 9, pp. 2656–2667, 2023. puter software and theory from Beijing Jiaotong
[44] S. Tao, Y. Liu, W. Meng, Z. Ren, H. Yang, X. Chen, L. Zhang, Y. Xie, University, Beijing, China, in 2006, and the M.S.
 C. Su, X. Oiao et al., “Biglog: Unsupervised large-scale pre-training degree in computer software and theory from the
 for a unified log representation,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 31st International Second Chinese Academy of Aerospace Science
 Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–11. and Technology, China, in 2009. He is currently a
[45] K. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Feng, and F. Chen, “Loganomex: An unsupervised Senior Engineer with Beijing Institute of Computer
 log anomaly detection method based on electra-dp and gated bilinear Technology and Applications, Beijing, China. His
 neural networks,” Journal of Network and Systems Management, vol. 33, research interests include network security protecno. 2, pp. 1–29, 2025. tion, artificial intelligence security, network attack
[46] Q. Guo, X. Qiu, P. Liu, X. Xue, and Z. Zhang, “Multi-scale self- and defense confrontation, etc., and he has presided
 attention for text classification,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference over or participated in the research of more than 20 scientific and technological
 on artificial intelligence, vol. 34, no. 05, 2020, pp. 7847–7854. innovation topics in the field of network security.
[47] J. Qi, S. Huang, Z. Luan, S. Yang, C. Fung, H. Yang, D. Qian, J. Shang, Yuan Tao received the Ph.d. degree in control
 Z. Xiao, and Z. Wu, “Loggpt: Exploring chatgpt for log-based anomaly theory and control engineering from the University
 detection,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on High Performance of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in 2010.
 Computing & Communications, Data Science & Systems, Smart City He is currently a Professor with Classified Security
 & Dependability in Sensor, Cloud & Big Data Systems & Application Protection, the Third Research Institute of Ministry
 (HPCC/DSS/SmartCity/DependSys). IEEE, 2023, pp. 273–280. of Public Security, Shanghai, China. His research
[48] X. Han, S. Yuan, and M. Trabelsi, “Loggpt: Log anomaly detection via interests include the field of cyberspace security,
 gpt,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData). including classified security protection, critical in-
 IEEE, 2023, pp. 1117–1122. formation infrastructure, and blockchain security.
[49] J. Zeng, Z. L. Chua, Y. Chen, K. Ji, Z. Liang, and J. Mao, “Watson:
 Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via aggregation of contextual
 semantics.” in NDSS, 2021.
[50] G. Chu, J. Wang, Q. Qi, H. Sun, Z. Zhuang, B. He, Y. Jing, L. Zhang,
 and J. Liao, “Anomaly detection on interleaved log data with semantic

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.