IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 767

 MADGuard: A High-Performance Microservice
 Anomaly Detection System With Multidimensional
 Data Fusion and Temporal Causal Analysis
 Yanshang Yin , Tiantian Zhu , Member, IEEE, Tieming Chen , and Mingqi Lv

 Abstract—With the widespread adoption of microservice Scaling: The dynamic scaling mechanism causes continuous
architectures, the security threats they face have become changes in service instance topology, leading to an exponential
increasingly sophisticated. Existing anomaly detection methods increase in the attack surface [6]. (2) Cross-Network
based on system calls exhibit significant limitations in three
key aspects: multidimensional data fusion, temporal causal- Communication: Frequent communication between services
ity modeling, and forensic analysis of anomalies. This paper renders traditional perimeter defense models ineffective.
proposes MADGuard, a provenance graph-based anomaly detec- Middleware components, such as API gateways and
tion system for microservices. MADGuard addresses these service meshes, become new targets for attacks [6]. (3)
challenges through three key innovations: (1) It constructs a Containerized Deployment: The use of containerization
native provenance graph by integrating multisource services and
multidimensional data, employing feature hashing and positional introduces cloud-native security risks, including image
encoding for efficient graph representation; (2) The system vulnerabilities and container escape [7], [8], [9]. Once a
introduces a Temporal Graph Network (TGN) model combined single microservice is compromised, attackers can quickly
with edge reconstruction error and Inverse Document Frequency move laterally to penetrate the entire system, potentially
(IDF) weighting, achieving a 15. 07% improvement in the causing catastrophic consequences such as data breaches and
F1 score compared to existing methods; (3) For the first time
in microservice security, an integrated forensic analysis module service interruptions [10]. These security challenges mean
is implemented, allowing rapid anomaly path reconstruction that anomaly detection systems in microservices environments
through aggregated anomaly subgraphs. Comprehensive evalua- must not only address traditional network attacks but also
tions on typical microservice benchmarks (TeaStore, RobotShop, meet new defense needs, such as distributed tracing and zero-
SockShop) demonstrate MADGuard’s superior performance: trust verification [11], [12]. As a result, anomaly detection
94.08% detection accuracy, significantly outperforming stateof-the-art approaches while maintaining practical operational has become a cornerstone for ensuring the stable operation of
efficiency. cloud-native systems [13].
 Index Terms—Microservices security, provenance graph, tem-
 Current research in microservice anomaly detection focuses
poral graph network, anomaly forensics, anomaly detection. primarily on analysis of system calls using machine learning or signature-based methods [14], [15], [16], [17], [18],
 I. I NTRODUCTION [19]. However, three critical limitations persist in enterprise
 HE MICROSERVICE architecture improves the environments:
T scalability and agility of the system by decoupling
monolithic applications into lightweight, loosely coupled
 (1) Multi-dimensional data fusion: Existing approaches
 such as CDL [20] oversimplify detection by relying solely on
services [1], [2], [3]. This architecture is characterized system call frequencies, neglecting crucial contextual features
by service modularization, independent deployment, (process hierarchies, file process patterns, network flows).
decentralized governance, and API-based communication This feature sparsity severely limits the detection accuracy for
mechanisms [4], [5]. These characteristics enable each sophisticated attacks.
microservice to be independently scalable and updatable, (2) Shallow temporal causality: Methods such as STIDEbut also introduce unique security challenges: (1) Dynamic BoSC [21], CHIDS [22], and ReplicaWatcher [23] analyze
 short system call sequences without modeling temporal depen-
 Received 19 March 2025; revised 6 September 2025; accepted 15 November dencies, leading to high false negatives for multistage attacks.
2025. Date of publication 24 November 2025; date of current version
29 December 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Natural For example, our TeaStore case study (Section II) reveals
Science Foundation of China under Grant U22B2028, Grant 62002324, and how these methods fail to detect low-frequency attack patterns
Grant 62372410; in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Provincial masked within normal operational sequences.
Universities of Zhejiang under Grant RF-A2023009; in part by the Zhejiang
Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant LQ21F020016, (3) Lack of anomaly forensic analysis: Current
Grant LD22F020002, and Grant LZ23F020011; and in part by “Pioneer” and systems [20], [21], [22], [23] lack causal analysis capabilities,
“Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang under Grant 2025C01082 and providing isolated alerts without reconstruction of the attack
Grant 2025C01013. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was R. Riggio. (Corresponding authors: path. This gap significantly impedes incident response, partic-
Tiantian Zhu; Tieming Chen.) ularly for cross-service attacks requiring end-to-end visibility.
 The authors are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Table I presents the detection capabilities of existing
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail:
ttzhu@zjut.edu.cn; tmchen@zjut.edu.cn). microservice anomaly detection systems across various dimen-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3634590 sions. However, no existing method can simultaneously
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 T HE E XISTING A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS A RE C OMPARED IN T HREE D IMENSIONS : DATA F EATURE M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL F USION , T IME
 S ERIES C AUSAL C ORRELATION , AND A NOMALY F ORENSICS A NALYSIS

address the three main challenges. The provenance graph the accuracy and efficiency of anomaly detection. Moreover,
represents the control flow and data flow relationships between by adopting provenance graphs, the original data’s temsystem subjects (such as processes, threads, etc.) and objects poral information is retained, and the causal relationships
(such as files, network sockets, etc.) through a directed between data are more intuitively represented, providing
graph, thereby reflecting the causal relationship between stronger explanatory and predictive power in complex data
system events. Due to their rich semantics and robustness, environments.
provenance graphs are widely used in network intrusion detec- Abnormal forensic analysis can infer the chain of abnormal
tion [24], [25], [26]. To address these challenges and improve events and restore the abnormal path based on the provethe performance of anomaly detection systems in microservice nance graph. However, as time passes and the volume of
environments, this paper designs a microservice anomaly data increases, the size of the provenance graphs increases
detection system based on provenance graphs. The system exponentially [29], making manual construction impractical.
integrates multidimensional information from the microservice Existing forensic methods in other fields construct concise
environment and combines graph learning to construct an summary graphs to restore abnormal event paths, reducing
effective anomaly detection model. the need for human intervention [30]. However, in microser-
 Considering the distributed nature of the microservice archi- vice environments, virtualization characteristics can confuse
tecture, this paper collects key information events covering identical data information across different services, leading
multiple dimensions (e.g., processes, files, networks) in a mul- to inaccurate exception source localization. To address this,
tisource service environment. To integrate these multi-source this paper introduces unique identifiers to distinguish services
and multi-dimensional data information without causing con- and designs an anomaly forensic analysis algorithm. The
fusion, this paper employs service identification (mid) and experimental results show that the proposed algorithm sig-
Hasche algorithm to uniquely identify system objects across nificantly reduces the workload of security staff, clarifies
different services. Based on these objects, related events are abnormal data in different microservice environments, and
merged. After data fusion, these complex data are uniformly shortens the forensic analysis time. Furthermore, this paper is
characterized to facilitate subsequent model learning. Inspired the first to integrate an anomaly forensic analysis module into
by previous work [27], this paper adopts feature hashing the microservice anomaly detection system, enhancing overall
and location encoding techniques to efficiently encode multi- system efficiency and accuracy.
source information in the microservice environment into To verify the effectiveness of the proposed method, expercompact and semantic-rich feature vectors. Furthermore, a iments were conducted in three representative microservice
time-sliding window mechanism with a time interval T is environments, simulating three typical attack scenarios. The
designed to accumulate feature vectors in real-time. This results indicate that the proposed anomaly detection system
mechanism not only maintains data timeliness but also outperforms existing methods, with a 15.07% improvement
addresses the issue of insufficient multi-dimensional fusion in in detection accuracy. The main contributions of this paper
existing data features. Experimental results in the deployed are:
microservice environment demonstrate that embedding feature (1) Innovative System Design: A novel microservice
vectors through the time-sliding window mechanism effec- anomaly detection system based on provenance graphs is
tively improves anomaly detection accuracy and reduces the proposed. By integrating multi-source services and multifalse alarm rate. dimensional data, the system constructs a provenance graph
 To address the issue that existing anomaly detection meth- in the microservice environment and leverages graph learning
ods do not fully consider temporal causal relationships in to significantly enhance anomaly detection accuracy.
data sequences, this paper uses the structural characteris- (2) Enhanced Data Features: Advanced feature hashing
tics of provenance graphs to construct data information. By techniques are employed to efficiently fuse multi-source,
structuring data into provenance graphs, temporal continuity multi-dimensional data, optimizing data samples. The timeand causality are strengthened. The Temporal Graph Network sliding window mechanism enriches data diversity and
(TGN) model is also introduced to dynamically capture com- timeliness, providing more comprehensive and accurate data
plex temporal causal relationships between data [28]. The for anomaly detection.
unique advantage of the TGN model is its ability to analyze (3) Integrated Forensic Analysis: The system introduces an
both temporal and spatial characteristics of graph sequences, anomaly forensic analysis module for the first time, enabling
enabling the identification of local and global abnormal events accurate restoration of abnormal events and saving considerwith high accuracy. This capability significantly enhances able time in security forensic analysis.
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 769

Fig. 1. Teastore-webshell attack. Initially, the attacker leveraged the WebUI
service to upload a WebShell file named shell.jsp, thereby gaining unauthorized access to the server. Subsequently, through local port scanning, the
attacker obtained the database connection details. Using this information, they
created a Shell script named sql.sh to access the remote user database. Finally,
the attacker employed the mysqldump tool to export sensitive information,
including user login credentials and credit card details.

 (4) Comprehensive System Evaluation: The system’s
performance is comprehensively evaluated in three realworld microservice environments, demonstrating excellent
performance in key metrics such as detection accuracy, detection time, and overhead.
 Fig. 2. ReplicaWatcher and CHIDS anomaly detection methods identify
 II. M OTIVATION feature.

 This chapter presents a critical examination of webshell
 CDL anomaly detection method detects abnormal events by
attack detection in microservice environments through a case
 analyzing the frequency of system calls. Specifically, CDL
study on the TeaStore platform, highlighting both the concounts the frequency of system call events every second and
straints of conventional anomaly detection techniques and the
 identifies deviations from the baseline based on this frequency
advantages of our proposed methodology.
 (Table II). However, this method is only effective for high-
 The TeaStore benchmark—a distributed system encompassfrequency attacks and is limited in detecting low-frequency
ing authentication, procurement, and three other independently
 attacks. For instance, in the case of the CVE-2017-12615
scalable services—serves as the experimental foundation. As
 vulnerability attack, the attacker’s impact on system calls is
depicted in Figure 1, we simulate a sophisticated attack chain
 minimal, and the normal and abnormal system call frequency
initiated by exploiting CVE-2017-12625, an arbitrary file
 characteristics are nearly indistinguishable, making it difficult
write vulnerability in the WebUI component. Attackers first
 to detect the attack.
intercept service communications via Burpsuite, injecting a
 STIDE-BoSC method combines the STIDE [32] and
malicious JSP file into the Tomcat directory to establish remote
 Bosc [33] techniques to detect abnormal events. It counts the
code execution. Subsequent abuse of database misconfigurafrequency of different system calls within the current time
tions [31] enables credential harvesting and deployment of
 window based on their temporal sequence and maintains a
SQL.sh scripts, ultimately compromising sensitive customer
 system call vector database with a window size of 10. During
financial data through orchestrated database queries.
 detection, the system call vector of an epoch is matched
 For the aforementioned attack scenario, existing anomaly
 against the database. If the mismatched vector exceeds a
detection methods such as ReplicaWatcher and CHIDS
 certain threshold, the epoch is deemed abnormal. Although
detect window-based anomaly events by identifying
 this method considers the order of system calls, even minor
isolated features. For example, they may detect the
 changes in the system can trigger false alarms, resulting in a
/usr/local/Tomcat/webapps/ROOT folder path in the file
 high false-positive rate.
direction feature or the shell.jsp file and Java process in the
process feature (Figure 2). However, these methods analyze
features in isolation, leading to a high false-negative rate. Even III. T HREAT M ODEL
if malicious processes or files are identified, it is challenging To construct a classical threat model, we focus on microserto trace the source of the anomaly. vices deployed in Kubernetes environments [34], as most
770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 3. MADGuard system architecture.

 TABLE II
 T HE N ORMAL AND A BNORMAL S YSTEM C ALL F REQUENCY temporal sequencing, causality, and forensic analysis. As
 C HARACTERISTICS OF CDL S TATISTICS illustrated in Figure 3, the architecture comprises five core
 components: provenance graph construction, graph preprocessing, graph learning, anomaly detection, and forensic analysis.
 The operational workflow proceeds as follows: (1) The system
 collects process, file, network log data from multi-source
 services. Temporal and causal relationships are analyzed to
 construct comprehensive provenance graphs across distributed
 services. (2) Hash encoding and positional encoding techniques are used to preprocess the node and edge information
 in the provenance graph into feature vectors. For each 1-hop
 event, composite feature vectors are generated by concatenating node-edge attributes. Dynamic time windows τ to generate
 real-time embedding feature vectors. (3) Considering the
 temporal dynamic characteristics of data, the system constructs
 a TGN dynamic time series network to learn the temporal
 and spatial characteristics of benign log data. (4) An anomaly
 detector computes edge reconstruction errors per window.
 Threshold-exceeding errors trigger alerts and forensic pipeline
 activation. (5) The forensic module reconstructs anomaly
existing microservices are hosted there. Similarly to previous
 propagation paths through subgraph analysis and visualization.
studies [20], [21], [22], [23], this article examines attacks
initiated by external adversaries that exploit open vulnerabilities. Specifically, attackers target microservices through A. Provenance Graph Construction
software-level vulnerabilities, including remote code exe- The construction of traditional provenance graph is mainly
cution, directory traversal, and code injection attacks. We aimed at a single host environment, while microservices
assume that attackers leave identifiable traces after success- run in a distributed manner. Therefore, information from
fully compromising a microservice. Additionally, we assume multiple service sources must be integrated when buildthat the collected system log data is complete, accurate, and ing provenance diagrams in a microservice environment.
untampered. This paper does not address internal attacks, (1) Multi-source Data Integration: Leveraging Kubernetes
system-level attacks, side-channel attacks, or hardware-related deployment characteristics, we collect pod-specific logs from
attack scenarios. cluster nodes, including process execution traces, file operations, and network activities. Hash-based entity resolution
 IV. D ESIGN OF A NOMALY D ETECTION S YSTEM reconciles system objects across services while maintain-
 This paper proposes a microservice anomaly detection ing pod isolation through unique service identifiers (mid).
system addressing four critical dimensions: data diversity, (2) Definition and Representation of Provenance Graph:
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 771

 TABLE III
 ATTRIBUTES AND F EATURES nodes, it does not accurately represent the positional relationships of nodes within the graph. To address this, we employ
 position encoding to restore the positional relationships.
 n = Φ(n) + position(n) (2)
 (3) Encoding Events in 1-Hop Subgraphs. To effectively
 apply the encoded features to graph learning, we encode events
 represented by each 1-hop subgraph. This coding process
 strictly follows chronological order to ensure the temporality
According to the definition of the system-level provenance of events, which is essential to reveal the dynamic changes and
graph [24], the system call event E can be represented by a < causality of events. Specifically, we generate a comprehensive
subject, object, time, operation >quadruple. Subject and object event feature vector by stacking the feature vectors of timesrepresent application process, file and network information, tamps, source context, edge types, and destination context.
and operation represents system call types, such as read, write,
etc. The entire provenance graph G is represented by (S, 
 ttimeend
 G mt = [srct , dstt , t, msgt ] (3)
O, E) and includes all subjects S, objects O, and events E. ttimestart
Given the distributed nature of microservices, podname is
introduced when building provenance graphs to distinguish where
between different pod events. Microservice system call event msgt = [midt , edget , srcmsgt , dstmsgt ] (4)
Em by <mid , subject, object, time, operation>. To represent
the provenance diagram Gm by (ID, S , O, E ) to show that. (4) Dynamic Window Embedding. Sliding windows τ create
(3) Data Storage Optimization: Database schemas orga- temporal embeddings balancing real-time responsiveness and
nize subject/object nodes and operational edges for efficient anomaly progression capture.
retrieval, reducing preprocessing latency.
 
 T
 Zτ = Gτ (5)
B. Graph Preprocessing
 Graph Learning Given the temporal dynamics of log
 Before graph learning, it is necessary to preprocess the data and their corresponding provenance graphs, conventional
provenance graph so that the model can learn the information Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) prove inadequate as they
in the system log. primarily handle static graph structures. To address this lim-
 (1) Encoding Node, Edge, and Position Information. To itation, we employ a TGN with memory-enhanced update
efficiently encode edge, node, and node position information mechanisms to capture spatio-temporal patterns in evolving
within the graph, this section integrates Hash encoding graphs.
and node position encoding techniques. These techniques MADGuard selects TGN (Temporal Graph Network) as the
transform the nodes, edges, context information, and node core temporal modeling architecture due to its deep adaptation
positions in the provenance graph into compact feature vectors. to the inherent dynamism, distribution, and causal complexity
Traditional encoding methods, such as one-hot and BoSC, of microservice environments. Compared to general temporal
can convert features into sparse vectors, but fail to capture graph models (such as TGAT or EvolveGCN), TGN demonrich contextual semantics. In contrast, Hash encoding maps strates significant advantages in the following three aspects:
high-dimensional feature information to low-dimensional vec- First, TGN introduces unique microservice identifiers (mid)
tors through feature hashing, albeit without capturing node and Pod names (podname) to represent cross-service events
position information. To address this limitation, we combine as <mid, subject, object, time, operation> quintuples. This
position encoding technology to extract node features from mechanism enables the spatiotemporal correlation modeling
the provenance graph. Additionally, to capture the complexity of distributed multi-source heterogeneous events, ensuring that
of system behavior, we select nine features closely related to interactions between different service nodes can be accusystem behavior, including process name, file path, network rately captured and associated. It overcomes the topological
source-destination IP and port, and system call type. These complexity brought by dynamic scaling and cross-node comfeatures can effectively describe system behavior, as detailed munication in microservice environments.
in Table III. Second, TGN combines a dynamic time window mechanism
 Using Hash encoding, we convert node, edge, and node (such as a 1-minute sliding window) to maintain the temporal
context information strings into fixed-length feature vectors. continuity of events while effectively covering the complete
This is achieved through two Hash functions: one maps anomaly propagation chain (such as file upload, database
element nj to the i-th dimension of the feature vector, while access, and data export in a WebShell attack). This design
the other maps nj to ±1. The formula is defined as follows: balances real-time responsiveness and the integrity of anomaly
    progression, avoiding feature fragmentation caused by overly
 Φ(n) = ξ nj (1)
 short windows (e.g., a significant drop in Recall with a
 j :h(sj )=i
 30-second window) or noise interference introduced by overly
 (2) Restoring Node Position Relationships. Although the long windows (e.g., a decrease in Precision with a 90-second
above feature encoding restores the relationships between window).
772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Third, TGN’s memory-enhanced mechanism dynamically is notably high, it signals that the current subgraph strays from
aggregates historical node states, edge attributes, and current the expected pattern, hinting at potential suspicious activities.
features through an encoder, enabling the maintenance of (2) Suspicious node identification: Suspicious edges often
long-term cross-service causal dependencies. This is particu- link to suspicious nodes. After identifying an suspicious edge,
larly suitable for detecting multi-stage low-frequency attacks we check connected nodes for unusual behavior. Furthermore,
in microservices. The mechanism performs outstandingly in in real-world environments, attackers might use common
attack scenarios that require long-term context awareness, processes for sensitive operations, like accessing sensitive files
such as code injection and information leakage. For related /etc/passwd. In such cases, uncommon nodes may emerge,
experimental evidence, see Section V-E. exhibiting suspicious behaviors. We use Inverse Document
 The TGN framework operates through coordinated encoder- Frequency (IDF) [35] to spot these sensitive files. The mathdecoder components. The encoder is used for feature ematical formula is as follows:
  
embedding from the provenance graph, and the decoder N
predicts the edge type according to the embedded feature IDFυ = log (8)
 dfυ + 1
vector. Specifically:
 Encoder: Dynamically embeds edge features through tem- where N is the number of nodes in the current time window,
poral aggregation. For an edge et at timestamp t, its embedding dfυ is node υ’s occurrence frequency in the current time
z (t) synthesizes three information streams: Historical node window. If IDFυ exceeds the threshold, the node is flagged.
states s(t − ) preceding t; Edge attributes e(t); Current node (3) Anomaly propagation chain construction: Once idenfeatures v (t) via graph neural network propagation: tifying suspicious edges and nodes within each time window,
 we trace related events to form a one-hop event queue. We then
 z (t) = GNN (s(t), e(t), v (t)) (6) calculate the anomaly score for the corresponding queue. If all
 queue scores in the window exceed θ (benign data threshold),
 Decoder: Predicts edge types through sequential modeling. we confirm an anomaly. Following this, we construct the
A Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network decodes the anomaly propagation link within the window based on these
temporal dependencies between nodes states, generating prob- queues.
abilistic edge type predictions:
 pred (e(t)) = LSTM (z (t)) (7) D. Anomaly Forensic Analysis
 The primary objective of the attack forensics component is
 The output pred (e(t)) ∈ R1×5 represents a probabilto provide security analysts with a streamlined global attack
ity distribution over five predefined edge types, allowing
 graph, which includes two key tasks: 1) reconstructing the
reconstruction-based anomaly detection through prediction
 global attack chain; 2) filtering out false positives to refine
errors.
 the attack graph. During the anomaly detection phase, it is
 common to identify isolated anomalous events without gaining
C. Anomaly Detection a comprehensive view of the anomalies, which forces security
 To efficiently identify anomalous events, we segment the analysts to sift through numerous isolated anomalous nodes to
entire provenance graph into consecutive, fixed-length time find the source of the attack, a process that is extremely timewindow sequences. Within each time window, we detect consuming and labor-intensive [36]. To address this issue, this
suspicious edges and nodes. Based on these suspicious edges paper compresses benign redundant nodes and edges within
and nodes, we construct a suspicious propagation chain. We services based on the one-hop events constructed during the
then calculate the anomaly score of the suspicious propagation anomaly detection phase, reducing the overhead of graph
chain. If the anomaly score exceeds the benign data threshold construction. We have observed that the anomaly scores of
θ, we conclude that an anomaly exists within the current anomalous events are significantly higher than those of benign
window. events. Therefore, by ranking the anomaly scores of events
 Our system is tailored for multi-container microservices, and selecting the top-k anomalous events, we can essentially
using 1-minute detection interval. This avoids the resource reconstruct the attack path while refining the attack graph.
contention of high-frequency detection seen in complex Furthermore, since existing cross-service trace tracking can
architectures. The 1-minute window also allows for detailed only reconstruct the application-level call chains between
data analysis with Tetragon, covering process behaviors and services and cannot achieve cross-service call chains based on
network traffic. Unlike methods like ReplicaWatcher with a kernel-level logs, external attackers often infiltrate the internal
30-second interval, our approach captures the full propagation service systems to gain maximum privilege information.
chain of progressive anomalies like resource leaks. Combined Hence, we have designed a global microservices attack graph
with a four-day pre-trained model, it balances real-time reconstruction method to track both single-service and crossresponse with long-term pattern generalization, optimizing service global attack chains. For cybersecurity teams, anomaly
resource use, analysis depth, and detection accuracy. forensic analysis is crucial for quickly pinpointing the source
 (1) Suspicious edge identification: We utilize a well-trained of events and restoring affected paths. To expedite this process,
and high-performance anomaly detection model to reconstruct we simplify complex anomaly data, including consolidating
edges within each time window. Meanwhile, we calculate the edges for identical nodes across various times and versions. To
reconstruction error of these edges. If the reconstruction error accurately trace the source of anomalous events, our module
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 773

Algorithm 1 Anomaly Graph Construction kernel-level monitoring tool Tetragon to collect logs and attach
Input: List of anomaly events Q; Anomaly threshold θ; Number of repre- Pod-level metadata (such as pod _id , container paths, and
 sentative events k
Output: Service-Specific anomaly graphs Gp |p ∈ pods; Global anomaly source/destination Pod information for network connections)
 graph Gglobal to each node, rather than relying solely on node names for
 1: // Step1: Filter top-k representative anomaly events identification. For example:
 2: Initialize G ← {} // maps podnames to lists of events
 3: count ← 0 Process nodes are uniquely identified by a combination
 4: for each event e in Q do of “process name-Pod name” (e.g., java-teastore-webui,
 5: compute loss ← crossEntropy(e) java-teastore-db). Even if the process names are the
 6: p ← podname(e)
 7: if loss > θ then same, instances in different Pods are treated as sep-
 8: if p ∈ G then arate nodes. File nodes are associated with Pods
 9: G[p] ← empty list through their absolute paths within the container (e.g.,
10: end if
11: append e to G[p] /usr/local/tomcat/webapps/ROOT/shell.jsp belongs to the
12: count ← count+1 teastore-webui Pod, while /var/lib/mysql/teadb.sql belongs to
13: if count ≥ k then the teastore-db Pod). Network nodes are bound to Pods based
14: break
15: end if on the source and destination IP addresses of the connections
16: end if (e.g., the destination IP 10.0.0.10:3306 belongs to the teastore-
17: end for db Pod, while the source IP 10.0.0.5 corresponds to the
18: // Step2: Construct anomaly graph for each service
19: initialize podnode ← empty dictionary // maps nodes to podnames teastore-webui Pod).
20: initialize srcnode ← empty dictionary // maps podnames to source nodes During the anomaly graph construction process,
21: for each podname p ∈ G do Algorithm 1 maintains a podnode dictionary (steps 19–27)
22: Gp ← create new directed graph
23: for each event e ∈ G[p] do to record the Pod IP information of each network node.
24: for each node n in nodes(e) do When processing an anomaly event for a particular Pod,
25: if n ∈ podnode then the algorithm checks the network nodes. If it finds that the
26: podnode [n] ← p
27: end if destination IP of a network node exists in podnode and the
28: add n to Gp corresponding Pod of this destination IP is not the current Pod
29: end for being processed, then this node is identified as a cross-Pod
30: for each edge(u,v) in edges(e) do
31: add(u,v) to Gp node (step 43). Subsequently, the algorithm locates the initial
32: end for attack source node srcnode[p] of the current Pod (obtained by
33: src ← identifySourceNode(e) sorting and filtering based on anomaly scores, steps 33–36)
34: if src ∈ srcnode [p] then
35: srcnode [p] ← src and constructs an edge from srcnode[p] to this cross-Pod node
36: end if n, adding it to the global anomaly graph G_global (step 46).
37: end for Taking the TeaStore WebShell attack as an example
38: end for
39: // Step3: Construct global anomaly graph (Section V-D, Figure 1, Figure 6), when the database process
40: Gglobal ← create new directed graph mysqld-teastore-db is accessed by the abnormal process java-
41: for each podname p ∈ G do teastore-webui (marked as abnormal due to the execution
42: // add cross-pod edges
43: for each node n in Gp .nodes do of the malicious file shell.jsp) in the teastore-webui Pod,
44: if podnode [n] = p then specific sockets are generated. In the teastore-webui Pod,
45: add edge (srcnode [p],n) to Gglobal // assuming srcnode [p] is the socket 10.244.2.168:55602→10.102.87.233:3306 is cresource node of pod p
46: end if ated, where the destination IP 10.102.87.233:3306 points
47: end for to the database service. In the teastore-db Pod, the socket
48: end for 10.244.2.167:3306→10.244.2.168:55602 is created. When the
49: return Gp ,Gglobal
 algorithm processes the anomaly event for the teastore-webui
 Pod, it detects that the destination IP 10.102.87.233:3306
 corresponds to the teastore-db Pod, not the teastore-webui Pod,
compiles anomaly subgraphs from each microservice into a and thus identifies this network node as a cross-Pod node.
unified global graph. Using this approach, we have developed Meanwhile, the algorithm locates the initial attack source node
an algorithm (Algorithm 1) that identifies the top K most srcnode[teastore-webui] as java-teastore-webui and constructs
significant anomalies by evaluating anomaly values across a cross-service edge from java-teastore-webui to mysqlddifferent service subgraphs. Finally, we employ Graphviz to teastore-db. This cross-service edge, together with subsequent
visualize the complete anomaly path. This tool offers a detailed database operation nodes (such as the node executing mysqland interactive representation, aiding in efficient root cause dump to export sensitive data), forms a complete attack
analysis. chain.
 In Algorithm 1, the detection of cross-service edges It is worth noting that in microservice environments, even if
relies on the Pod identification native binding mecha- the same node (such as /etc/hosts or a database IP) is accessed
nism introduced during the provenance graph construction by multiple Pods, Tetragon generates unique socket identifiers
phase (Section IV-A). This ensures that each system entity for each interaction (e.g., 10.0.0.5:55602→10.0.0.10:3306 vs.
(processes, files, network connections) is explicitly associated 127.0.0.1:3306→127.0.0.1:48921), and these socket details
with its respective Pod. Specifically, we use the eBPF-driven are preserved through edge attributes (Section IV-B). This
774 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 V. E VALUATION
 To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our
 proposed anomaly detection system, we investigate four key
 research questions through rigorous experimentation:
 RQ1. Detection Accuracy: How does our system compare
 with existing microservice anomaly detection systems in terms
 of detection performance?
 RQ2. Runtime Overhead: What is the operational cost of
 our anomaly detection system, and how does it compare with
 state-of-the-art solutions?
 RQ3. Forensic Capability: How effectively does the
Fig. 4. Loss values comparison. forensic analysis module trace anomaly sources, and what
 performance impact does it introduce?
 RQ4. Component Ablation: What is the individual conensures that the algorithm can accurately distinguish between tribution of each component in MADGuard to the system’s
Pod interactions and avoid missing real cross-service performance?
dependencies.
 A. Experimental Setup
E. Online Update (1) Test Environment: We deployed a Kubernetes cluster
 To address the issue of performance degradation of with one master node and two worker nodes running Ubuntu
MADGuard over time, we propose an online update mecha- 22.04 and Containerd v1.6.33.
nism (Online Update, OU). The core of OU lies in the concept Teastore[37], SockShop [38], and RobotShop[38] cover the
of real-time drift detection and targeted incremental model common multi-technology stacks found in enterprise-level
updates. To automatically identify when model performance microservices, as shown in Table IV below. These scenarios
degrades due to changes in data distribution (concept drift), encompass mainstream languages such as Java, PHP, Node.js,
OU utilizes the standard deviation of anomaly scores output and Go, and their attack surfaces (such as Tomcat remote
by the model as a key metric. This approach relies on the code execution, PHP code injection, and Node.js path traveranalysis of three types of typical data (pure benign daily data, sal) are consistent with real-world enterprise environments.
new daily data generated by the evolution of benign behavior, We have selected Teastore, SockShop, and Teastore as test
and anomalous daily data). The standard deviation of anomaly environments. Regarding log collection tools, since Kubernetes
scores s for pure benign data is relatively stable; the standard native observability tools (such as service mesh, Istio) focus
deviation snew produced by the evolution of benign behavior on application-level call chain monitoring, they are unable to
typically falls within 3 times the historical standard deviation capture kernel-level attack traces (such as access to sensitive
s (i.e., snew ∈ (s, 3s)); whereas the standard deviation sanom files like /etc/passwd, creation of malicious files like shell.jsp).
generated by anomalous data significantly exceeds this range, Therefore, MADGuard employs a kernel-level observation
as shown in Figure 4. Based on this finding, the system tool, Tertagon, which uses eBPF technology to collect promaintains a sliding window to record the current baseline of cess, file, network, and other low-level events, ensuring the
benign behavior and calculates the standard deviation snew of complete capture of attack behaviors. The Tetragon monitoring
newly incoming data in real-time. When snew falls within the component [39] was deployed as a DaemonSet to ensure non-
(s, 3s) range, a concept drift alarm is triggered. intrusive data collection across all nodes.
 Once drift is detected, the system initiates an incremental (2) DataSet: We injected representative vulnerabilities into
model update process. To prevent the model from updating three microservice benchmarks (Teastore [37], Sockshop [38],
solely on new data, which could lead to a “catastrophic Robotshop [38]) to simulate critical attack scenarios:
forgetting” of old knowledge, the update does not only use WebShell attack (CVE-2017-12615): The attacker first conthe new window data that triggered the drift. The system structs a WebShell file named shell.jsp within the webui
looks back at an equally sized historical old window of data service to gain unauthorized access to the server. Subsequently,
(representing previously stable normal data). Subsequently, the by scanning local ports, the attacker acquires connection
new window data causing the drift is merged with the retrieved details for the teadb database. Using this information, the
old window data to form a small-scale incremental training attacker creates a shell script named sql.sh to remotely access
dataset. The existing model is then incrementally trained the user database. Finally, leveraging the mysqldump utility,
with the merged dataset, allowing the model to learn new the attacker extracts sensitive information, including user login
patterns while consolidating old knowledge. After successfully credentials and credit card details.
updating the model, the reference sliding window data used for Code injection (CVE-2024-2961): The attacker creates a
detecting drift also needs to be updated, typically refreshing malicious shell.php file, leverages a remote code execution
the reference baseline with the new window data that triggered flaw in the ratings service to run it, and exfiltrates server
this update, providing the most current standard deviation s details (RobotShopRatingsKernelDevbugContainer.php.meta)
baseline for subsequent drift detection. and sensitive file data (/etc/group).
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 775

 TABLE IV
 M ICROSERVICES P LATFORMS AND T HEIR T ECHNOLOGIES vectors, if the reconstruction error exceeds a predetermined
 threshold, the system call sequence is determined to be an
 anomaly.
 ReplicaWatcher [23]: This method first processes a continuous stream of events into a short monitoring interval (called
 a“Snapshot”). Next, feature vectors are generated from each
 snapshot to capture the differences between that snapshot and
 other snapshots. In the anomaly detection phase, the deviation
 of each snapshot from the ideal state (where all snapshots
 are identical) is evaluated. If any snapshot is found to have a
 significant deviation, it is judged to be abnormal.
 Table VII summarizes key implementation differences.
 Our system (MADGuard) uniquely incorporates multiservice monitoring with Tetragon while requiring extended
 pre-training.

 B. Detection Performance (RQ1)
 Table VIII presents comprehensive detection metrics across
 three attack scenarios. Our analysis reveals three key patterns:
 WebShell Attack Analysis: MADGuard achieves superior
 F1-score (0.8666) through optimal precision-recall balance,
 Information leakage (CVE-2017-14849): The attacker while CDL’s exceptional accuracy (99.92%) stems from its
exploits a vulnerability in the front-end service to construct frequency-based reconstruction mechanism that effectively
malicious file paths (e.g., /../../../../etc/XX) and access sensitive filters common system call patterns. However, CDL’s 41.26%
server files such as passwd, shells, group, fstab, profile, and missed detection rate (1 - 0.5874 Recall) exposes limitations
protocols. in recognizing novel attack signatures. STIDE-BoSC’s poor
 For each scenario, we collected 4 days of operational data performance (F1=0.044) confirms the inadequacy of slidcontaining more than 30 million normal events and 900,000 ing window approaches for stealthy WebShell activities that
anomalous events, as detailed in Tables V and VI. exhibit temporal dispersion.
 (3) Baseline Systems: We compare against four state-of- Code Injection Dynamics: While CHIDS demonstrates
the-art approaches: competitive F1-score (0.8881), its 19.64% false positive rate
 STIDE-BOSC [21]: It combines STIDE and BOSC tech- (1 - 0.8036 Precision) suggests over-sensitivity to parameter
niques to model a sequence of system calls. Specifically, the variations in PHP execution contexts. MADGuard’s permethod uses a time window with a size of 10 to record the fect precision demonstrates exceptional discriminative power
frequency of each system call and constructs a system call in containerized PHP environments, accurately distinguishbag-of-words vector database. In the anomaly detection phase, ing legitimate Composer operations from malicious payload
the new system call bag-of-words vector is compared with the injections.
vector in the database. Once the number of mismatched bag- Information Leakage Characteristics: The proposed
of-words vectors exceeds the set threshold, the current time system’s complete recall (1.0000) in Node.js environments
period is judged to be an anomaly. validates our graph neural network’s capability to detect low-
 CHIDS [22]: This method focuses on identifying unusual and-slow data exfiltration patterns. CHIDS’ precision-recall
sequences of system calls while integrating the sequence’s imbalance (1.0000 vs 0.4428) reveals inherent challenges
parameters and context information. It divides a long sequence in modeling asynchronous I/O operations characteristic of
into small segments of fixed length and represents these seg- Node.js microservices.
ments as graphs. By analyzing the degree centrality and weight Overall, the proposed method in this paper performs well in
of the graph, feature vectors such as sequence frequency all scenarios, especially on F1-score and Accuracy, showing
and parameters are extracted, and these feature vectors are its high efficiency and reliability in anomaly detection, and the
trained by autoencoder. In the anomaly detection stage, by effectiveness of the proposed method in anomaly detection,
reconstructing these feature vectors, if the reconstruction error compared with the existing anomaly detection system, the
exceeds the preset threshold, the sequence is considered to be accuracy is improved by 15.07%. CDL does very well on
abnormal. Accuracy, but lacks Recall, which can lead to some under-
 CDL [20]: This approach focuses on counting the frequency reporting. CHIDS perform well in code injection scenarios,
of various types of system calls and constructing frequency but Recall is low in information leak scenarios, affecting
vectors based on these statistics. Subsequently, an autoencoder overall performance. ReplicaWatcher has high Precision in
is used to train and learn these frequency patterns. In the some scenarios but low Recall, which means it can generate
anomaly detection phase, by reconstructing these frequency false positives in different scenarios.
776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE V
 M ICROSERVICE ATTACK E NVIRONMENT

 TABLE VI
 D ISTRIBUTION OF E XPERIMENTAL DATA The experimental results (Figure 5) show that the trace
 storage increment of the trace graph grows linearly with
 increasing load: although the storage increment per hour in
 the high load scenario is slightly higher than in the light
 load scenario, the overall growth is stable, with no nonlinear expansion observed. This performance is attributed to
 the optimized storage strategy of the trace graph, including
 hash coding techniques for compressing high-dimensional
 features and pod isolation mechanisms to avoid redundant
 cross-service data, proving its controllable storage overhead
 during long-term high load operation. At the same time, the
 peak memory of TGN remains stable across all load levels,
 without significant fluctuations with increasing load, due to
 the dynamic memory management strategy adopted by TGN,
 which focuses on recent key data and reduces the storage of
 the full historical log to efficiently control memory usage.
 Additionally, with increasing load, the graph reconstruction
 time per 60k data shows a slow growth trend: the lowest in the
 light load scenario, slightly higher in the high load scenario,
 but overall maintained at a low level within 14 seconds. This
 indicates that even in high load scenarios, the anomaly forensic
Fig. 5. MADGuard core component runtime overheads at different load process of MADGuard remains efficient, without a significant
levels.
 increase in time due to the increase in data volume, verifying
 the practicality of the forensic module under complex load
C. Runtime Overhead & Scalability Analysis (RQ2) conditions.
 The runtime comparison in Table IX reveals critical engineering trade-offs: STIDE-BoSC’s efficiency (9s) comes at
the cost of limited detection scope - its single-container D. Forensic Analysis (RQ3)
focus ignores 30% of cross-service anomalies in our testbed; To validate the effectiveness of the forensic module,
CHIDS’ prolonged runtime (960s) stems from expensive performance analysis was conducted in three typical attack
graph isomorphism checks, increasing exponentially with scenarios: Code Injection, Information Leakage, and WebShell
sequence complexity; MADGuard’s moderate overhead (240s) Attack, with comparisons made to the Kairos [27] anomaly
reflects the computational intensity of our hybrid architecture, reconstruction method.
but remains practical given its 1-minute detection interval. In the Code Injection attack scenario, MADGuard demon-
Combing Table VII, MADGuard’s achieves 56% better F1- strated high precision: apart from benign events frequently
score than ReplicaWatcher with only 2.4× time increase. accessed within the service (such as ‘/etc/hosts’) being mis-
 To analyze the runtime overhead of MADGuard in the judged as anomalies and occasional omissions of ‘/proc’ file
trace storage, TGN memory update, and forensic graph events associated with anomalies, core anomalous events (such
reconstruction phases, performance analysis was conducted as the creation of the malicious file ‘/shell.jsp’) were all
under different load conditions. The experiment was based accurately identified. With the help of unique event idention a Kubernetes cluster environment verified in the paper, fication and cross-service event reconstruction methods, the
simulating varying degrees of load intensity by injecting real entire attack chain could be clearly and completely traced.
business traffic: CPU loads of 20% (light load), 40% (medium In contrast, although Kairos’ anomaly reconstruction method
load), 60% (medium-high load), and 80% (high load), corre- could detect some anomalies, it missed key events such as
sponding to peak business scenarios of Sockshop, Robotshop, ‘shell.jsp’, and its community partitioning strategy fragmented
and Teastore benchmark microservices. The collected log the attack graph into multiple subgraphs, obscuring the relavolume increased with the load and covered a mixed load tionships between anomalous events.
pattern of complex attacks such as Web shell attacks and In the Information Leakage attack scenario, MADGuard
code injection, to meet the stress testing needs of real-world effectively filtered out most false-positive events, with only a
business scenarios. few ‘/proc’ files being misjudged; similar to the Code Injection
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 777

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF A NOMALY D ETECTION S YSTEM

 TABLE IX
scenario, the frequent access to ‘/etc/hosts’ within the service RUNTIME OVERHEAD C OMPARISON
was misjudged as an anomaly, but core anomalous events (such
as sensitive accesses to ‘/etc/passwd’ and ‘/etc/fstab’) were all
successfully detected, and the attack path could be completely
reconstructed. Kairos performed poorly in this scenario, not
only misjudging a large number of normal events as anomalies
but also disrupting the coherence of the attack chain due to and “MADGuard with a forensic module” (the relevant
its graph partitioning strategy. results are shown in Figure 6), with a detailed analysis as
 In the WebShell Attack scenario, MADGuard significantly follows:
filtered out false-positive events through top-k event filtering, When MADGuard is not integrated with a forensic analysis
achieving a 33% increase in precision compared to Kairos, module (Figure 6a)), the system can only present the detected
with only a 3% decrease in recall, thus balancing precision anomalous nodes in isolation, without the ability to correlate
and completeness. the attack propagation paths between nodes, nor to label
 In terms of throughput performance, MADGuard demon- the microservices to which the anomalous nodes belong (for
strated efficient processing capabilities: it processed 26,672 example, it cannot distinguish whether the anomalous nodes
events in the Code Injection scenario in just 4 seconds, are from the “Order Service” or the “Payment Service”), caushandled 118,784 events in the Information Leakage scenario ing security analysts to manually investigate the relationships
in 7 seconds, and processed 452,608 events in the WebShell and affiliations of nodes, greatly increasing the complexity and
Attack scenario in 10 seconds. On average, it could handle time consumption of attack tracing.
over 60,000 events every 7 seconds. Compared to Kairos’ Regarding the existing Kairos forensic method (Figure 6b)),
real-time attack reconstruction capability, MADGuard’s event although it can connect some anomalous nodes to form
processing rate per second increased by more than 7,000. The paths, there are two key shortcomings: First, Kairos uses a
specific performance metrics are shown in Table X. community division algorithm for path aggregation, which is
 To further illustrate the core value of the security forensics prone to splitting cross-service attack propagation chains into
module, this section starts from the actual operational needs several isolated subgraphs (for example, the complete path of a
of security analysts, taking the WebShell attack scenario WebShell attack from the “Frontend Service” to the “Database
in the TeaStore environment as an example, and compares Service” is split), failing to reconstruct the global propagation
the differences in the forensic results of “MADGuard with- process of the attack; Second, due to the possibility of
out a forensic module,” “existing Kairos forensic method,” similar names or paths of nodes across different services
778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE X
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF MADG UARD AND K AIROS IN D IFFERENT ATTACK S CENARIOS

Fig. 6. Comparison of forensic analysis methods in WebShell attack: impact on attack path reconstruction and node affiliation clarity.

in a microservices environment (for example, each service (mid), it labels each node with explicit service affiliation
contains a “log.txt” file node), Kairos lacks a mechanism information (for example, “order-service:node-123”), helping
for clearly identifying node affiliations, which can lead to analysts quickly locate the service to which the anomalous
analysts mistakenly identifying nodes under different services node belongs; On the other hand, relying on a cross-service
as belonging to the same service, resulting in misjudging the attack chain identification mechanism, it can associate isoscope of the attack. lated anomalous nodes beyond service boundaries, completely
 In contrast, MADGuard’s forensic analysis module reconstructing the global propagation path from the attack
addresses the aforementioned issues through two core designs: entry point (such as the WebShell implantation point) to
On one hand, by introducing a unique service identifier the target service (such as the database data theft point)
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 779

 Fig. 9. Forensic analysis of Information Leakage in SockShop.

 E. Comparison of MADGuard-TGN With Existing Temporal
 Models
 To verify the superiority of the TGN (Temporal Graph
 Network) adopted by MADGuard in microservices anomaly
Fig. 7. Forensic analysis of Webshell attack in TeaStore. detection scenarios, this paper designs comparative experiments in three typical microservices benchmark environments:
 TeaStore, SockShop, and RobotShop. The data preprocessing procedures (hash encoding, positional encoding), feature
 dimensions (each 16-dimensional), and evaluation protocols
 (with Precision, Recall, and F1-score as core metrics) are
 kept completely consistent, with only the core temporal
 modeling module TGN being replaced by existing temporal
 graph models TGAT (Temporal Graph Attention Network) and
 EvolveGCN (Evolving Graph Convolutional Networks) for a
 fair comparison of the models’ adaptability.
 The experimental results (Figure 10) show that TGN
Fig. 8. Forensic analysis of code injection in RobotShop. exhibits better detection performance in all three types of
 microservices attack scenarios, especially in cross-service and
 highly dynamic scenarios: in the RobotShop code injection scenario, TGN’s F1-score reaches 0.8888 and Precision
(Figure 6c)). Ultimately, it provides security analysts with maintains 1.0, accurately distinguishing normal dependency
forensic results that are “clear in node affiliation and complete calls in the PHP environment from malicious code injection,
in path continuity,” significantly reducing the difficulty and while TGAT and EvolveGCN’s F1-scores are only 0.8177 and
time cost of attack tracing. 0.7615, respectively; in the TeaStore WebShell attack scenario,
 MADGuard Forensic Analysis Results: TGN’s F1-score is 0.8666, although TGAT’s F1-score (0.8809)
 WebShell Attack (TeaStore): MADGuard detected edges is slightly higher, TGAT’s Precision (0.8916) is significantly
related to the shell.jsp, sql.sh, and mysqldump attack nodes in lower than TGN’s (1.0), with more normal events being misthe teastore-webui service environment. These edges exhibited judged; in the SockShop information leakage scenario, TGN’s
significant reconstruction errors compared to benign edges. Recall reaches 1.0000, fully capturing the low-frequency
Similarly, in the teastore-db service environment, MADGuard sensitive file access behavior in Node.js asynchronous I/O,
identified unusual teadb files and IP information communicat- while TGAT and EvolveGCN’s Recall are 0.8881 and 0.7926,
ing with the webui service. respectively, easily omitting local temporal anomalies. Overall,
 Code Injection (RobotShop): During the attack, the TGN’s average F1-score in the three scenarios reaches 0.9130,
attacker generated access to service metadata in the RobotShop improving by 3.87% over TGAT (0.8743) and 13.51% over
ratings service, including KernelDevbugContainer.php.meta, EvolveGCN (0.7779), with better balance between Precision
urlmatchingroutes.php.meta, and .htaccess. By identifying and Recall, better meeting the actual needs of microservices
malicious edges associated with these nodes, MADGuard anomaly detection for “low false positives, low false negatraced the malicious nodes and their related chain information tives.”
to reconstruct the entire attack path. Further analysis of the core reasons for the performance
 Information Leakage (SockShop): The attacker left differences between models: Although TGAT strengthens the
traces of accessing sensitive files in the front-end service. temporal correlation weights between nodes through temporal
MADGuard identified abnormal edges related to sensitive files attention mechanisms, in microservices scenarios, its attenthrough a reconstruction error and used IDF to assist in iden- tion allocation is easily disturbed by high-frequency normal
tifying abnormal nodes. By tracing the one-hop events related events (such as inter-service heartbeat calls, routine business
to these abnormal edges and nodes, MADGuard reconstructed requests)—for example, in the TeaStore WebShell attack, the
the attack path. normal communication frequency between the webui service
780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 F. Ablation Study (RQ4)
 To verify the specific roles of each component in
 MADGuard, we designed an ablation study using the controlled variable method, with the results shown in Table XI.
 By systematically removing model components and observing
 changes in performance, the core functions of each component
 and their impact on the model’s effectiveness can be clearly
 demonstrated: after removing the Memory module, the model
 loses its ability to dynamically capture and update node
 and edge information, leading to confusion between benign
Fig. 10. Comparison of model performance across scenarios. and anomalous event features, and a significant increase
 in the false positive rate; without the Embedding module,
 edge embeddings rely on static historical node information
 TABLE XI and fail to capture dynamic changes in nodes, making it
 C OMPARISON OF A BLATION C OMPONENTS P ERFORMANCE difficult to distinguish subtle differences in events, leading to
 a large number of false positives; the Encoder module, as the
 core integrator of memory and embeddings, when removed,
 causes the model to lose its ability to dynamically learn the
 evolution of graph structures, resulting in decreased precision
 in anomaly detection and an increased false positive rate;
 and after removing the Decoder module, the model is unable
 to explore long-term dependencies between nodes, and since
 anomalous events often manifest through the accumulation
 of long-term features, this ultimately leads to a significant
 increase in the false negative rate.
 In addition to the synergistic effect of the core components,
 the model’s anomaly detection capability also relies on the
 support of a multidimensional information fusion mechanism. Among them, Multidimensional message fusion has
 been proven to be a core mechanism for effective anomaly
 detection—by integrating multi-dimensional message features,
 the model’s AUC value is significantly improved from a
 baseline level of 0.5, providing a more comprehensive feature
and the db service (50 times per second) is much higher than basis for anomaly identification. The importance of Temporal
the malicious data theft frequency (once per second), caus- fusion, however, is scenario-dependent: in Webshell detection,
ing TGAT’s attention weights to tilt towards normal events, temporal fusion is crucial, supporting the model to achieve
resulting in decreased sensitivity to low-frequency anoma- a 100% recall rate (although the precision is 29.8%); it also
lies; EvolveGCN relies on fixed-frequency updates (default plays a key role in code injection identification; while the
every 30 seconds) of graph convolutional kernels to adapt information leakage detection scenario demonstrates the indeto temporal changes, unable to cope with the rapid topology pendence of temporal patterns, indicating that the necessity of
adjustments caused by microservices dynamic scaling—when temporal fusion is relatively lower in such scenarios.
SockShop’s frontend service scales from 2 to 5 Pods due to In summary, MADGuard ensures the capture and integration
traffic fluctuations, EvolveGCN’s kernel updates lag behind of dynamic graph features through its core compothe topology changes, leading to broken cross-service event nents, combined with a multidimensional message fusion
associations and significant performance degradation (F1-score and scenario-adaptive temporal fusion mechanism, together
drops by 8.2%). achieving a comprehensive improvement in anomaly detection
 In contrast, TGN’s adapted design for microservices charac- performance: the core components address the issues of
teristics (distributed tracing graph’s mid/podname identifiers, dynamic feature learning and long-term dependency capture,
memory-enhanced node state updates, dynamic time window while the fusion mechanism enhances feature discrimitemporal aggregation) effectively avoids the above issues: its nation capability through multi-dimensional and temporal
memory-enhanced mechanism maintains the causal dependen- information, both synergistically supporting the model’s
cies of long-term cross-service attacks (such as the 10-minute effectiveness.
attack chain temporal modeling in WebShell attacks), and To further verify the model’s long-term adaptability in
the dynamic time window (60 seconds) balances real-time dynamic scenarios, we designed comparative experiments for
performance with event completeness, both working together the Online Update mechanism. One group was the MADGuard
to keep TGN’s stable detection performance in highly dynamic without OU, which did not incorporate the OU mechanism,
and cross-service scenarios of microservices, verifying the and we observed the evolution of its performance over
rationality of TGN as the core temporal modeling module. time steps; the other group was the MADGuard with OU,
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 781

Fig. 11. F1-Score Comparison with and without OU. Fig. 12. TPR, TNR, and FPR for different scenarios and CPU loads.

which integrated the OU mechanism, and we analyzed the the libthrift library dependency of the recommender service of
trend of its performance over time. The experimental results the teastore application from version 0.16.0 to 0.20.0, simu-
(Figure 11) showed that without the OU mechanism, the lating business component dependency upgrades. Both types
model’s performance degraded significantly over time, with of operations are benign changes without malicious intent but
the F1-score dropping sharply from 96% to 80% within just may cause short-term fluctuations in service communication
six time steps; after introducing the OU mechanism, the model patterns and resource consumption characteristics, potentially
could continuously learn new event patterns, and the F1- interfering with the detection system.
score was essentially stable, maintaining around 96%. This To further simulate the combined effects of load and
indicates that the OU mechanism can effectively overcome configuration changes in a real environment, the experiment
the performance degradation caused by temporal evolution, repeated the above pod update operations under different CPU
allowing the model to maintain stable anomaly detection capa- load pressures: controlling the system CPU load occupancy
bilities over the long term, and working in conjunction with rate to 40% (light load), 60% (medium load), and 80% (high
core components and fusion mechanisms to jointly enhance load), covering typical load ranges in daily microservices
the lifecycle performance of MADGuard. operations. Through this design, a comprehensive evaluation
 of MADGuard’s stability under “configuration change + load
 fluctuation” compound scenarios is possible.
G. Robustness Experiments Experiment Results (as shown in Figure 12) indicate that
 In a microservices environment, the dynamic evolution of MADGuard maintained excellent robustness in various synbusiness loads (such as resource consumption changes) and thetic stress environments: for benign behavior changes (such
updates to benign behavior (such as component upgrades) as OS image upgrades, dependency package updates), its true
are common occurrences. These changes can easily be mis- positive rate (TPR) remained consistently above 90%, ensuring
judged as anomalies by anomaly detection systems, leading effective detection of genuine anomalies; at the same time, the
to increased false positive rates or decreased detection accu- false positive rate (FPR) was controlled below 8%, without
racy. To verify the robustness of MADGuard under such generating a large number of false alarms due to configuration
scenarios—namely, its “resistance to interference” against updates or load fluctuations. This performance is attributed to
benign behavior changes and its stable detection capability for MADGuard’s core technical mechanisms: a sliding window
genuine anomalies—we designed synthetic stress environment dynamically capturing the latest baseline of benign behavior,
experiments that closely mimic real-world operational scenar- combined with an online update mechanism to adjust the
ios and evaluated its performance using key metrics such as feature distribution in real-time, enabling the model to quickly
TPR (True Positive Rate), TNR (True Negative Rate), and FPR adapt to normal evolution of business, rather than misjudging
(False Positive Rate). benign changes as anomalies.
 Experiment Design focuses on two typical benign dynamic To verify the robustness of MADGuard in crosschanges in a microservices environment: pod configuration microservices scenarios, we designed a cross-environment
updates and load fluctuations. Regarding pod configuration training-testing experiment: we selected different microserupdates, we selected common base component upgrade sce- vices environments and trained the model in one environment,
narios encountered in microservices operations: one is the base then migrated it to another for testing. Specifically, we set
OS image update, upgrading the shipping service of the robot- up two groups of experiments: one trained in the robotshop application from Debian 10-buster to Debian 11-bullseye, shop environment and tested in the teastore environment; the
simulating version iteration of the underlying operating envi- other trained in the sockshop environment and tested in the
ronment; the other is dependency package updates, upgrading robotshop environment. The experimental results (as shown
782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 13. |θ|.

 TABLE XII
 C ROSS -E NVIRONMENT T RAINING AND T ESTING R ESULTS benign data (≤3), which led to a large number of benign
 data being misclassified as anomalies. Although the AUC was
 0.929, the false alarm rate was excessively high. When θ was
 set to 4, the threshold exceeded the upper limit of benign data,
 causing some abnormal data to be missed due to insufficient
 scores, resulting in a significant increase in the miss rate and
 a sharp drop in AUC to 0.700. However, when θ was set to
in Table XII) indicate that although there was a performance
 3, the AUC reached the highest value of 0.996, indicating that
fluctuation of about 1% during cross-environment testing, the
 the model could most accurately distinguish between benign
F1-score metric remained consistent with the performance
 and abnormal events at this point, effectively controlling false
of training and testing within the same environment. For
 alarms while avoiding misses. Therefore, θ =3 was determined
instance, when trained in robotshop and tested in teastore, the
 to be the optimal threshold for this environment.
precision reached 1.0, recall was 0.7923, and the F1-score was
 In the SockShop microservice environment, the anomaly
0.8841; when trained in sockshop and tested in robotshop,
 scores of benign data were concentrated around 2. When the
the precision was 0.8333, recall was 1.0, and the F1-score
 threshold θ was set to 1 (below 2), a large number of benign
was 0.9090. This demonstrates that MADGuard can stably
 data was misclassified as anomalies, leading to a surge in false
maintain detection performance in cross-microservices system
 alarms and an AUC of only 0.729. When θ was set to 3 (above
scenarios, fully verifying its cross-system robustness and its
 2), some abnormal data were missed due to insufficient scores,
ability to effectively adapt to microservices environments with
 resulting in a significant increase in misses and an AUC drop
different loads and configurations.
 to 0.808. However, when θ was set to 2, the AUC reached the
 highest value of 0.997, indicating the optimal distinguishing
H. Alert Threshold and Sliding Window Optimization ability of the model. Thus, θ = 2 was established as the
 In this section, we provide a detailed description of the optimal threshold for this environment.
optimization process for two key parameters in MADGuard: For the TeaStore microservice environment, the anomaly
the alert threshold and the sliding window. scores of benign data were also concentrated around 2. When
 Alert Threshold Optimization. During the optimization of θ was set to 1, the model’s distinguishing ability was close
the alert threshold, we first performed a preliminary evaluation to random (AUC = 0.501), resulting in a large number
using benign data that had not been trained on. The distribution of misses. When the threshold was set too high (e.g., θ
of anomaly scores of benign data was observed to have = 5), the AUC dropped to 0.793, with an increased risk
scenario-specific characteristics across the three microservice of false alarms. However, when θ was set to 2, the AUC
scenarios. In the RobotShop environment, the anomaly scores reached the highest value of 0.909, indicating that the model
of benign data were concentrated within 3, while in the could effectively balance false alarms and misses. Therefore,
SockShop and TeaStore environments, these scores were stable θ = 2 was determined to be the optimal threshold for this
around 2. Based on these observations, we set different alert environment.
thresholds (θ) within the range of 1 to 5 and evaluated their Sliding Window Optimization. To verify the effectiveness
rationality using the ROC curve and AUC value (a core of the model’s default τ = 1-minute (60s) time window setindicator of the model’s ability to distinguish between benign ting, we compared the performance of 30s (a shorter window)
and abnormal events). The results are shown in Figure 13. and 90s (a longer window) in the RobotShop, SockShop,
 In the RobotShop environment, when the threshold θ was and TeaStore microservice environments. We evaluated the
set to 1, it was below the general anomaly score range of impact of window length on detection performance using four
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 783

 TABLE XIII
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF H ASH C ODING D IMENSIONS

Fig. 14. |τ |.

core metrics: precision, recall, f1-score, and accuracy. The
 TABLE XIV
experimental results are shown in Figure 14. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF P OSITION C ODING D IMENSIONS
 From the trends of the metrics, it was evident that the
shorter 30s window exhibited significant drawbacks in all three
environments. Since attackers often exhibit latent behavior
in microservice environments, the features of attack events
are dispersed across multiple short windows, resulting in a
lower proportion of abnormal features within a single window.
The data showed that in the RobotShop environment, the
recall dropped to around 0.6 with the 30s window, while in
the SockShop environment, the recall was less than 0.7. The
composite f1-score was approximately 0.65 in the RobotShop
environment and around 0.7 in the SockShop environment,
both significantly lower than the 60s window level. This microservice benchmarks, while the core model parameters—
indicates that the 30s window is prone to missing key abnormal TGN structure, sliding-window τ , and anomaly threshold θ
events due to feature fragmentation. remain unchanged; only encoding-related variables are manip-
 However, the longer 90s window, although capable of ulated.
covering more potential attack event sequences, also included 1) Encoding-Dimension Hyper-Parameter Study: We
too many normal events, resulting in a lower feature purity determine the optimal dimensions for hash encoding (H) and
within the window. The experimental data showed that in the positional encoding (P) through two independent-variable
90s window, the precision in all three environments declined. experiments.Hash-dimension experiment: Fix positional
In the RobotShop environment, the precision dropped to encoding at 16-D, vary hash dimensions in {8, 16, 32},
around 0.8, and in the TeaStore environment, it fell below 0.75. and evaluate detection metrics (Precision, Recall, F1-score)
The increased misclassification of normal events as anomalies together with the hash-collision rate.Positional-dimension
directly led to a lower f1-score in the 90s window compared experiment: Fix hash encoding at 16-D, vary positional
to the 60s window in all three environments. dimensions in {8, 16, 32}, and evaluate detection performance
 In contrast, the 60s window demonstrated optimal plus the completeness of positional information (measured by
performance across all metrics. In the RobotShop environment, anomaly-path reconstruction clarity on a 1–5 scale, 5 being
the f1-score reached 0.95, with precision and recall both best). Tables XIII and XIV summarize the results. The optimal
stable above 0.9. In the SockShop environment, the f1-score configuration is 16-D for both hash and positional encodings.
was approximately 0.9, with precision and recall maintained Hash-dimension results: 8-D hash encoding yields a colabove 0.85. In the TeaStore environment, the f1-score was lision rate above 20% due to the compact space, confusing
the highest, reaching 0.92. This indicates that a 1-minute normal and abnormal node features. 32-D hash encoding
window can effectively aggregate the continuous features of reduces collisions below 9%, but F1-score improves by only
attack events while controlling the excessive mixing of normal 0.5%–2% while doubling storage and computation cost, offerevents, fully adapting to the latent nature and feature continuity ing poor cost-effectiveness.Positional-information results:
requirements of attack behavior in microservice environments. 16-D positional encoding fully captures node spatial relationships, achieving the maximum clarity score (5). 8-D
I. Impact of Hash Encoding and Positional Encoding on encoding suffers from insufficient capacity, causing cross-
Model Performance service path discontinuities; 32-D yields no additional gain
 To clarify the dimensions of hash and positional encodings, and only increases computational complexity.
the risk of hash collisions, and the stability of the encod- 2) Hash-Collision Risk Analysis: We localize collision
ing scheme when new data types appear, we conduct three sources and quantify their impact in two steps. (1) Collision
targeted experiments to systematically validate the rationality source localization: After deduplication of logs from the three
and robustness of our encoding mechanism. All experiments scenarios, we hash all nodes (process paths, file directories,
are carried out on the TeaStore, SockShop, and RobotShop network IPs, etc.) and identify colliding original log entries.
784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE XV TABLE XVII
 S TATISTICS OF H ASH C OLLISION S OURCES C ODING S TABILITY C OMPARISON U NDER N EW DATA T YPES

 TABLE XVI
 I MPACT OF H ASH C OLLISIONS ON M ODEL R ECOGNITION A BILITY

 Section IV-D) mechanism. To avoid affecting other services,
 the OU training process is encapsulated and executed within
 a dedicated Docker container (MADGuard-retrain). Inside
Common patterns are analyzed. (2) Collision impact ver- MADGuard-retrain, modules for data preprocessing, model
ification: Log entries responsible for collisions are labeled training, and weight updates are pre-installed, completing the
‘collision samples.’ We compute their proportion among nor- model weight update by inputting historical window data
mal and abnormal events, and compare the anomaly-detection and new window data. Once the new model is generated, it
accuracy of collision vs. non-collision samples. immediately triggers a containerized deployment at the ser-
 Tables XV and XVI present the results. Roughly 80% of vice layer. The model service container (MADGuard-service)
collisions stem from Linux /proc/pid directory accesses: dynamically loads the model through a shared storage volume
the kernel creates a unique /proc/pid for every process; and initiates an automated verification process. First, A/B
logs differ only in PID, causing high structural similarity and testing is conducted in a shadow environment, comparing the
frequent hash collisions. Collision samples account for less new model’s anomaly detection accuracy and false positive
than 0.5% of abnormal events, and the anomaly-detection rate with the old model under real-time logs. After verification,
accuracy difference between collision and non-collision sam- a canary deployment is performed, using Tertagon to route
ples is below 0.3%. Thus, /proc/pid logs are redundant for 5% of production logs to the new version container, while the
anomaly discrimination, and hash collisions do not impair the Prometheus monitoring module collects performance metrics
model’s core capability. in real-time. If key business metrics (false positive rate
 3) Encoding Stability With New Data Types: To simulate threshold) do not exhibit anomalies, the Kubernetes rolling
production scenarios in which new data types emerge, we update strategy is initiated, gradually replacing old version
design the following protocol: (1) Add new data types: containers until full coverage is achieved.
We augment the original logs with two common production
sources—container-resource monitoring logs (memory usage, VI. D ISCUSSION
container start/stop events) and microservice API-call logs Generality Challenges of Microservice Anomaly
(response time, success rate). (2) Stability metrics: Using Detection Systems. Existing microservice anomaly detection
the existing 16-D hash + positional encodings without any methods typically require model retraining for different
parameter tuning, we compare model performance (Precision, microservice environments to ensure accurate identification
Recall, F1-score) between ‘original only’ and ‘original + new of abnormal events. With the widespread adoption of
data’ inputs. Performance fluctuation within 2% is deemed microservices, diverse operation modes are employed across
stable. various microservice systems, and system log information
 Table XVII shows results. After adding both new data types, also varies. This necessitates training models from scratch for
F1-score varies by less than 0.7%, with no significant drop different microservice systems, making it difficult for existing
in Precision or Recall. This indicates that the 16-D encoding anomaly detection models to achieve the “compile once, run
scheme does not rely on prior knowledge of specific data types. everywhere” goal.
The hash function compresses high-dimensional features of Public Dataset Availability. Currently, in the field of
new data into a 16-D vector via uniform mapping, while posi- microservice anomaly detection, public datasets either do not
tional encoding supplements structural information through exist or contain only benign data [40], which lack practical
spatial relationships, requiring no re-tuning to accommodate reference value. The lack of a unified public dataset makes it
new data types. difficult to evaluate and compare the performance of different
 anomaly detection methods.
J. Deployment Concept Drift. Concept drift is a common problem in
 MADGuard is deployed in a continuous delivery environ- machine learning models [41], [42]. With the evolution of
ment using containerization, with Tertagon collecting event microservice systems, new components or services continue
stream information in real-time. When the real-time event to appear, and anomaly detection models may misidentify
stream detection results deviate from the historical base- new normal patterns as anomalies, resulting in false positives.
line, the system automatically triggers continuous integration Usually, the way to solve this problem is to update the training
tools (such as CircleCI) to initiate the Online Update (OU data set and retrain the anomaly detection model. Although
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 785

the anomaly detection system proposed in this paper can external attacks and struggle to effectively identify and trace
update the detection model efficiently, it becomes impractical attack paths.
to update the model manually over time. Therefore, how to
realize the automatic update of anomaly detection model is an
important challenge. VII. R ELATED W ORK
 Ensuring the Integrity of Logs. The log sources of our Contemporary microservice anomaly detection strategies
system are based on Tetragon, a Kubernetes observation tool fall into three primary categories.
built on eBPF technology. The core advantage of Tetragon lies Unsupervised approaches [20], [21], [22], [52] analyze
in its ability to dynamically insert and remove probes directly system call patterns through frequency thresholds and sequenin the kernel space, which greatly reduces the latency and risk tial context modeling. Early implementations focused on call
of log loss that may be introduced by traditional log collection frequency metrics but evolved to incorporate graphical repremethods. However, we fully understand the challenges that log sentations of call sequences and deep learning architectures,
integrity may face in real-world environments. In response to enhancing contextual awareness. However, these methods
the issue of log loss, existing research primarily focuses on log remain vulnerable to “normal drift” as system behaviors
compression techniques, including lossless and lossy compres- gradually diverge from initial training baselines. Existing
sion [36], [43], [44], [45]. Lossless compression technology Federated Learning-based Anomaly Detection methods
reduces the size of log data by identifying and eliminating (e.g., MT-FL [13], FL-IDS [53]) focus on detecting anomalies
redundant information within it, having minimal impact on within microservices. They employ techniques like distributed
the performance of subsequent anomaly detection models training combined with multi-task learning and feature fusion
based on log sequences. Lossy compression techniques, in to identify internal anomalies such as network latency and
pursuit of higher compression ratios or processing efficiency, packet loss. While they excel in privacy preservation and
actively discard some log data that is considered to have distributed collaboration, they struggle to characterize crosslower value or higher redundancy. This method of compression service causal dependencies. Consequently, they are ineffective
can affect the performance of anomaly detection models to against external attackers exploiting internal vulnerabilities to
varying degrees, depending on the amount and strategy of launch cross-service attacks and information leakage attacks.
the discarded log data. We plan to focus on and test the Untrained detection methods circumvent model training
robustness of our anomaly detection model under different through comparative analysis of service replica behavtypes and degrees of log loss in future research, and explore iors [23], [54], [55]. By tracking ten operational features
the integration of lossless compression technology to enhance related to system calls, files, and processes, these techniques
detection efficiency. calculate Jaccard similarity metrics across time intervals to
 Zero-day/Unknown Anomaly Detection. Zero-day and identify deviations. While eliminating training overhead, they
unknown anomalies represent emerging patterns of mali- suffer from limited feature correlation analysis and dependence
cious behavior that do not yet have established signatures on manual feature engineering.
or labeled datasets. Traditional security systems, which rely Rule-based systems employ predefined security patterns for
on predefined rules and signature databases, are inherently network activity, file access, and system calls [56], [57], [58].
limited in their ability to detect such novel threats [46], Though initially effective, their static nature conflicts with
[47]. MADGuard, however, is designed to operate without microservices’ dynamic architecture, requiring labor-intensive
the need for prior knowledge of attack patterns. It is trained rule updates and generating excessive false positives that
on benign data and employs edge reconstruction errors to overwhelm security teams. Each paradigm presents distinct
identify behaviors that deviate from the norm. This approach trade-offs between detection granularity, adaptability, and
is particularly well-suited for the detection of unknown or operational sustainability. Tracee [59] leans towards lowzero-day anomalies, as it does not rely on pre-existing attack overhead collection of system calls and event data. While it can
signatures. be integrated with anomaly detection systems, it lacks intrinsic
 Limitations of Existing Distributed Tracing causal analysis capabilities and cannot directly support attack
Technologies. In response to the challenges of large-scale path tracing.Deep Learning Tools for Kubernetes (e.g.,
distributed systems, Google has developed large-scale tracing KubAnom, DevGraph [60]) leverage the integration of Large
tools such as Dapper [48]. Widely adopted, Dapper has Language Models (LLMs) to achieve automated anomaly
given rise to a range of derivative tools, including Zipkin, detection, enhancing capability by incorporating microservice
Jaeger, osprofiler, and opentracing. Building on these tracing topology graphs. However, these methods depend on mastools, researchers have designed intelligent anomaly detection sive natural language corpora and significant computational
solutions for microservices in spatiotemporal and edge resources, creating technical barriers for small and mediumcomputing environments [49], [50], [51]. However, existing sized enterprises (SMEs). Furthermore, these deep learning
tracing tools (such as Dapper) primarily focus on data tools do not integrate system-level data such as kernel logs,
at the application layer of microservices (e.g., API call limiting their scope and making it difficult to cover underlying
chains, latency information) and are unable to capture the resource anomalies.The existing microservices anomaly deteccharacteristics of external attackers targeting microservices tion systems have been summarized from three major aspects:
(for instance, the malicious file sql.sh in a WebShell attack). detection technology, deployment overhead, and forensic capa-
As a result, these tools are limited in their ability to detect bility (Table XVIII).
786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE XVIII
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION M ETHODS

 VIII. C ONCLUSION [7] M. S. Haq, T. D. Nguyen, A. S. Tosun, F. Vollmer, T. Korkmaz,
 and A.-R. Sadeghi, ‘‘SoK: A comprehensive analysis and evaluation of
 This study presents a provenance graph-based detec- docker container attack and defense mechanisms,” in Proc. IEEE Symp.
tion system addressing microservice anomaly identification Security Privacy (SP), 2024, pp. 4573–4590.
through three key innovations: multi-dimensional data fusion, [8] Y. He et al, “Cross container attacks: The bewildered eBPF on clouds,”
 in Proc. 32nd USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2023,
temporal graph networks (TGN) for causality modeling, pp. 5971–5988.
and an automated forensic analysis module. Experimental [9] V. S. Devi Priya, S. C. Sethuraman, and M. K. Khan, “Container secuevaluations demonstrate superior detection accuracy (15.07% rity: Precaution levels, mitigation strategies, and research perspectives,”
 Comput. Security, vol. 135, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 103490.
improvement over baselines) across diverse microservice con-
 [10] R. Feng, Z. Yan, S. Peng, and Y. Zhang, “Automated detection of
figurations. The integrated forensic component enables full password leakage from public Github repositories,” in Proc. 44th Int.
attack chain reconstruction, significantly advancing incident Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 175–186.
investigation capabilities. [11] Q. Y. Zeng, M. Kavousi, Y. H. Luo, L. Jin, and Y. Chen, “Full-stack
 vulnerability analysis of the cloud-native platform,” Comput. Security,
 Although effective, three limitations warrant further vol. 129, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103173.
research: (1) System generalizability across heterogeneous [12] A. Pereira-Vale, E. B Fernandez, R. Monge, H. Astudillo, and
cloud platforms requires enhanced architecture-agnostic G. Márquez, “Security in microservice-based systems: A multivocal
 literature review,” Comput. Security, vol. 103, Apr. 2021, Art. no.
modeling; (2) The field urgently needs standardized anomaly 102200.
datasets with labeled attack patterns; (3) Concept drift mitiga- [13] J. F. Hao, P. Chen, J. Chen, and X. Li, “Multi-task federtion demands self-adaptive models with automated retraining ated learning-based system anomaly detection and multi-classification
triggers. Future directions should explore federated learning for microservices architecture,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., 159,
 pp. 77–90, Oct. 2024.
for cross-environment adaptation and blockchain-based dataset [14] “Aquasec.” Reverse shell. Accessed: Jul. 19, 2023. [Online]. Available:
sharing frameworks to collectively address these challenges. https://kubernetes.io/
 [15] O. I. Alqaisi, M. S. Haq, and A. S. Tosun, “Security of containerized
 computer vision applications,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Comput. Inf.
 R EFERENCES Technol. (ICCIT), 2022, pp. 115–120.
 [16] Z. Q. Jian and L. Chen, “A defense method against docker
 [1] P. Di Francesc, P. Lago, and I. Malavolta, “Architecting with microserescape attack,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cryptogr. Security Privacy, 2017,
 vices: A systematic mapping study,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 150, pp. 77–97,
 pp. 142–146.
 Apr. 2019.
 [2] A. Hannousse and S. Yahiouche, “Securing microservices and microser- [17] “Secure Flag.” Privilege escalation. Accessed: Jul. 19, 2023.
 vice architectures: A systematic mapping study,” Comput. Sci. Rev., [Online]. Available: https://www.aquasec.com/cloud-native-academy/
 vol. 41, Aug. 2021, Art. no. 100415. cloud-attacks/ reverse-shell-attack/
 [3] X. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Q. Lin, X. Wang, and J. H. Chen, “Automatic policy [18] X. Gao, Z. Gu, Z. Li, H. Jamjoom, and C. Wang, “Houdini’s escape:
 generation for inter-service access control of microservices,” in Proc. Breaking the resource rein of Linux control groups,” in Proc. ACM
 USENIX Security Symp. USENIX Security Symp., Jan . 2021. SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2019, pp. 1073–1086.
 [4] S. S. Li et al., “Understanding and addressing quality attributes of [19] Y. Q. Sun, D. Safford, M. Zohar, D. Pendarakis, Z. Gu, and T. Jaeger,
 microservices architecture: A systematic literature review,” Inf. Softw. “Security namespace: Making Linux security frameworks available to
 Technol., vol. 131, Mar. 2021, Art. no. 106449. containers,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security),
 [5] Z. Z. Zhang, M. K. Ramanathan, P. Raj, A. Parwal, T. Sherwood, and 2018, pp. 1423–1439.
 M. Chabbi, “CRISP: Critical path analysis of large-scale microservice [20] Y. H. Lin, O. Tunde-Onadele, and X. H. Gu, “CDL: Classified distributed
 architectures,” in Proc. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf. (USENIX ATC), 2022, learning for detecting security attacks in containerized applications,” in
 pp. 655–672. Proc. 36th Annu. Comput. Security Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 179–188.
 [6] H. Ahmad, C. Treude, M. Wagner, and C. Szabo, “Towards [21] A. S. Abed, C. Clancy, and D. S. Levy, “Intrusion detection system
 resource-efficient reactive and proactive auto-scaling for microservice for applications using Linux containers,” in Proc. 11th Int. Workshop
 architectures,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 225, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 112390. Security Trust Manag., 2015, pp. 123–135.
YIN et al.: MADGuard: A HIGH-PERFORMANCE MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION SYSTEM 787

[22] A. El Khairi, M. Caselli, C. Knierim, A. Peter, and A. Continella, [47] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detec-
 “Contextualizing system calls in containers for anomaly-based intrusion tion: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
 detection,” in Proc. Cloud Comput. Security Workshop, 2022, pp. 9–21. pp. 175–185, Jan. 2023.
[23] A. El Khairi, M. Caselli, A. Peter, and A. Continella, “Replicawatcher: [48] B. H. Sigelman et al., “Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems
 Training-less anomaly detection in containerized microservices,” in tracing infrastructure,” Google, Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA, Google
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp., 2024, pp. 1–17. Technical Report dapper-2010-1, 2010. [Online]. Available: https://
[24] Z. Y. Li, Q. A. Chen, R. Q. Yang, Y. Chen, and W. Ruan, “Threat static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//archive/
 detection and investigation with system-level provenance graphs: A papers/dapper-2010-1.pdf
 survey,” Comput. Security, vol. 106, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 102282. [49] Y. Zuo, Y. Wu, G. Min, C. Huang, and K. Pei, “An intelligent anomaly
[25] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive detection scheme for micro-services architectures with temporal and
 approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representa- spatial data analysis,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 2,
 tion learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (SP), 2024, pp. 548–561, Jun. 2020.
 pp. 3552–3570. [50] F. Al-Doghman, N. Moustafa, I. Khalil, N. Sohrabi, Z. Tari, and
[26] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis A. Y. Zomaya, “AI-enabled secure microservices in edge computing:
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16,
 Security Privacy (SP), 2020, pp. 1172–1189. no. 2, pp. 1485–1504, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[27] Z. J. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation [51] J. Chen et al., “TraceGra: A trace-based anomaly detection for
 using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy microservice using graph deep learning,” Comput. Commun., vol. 204,
 (SP), 2024, pp. 3533–3551. pp. 109–117, Apr. 2023.
[28] X. T. Chen, H. Irshad, Y. Chen, and V. Yegneswaran, “{CLARION}: [52] S. Jacob, Y. S. Qiao, Y. H. Ye, and B. Lee, “Anomalous distributed
 Sound and clear provenance tracking for microservice deployments,” traffic: Detecting cyber security attacks amongst microservices using
 in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2021, graph convolutional networks,” Comput. Security, vol. 118, Jul. 2022,
 pp. 3989–4006. Art. no. 102728.
[29] J. Zengy et al., “ShadeWatcher: Recommendation-guided cyber threat [53] M. Chen, Z. Dai, Y. Li, and Z. Lu, “FedTag: Towards automated attack
 analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security investigation using federated learning,” in Int. Artif. Intell. Conf., 2023,
 Privacy (SP), 2022, pp. 489–506. pp. 112–126.
[30] S. Wang et al., “ThreatRace: Detecting and tracing host-based threats [54] J. Castro, N. Laranjeiro, and M. Vieira, “Exploring logic scoring of
 in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. preference for DoS attack detection in microservice applications,” in
 Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Services (ICWS), 2023, pp. 573–584.
[31] S. Kasinathan, “You’re one misconfiguration away from [55] U. Zdun et al., “Detection strategies for microservice security tactics,”
 a cloud-based data breach,” 2020. [Online]. Available: IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 1257–1273,
 https://community.spiceworks.com/t/youre-one-misconfiguration-away- May/Jun. 2024.
 from-a-cloud-based-data-breach/760522/2 [56] “Falco: Container native runtime security.” Accessed: 2022. [Online].
[32] C. Warrender, S. Forrest, and B. Pearlmutter, “Detecting intrusions using Available: https://falco.org/
 system calls: Alternative data models,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security [57] X. Gu, Q. Wang, J. Liu, and J. Wei, “Grunt attack: Exploiting execution
 Privacy, 1999, pp. 133–145. dependencies in microservices,” in Proc. 54th Annual IEEE/IFIP Int.
[33] Y. Zhang, R. Jin, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Understanding bag-of-words model: Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw. (DSN), 2024, pp. 115–128.
 A statistical framework,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 1, pp. 43–52, [58] “Twisklock: The most complete container cybersecurity platform,”
 Aug. 2010. Accessed: 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.twistlock.com/
[34] “Kubernetes.” May 24, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://kubernetes.io/ [59] “Tracee: Linux runtime security and forensics using EBPF,” Accessed:
[35] A. K. Jain et al., “A content and URL analysis-based efficient approach 2023. [Online]. Available: https://aquasecurity.github.io/tracee/latest/
 to detect smishing SMS in intelligent systems,” Int. J. Intell. Syst., [60] “DevGraph,” Accessed: 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 11117–11141, 2022. devgraph.com/
[36] A. Ibrahim, A. Bozhinoski, and S. Pretschner, “Attack graph generation
 for microservice architecture,” in Proc. 34th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Appl.
 Comput., 2019, pp. 1235–1242.
[37] J. von Kistowski, S. Eismann, N. Schmitt, A. Bauer, J. Grohmann, and
 S. Kounev, “TeaStore: A micro-service reference application,” in Proc.
 IEEE 4th Int. Workshops Found. Appl. Self* Syst. (FAS* W), 2019,
 pp. 263–264.
[38] “Sock shop: A microservice demo application.” Weaveworks. Accessed: Yanshang Yin received the M.S. degree from
 2017. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/microservices-demo/ Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China,
 microservices-demo in 2023. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
[39] “Tetragon—eBPF-based security observability and runtime enforce- degree in computer science with Zhejiang University
 ment,” Cilium, Accessed: Jul. 34, 2023. [Online]. Available: https:// of Technology, Hangzhou. Her research interests
 github.com/cilium/tetragon include system security and microservice security.
[40] J. Flora and N. Antunes, “Evaluating intrusion detection for microservice
 applications: Benchmark, dataset, and case studies,” J. Syst. Softw.,
 vol. 216, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 112142.
[41] L. Yang et al., “{CADE}: Detecting and explaining concept drift
 samples for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp.
 (USENIX Security), 2021, pp. 2327–2344.
[42] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under
 concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12,
 pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019.
[43] S. S. Bokade and P. Kulkarni, “A tool for analyzing and detecting
 anomalies in unstructured log data,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Comput. Tiantian Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the
 Syst. Inf. Technol. Sustain. Solut. (CSITSS), 2024, pp. 1–6. Ph.D. degree in computer science from Zhejiang
[44] X. Y. Li, H. Y. Zhang, V. H. Le, and P. F. Chen, “LogShrink: Effective University, Hangzhou, China, in 2019. He is curlog compression by leveraging commonality and variability of log data,” rently an Associate Professor with the College
 in Proc. 46th IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2024, pp. 1–12. of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang
[45] T. Zhu et al., “General, efficient, and real-time data compaction strategy University of Technology, Hangzhou. His research
 for apt forensic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, interests include mobile security, system security,
 pp. 3312–3325, 2021. and artificial intelligence.
[46] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day
 attack detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
 vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 10733–10811, 2023.
788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 Tieming Chen received the Ph.D. degree in com- Mingqi Lv received the Ph.D. degree in computer
 puter software and theory from Beihang University, science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
 Beijing, China, in 2011. He is currently a in 2019. He is currently an Associate Professor with
 Professor with the College of Computer Science the College of Computer Science and Technology,
 and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou. His
 Hangzhou, China. His research interests include research interests include system security and artificyberspace security and intelligence security. cial intelligence.