MAGNN: Multi-scale adaptive graph neural networks with contrastive
learning for malicious network traﬃc detection
Mukhtar Ahmed a , Jinfu Chen a,b,∗, Ernest Akpaku a , Ali Bux c

a
 School of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China
b Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Security Technology for Industrial Cyberspace, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China
c
 School of Management, Jiangsu University, 301 Xuefu Road, Zhenjiang, 212013, Jiangsu, China

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Keywords: Network traﬃc analysis is a critical task in cybersecurity, enabling the classiﬁcation of malicious traﬃc and the
Malicious network traﬃc identiﬁcation of potentially dangerous connections. Existing approaches often utilize traditional graph neural
Network security networks (GNNs) to represent and analyze the inherent graph-like structures in network traﬃc, where nodes
Multi-scale contrastive learning
 correspond to entities such as IP addresses or devices, and edges represent communication or data ﬂow between
Graph neural networks
Temporal-node contrast
 them. However, these methods primarily focus on node features, often neglect crucial edge-level (packet-level)
Edge-level contrast information and struggle to adapt to diverse and evolving traﬃc patterns. To overcome these limitations, we
 propose a novel framework, Multi-Scale Adaptive Graph Neural Networks (MAGNN), for malicious network traf-
 ﬁc detection. MAGNN integrates both node and edge features within a multi-scale contrastive learning framework, introducing three novel mechanisms: temporal-node contrast, edge-level contrast, and multi-head hierarchical contrast, to capture complex dependencies in network behavior. MAGNN is evaluated on four diverse
 benchmark datasets-CTU-13, ISCXVPN2016, CICIDS-2017, and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020-demonstrating superior
 performance in detecting malicious traﬃc. In addition to classiﬁcation accuracy, MAGNN supports temporal
 traﬃc trend estimation, where error-based (regression-task) metrics are employed to assess the model’s ability
 to forecast evolving traﬃc dynamics. Furthermore, MAGNN demonstrates robust scalability through linear computational complexity, support for distributed training with multi-GPU architectures, and eﬃcient convergence
 across large-scale graphs.

1. Introduction Another limitation of traditional detection systems is their inability
 to capture topological patterns in network traﬃc. These patterns are vi-
 The increasing frequency and sophistication of cyberattacks pose tal for identifying advanced intrusions, such as persistent threats that
substantial threats to the security of computer networks and information involve lateral movement across a network [5]. Incorporating topologsystems. Malicious network traﬃc detection methods are critical for pro- ical relationships into detection frameworks can signiﬁcantly enhance
tecting critical infrastructure by analyzing raw network traﬃc, such as their ability to detect sophisticated attacks by analyzing network graph
packet captures or ﬂow-based records, to extract detailed statistics and structures and communication pathways [6].
identify potential threats. Traditional malicious detection approaches Graph-based deep learning has emerged as a promising approach
are broadly categorized into signature-based and behavior-based meth- for addressing these challenges due to its ability to handle complex
ods. Signature-based methods rely on predeﬁned rules or metrics to clas- relational data [7,8]. Within this domain, graph-based malicious trafsify traﬃc, while behavior-based approaches use machine learning to ﬁc detection identiﬁes malicious nodes in graph structures and has
detect complex and evolving attack patterns [1]. Behavior-based ap- been widely applied in areas such as ﬁnancial fraud detection, misproaches [2,3] are preferred for their ability to detect previously un- information detection, and network intrusion detection [9,10]. Unlike
seen attacks, including zero-day vulnerabilities, but their reliance on other ﬁelds of malicious detection, graph-based methods uniquely comlarge volumes of labeled data often limits their practicality in real-world bine node features and graph structures, enabling a more comprescenarios [4]. hensive analysis [11]. Malicious traﬃc is often categorized as either

 ∗ Corresponding author.

 E-mail address: jinfuchen@ujs.edu.cn (J. Chen).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2026.105240
Received 28 December 2024; Received in revised form 26 July 2025; Accepted 9 February 2026
Available online 14 February 2026
0743-7315/© 2026 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

feature-based, where node attributes deviate signiﬁcantly from their complementary graph views. This strategy simulates realistic varianeighbors, or structural, where anomalous patterns emerge in closely tions in network traﬃc, enhancing the model’s robustness and adaptconnected groups of nodes [12]. ability to emerging attack scenarios and diverse malicious behaviors.
 Over the years, numerous methods have been developed to address 3. Unlike traditional graph neural network methods, which primarily
these challenges. Early approaches primarily compared a node’s fea- focus on node-level features, MAGNN explicitly incorporates temtures with its neighbors or used network structure for detection [13,14]. poral information and edge-level attributes. This comprehensive in-
Other techniques focused on feature subspace selection [15,16], but tegration addresses the limitations of node-centric approaches and
these methods often relied on domain-speciﬁc knowledge and failed to provides a holistic understanding of network ﬂow patterns, critical
capture deep, non-linear relationships in graph data, limiting their scal- for detecting sophisticated malicious traﬃc.
ability and eﬀectiveness. 4. MAGNN adopts a self-supervised learning strategy that enables train-
 The advent of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [17] marked a ma- ing without labeled data, while supporting optional semi-supervised
jor breakthrough in graph-based malicious traﬃc detection. Early GNN- reﬁnement during evaluation. This design ensures robust perforbased approaches, such as Anomal-E [18], identiﬁed malicious traﬃc mance on large-scale datasets, maintains computational eﬃciency,
by comparing restructured features and adjacency matrices. However, and enhances applicability in practical cybersecurity environments
these methods often failed to capture critical malicious patterns due where labeled data is limited.
to their reliance on neighborhood aggregation, which can dilute essential signals [19]. Recent advancements introduced contrastive learning The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
paradigms [20] to graph-based malicious detection, leveraging relation- related work in network traﬃc detection. Section 3 details the proships between nodes and their neighborhoods to improve representation posed model architecture and design. Section 4 presents the experimenlearning [21]. While eﬀective, these methods often neglect subgraph- tal setup and evaluation metrics. Section 5 discusses the results and comlevel information, which is crucial for optimizing embeddings and cap- parisons with baseline methods. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper
turing complex dependencies in graph data [22]. with future research directions.
 To address these limitations, we propose MAGNN: Multi-Scale Adaptive Graph Neural Networks for malicious traﬃc detection. MAGNN 2. Related work
combines node and edge features with the graph’s topological structure in a multi-scale contrastive learning framework. The framework The detection of malicious network traﬃc has been a crucial area
introduces three innovative mechanisms-temporal-node contrast, edge- of research, with signiﬁcant advancements in leveraging graph-based
level contrast, and multi-head hierarchical contrast-to capture diverse models and deep learning techniques to address increasingly sophistidependencies and improve detection accuracy. This multi-view design cated cyber threats. Early approaches, including those by Li et al. [23]
integrates various sources of malicious traﬃc information, computing and Zola et al. [24], employed traditional graph-based methods that prireliable malicious scores for each node while maintaining scalability marily analyzed the structural and feature-based properties of network
and robustness. Furthermore, MAGNN incorporates graph augmenta- graphs. While these methods oﬀered initial insights into malicious betion techniques to enhance subgraph representation learning, address- havior, their limitations in capturing complex, non-linear dependencies
ing challenges commonly encountered in practical deployment, such as and adapting to dynamic network behaviors hindered their eﬀectiveness
data scarcity and evolving attack patterns. in evolving threat scenarios.
 Unlike traditional supervised models, MAGNN operates in a self- The emergence of GNNs has revolutionized the ﬁeld by enabling the
supervised manner, reducing its reliance on extensive labeled data modeling of intricate dependencies within graph-structured data. GNNand making it more practical for deployment in operational network based approaches have demonstrated signiﬁcant improvements in idenenvironments where labeled traﬃc is often unavailable. By leverag- tifying malicious activities by leveraging both local and global graph feaing the graph-based nature of network traﬃc-where nodes represent tures. For instance, Zhou et al. [25] introduced a GNN-based framework
hosts and edges denote communication ﬂows-MAGNN captures both for botnet detection that focused on the topological structure of network
node and edge features, enabling the detection of sophisticated intru- traﬃc, achieving higher accuracy than traditional machine learning
sions. To address the practical challenges posed by contemporary net- methods. Similarly, Liu et al. [12] proposed a Contrastive self-supervised
work environments-particularly the scarcity of labeled malicious traﬃc- Learning framework for Anomaly (CoLA), a contrastive learning-based
MAGNN is designed around a self-supervised training paradigm. Instead technique for anomaly detection in graph data, which inspired furof relying on large labeled datasets, MAGNN learns informative rep- ther reﬁnements like the Abnormality-Aware Graph Neural Network
resentations by optimizing multi-scale contrastive objectives derived (AAGNN) [25] and Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) [26].
from intrinsic graph structures and temporal dynamics. These include These advancements incorporated sophisticated paradigms, including
temporal-node, edge-level, and hierarchical contrasts, which allow the one-class GNNs and GCN-based feature extraction, to enhance the romodel to extract semantic features from unlabeled traﬃc data. During bustness of malicious traﬃc detection.
evaluation or deployment, a small set of labeled examples can option- The integration of self-supervised learning into GNN frameworks
ally be used for ﬁne-tuning or scoring, making MAGNN highly adapt- has further expanded their capabilities, particularly in handling unable to semi-supervised scenarios. This hybrid capability ensures that labeled data-a common challenge in real-world cybersecurity applicathe framework remains robust, scalable, and eﬀective in modern cy- tions. Anomal-E [18], for example, utilized self-supervised methods to
bersecurity operations where labeling is often limited or delayed. The generate edge embeddings and detect network intrusions, outperformproposed MAGNN framework makes the following key contributions to ing traditional feature-based models. Similarly, the adoption of graph
the ﬁeld of malicious network traﬃc detection: contrastive learning methods, as highlighted by Velickovic et al. [27],
 Li et al. [28], and Hafdi et al. [29], has been instrumental in improv-
1. MAGNN introduces an innovative multi-scale contrastive learning ing malicious traﬃc detection. These methods employ techniques such
 framework that integrates temporal-node, edge-level, and multi- as node-subgraph and edge-level contrasts to optimize node representahead hierarchical contrasts. This approach enables the model to cap- tions and identify malicious patterns more eﬀectively.
 ture diverse malicious patterns across varying levels of granularity, Data augmentation techniques have also been integrated into graphsigniﬁcantly enhancing its ability to detect both localized malicious based frameworks to improve generalization and robustness. Strateactivities and broader structural deviations in network traﬃc. gies such as Robust Self-Aligned (RoSA) [30] and Random Walk with
2. The framework employs a graph augmentation technique that com- Restart (RWR) [31] create augmented graph views, simulating realistic
 bines edge modiﬁcation and random walk with restart to generate variations in network traﬃc. GRaph Anomaly Detection AugmenTEd

 2
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

(GRADATE) [32] further advanced this ﬁeld by combining graph aug- Table 1 provides a comparative summary of key challenges in existmentation with multi-scale contrastive learning, capturing relationships ing malicious traﬃc detection approaches and illustrates how the proacross nodes, subgraphs, and the entire graph. These methodologies en- posed MAGNN framework eﬀectively addresses these limitations.
hance the detection of diverse and evolving attack patterns, showcasing
the potential of graph augmentation in malicious traﬃc detection. 3. Design of MAGAN model
 Despite these advancements, many existing models rely heavily on
node-level features and overlook the importance of integrating edge- 3.1. Preliminaries
level information and temporal dynamics, which are critical for a comprehensive understanding of network ﬂow patterns. The Net-ﬂow Edge We deﬁne the task of malicious traﬃc detection within the frame-
Graph Attention Network (NEGAT) [17], for instance, addressed this work of graph-based analysis, where the network traﬃc is represented
gap by incorporating Net Flow-based features to distinguish network as an undirected graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸). Here, 𝑉 = {𝑣1 , 𝑣2 , … , 𝑣𝑁 } represents
attacks in real-time. However, the scalability and adaptability of such the set of 𝑁 nodes, each corresponding to a network entity such as an
approaches remain limited in dynamic and large-scale network environ- IP address or a device, and 𝐸 denotes the set of 𝑀 edges, representments. ing interactions or connections between these entities, such as network
 Recently, the Robust Adaptive Graph Network (RAGN) [33] intro- packets or communication sessions.
duced a dynamic attention mechanism and iterative reﬁnement of graph Each node 𝑣𝑖 ∈ 𝑉 is associated with a 𝑑-dimensional feature vector
structures and node features, guided by feature smoothness regulariza- encapsulated in the node feature matrix 𝑋 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑑 . These features may
tion. This design allows RAGN to adapt to adversarial changes in real include attributes such as traﬃc volume, packet statistics, or behavioral
time by assigning lower attention weights to unreliable edges and reﬁn- patterns. The structural relationships among the nodes are captured by
ing node features to suppress perturbations. These mechanisms collec- the adjacency matrix 𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑁 , where 𝐴𝑖𝑗 = 1 if an edge exists between
tively enhance its robustness and accuracy in dynamic, adversarial envi- nodes 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 , and 𝐴𝑖𝑗 = 0 otherwise. This adjacency matrix encodes
ronments. In contrast, the proposed MAGNN framework adopts a multi- the graph’s topology, which reﬂects the inherent relationships within
scale self-supervised contrastive learning strategy that captures both lo- the network traﬃc data.
calized and global structural semantics within graph-structured network The objective of malicious traﬃc detection is to learn a scoring functraﬃc data. Instead of relying on explicit regularization, MAGNN lever- tion 𝑓 ∶ 𝑉 → ℝ that assigns a maliciousness score 𝑆𝑖 to each node 𝑣𝑖 . A
ages hierarchical contrastive objectives-including temporal-node, edge- higher score 𝑆𝑖 indicates a greater likelihood that the node 𝑣𝑖 is assolevel, and subgraph-to-graph contrast-guided by multi-head attention ciated with malicious activity. The scoring function 𝑓 must eﬀectively
mechanisms to enhance the expressiveness and robustness of node repre- leverage both the node-level attributes and the edge-level relationships
sentations. Furthermore, it incorporates graph augmentation techniques within the graph. Moreover, it must capture the multi-scale dependento enrich subgraph learning and improve generalization under limited cies within the network, integrating topological information and feature
data and evolving attack patterns, making it well-suited for dynamic representations to identify malicious behaviors with high accuracy and
malicious traﬃc detection tasks across diverse real-world scenarios. robustness. This formulation lays the foundation for graph-based mali-
 Recent eﬀorts by Zhou et al. introduced a Reconstructed Graph neu- cious traﬃc detection, emphasizing the critical role of both structural
ral network with Global-Local Distillation (RG-GLD) [34], which fo- and feature-based representations in accurately modeling network trafcuses on building lightweight GNNs for anomaly detection by reducing ﬁc and identifying malicious entities (Table 2).
model complexity through knowledge distillation. Unlike this approach,
MAGNN emphasizes multi-scale semantic representation learning via 3.2. MAGNN framework
contrastive objectives, providing robustness across diverse attack types
while maintaining computational eﬃciency through subgraph sampling The proposed MAGNN framework is designed to address the comand distributed training. plexities of malicious network traﬃc analysis through a multi-stage
 Li et al. [35] proposed Flow GAN Anomaly, an adversarial learning- graph-based learning pipeline, as shown in Fig. 1. The process bebased anomaly detection framework that models traﬃc ﬂow distri- gins with constructing graph-structured representations from raw packet
butions to identify anomalies in network intrusion detection systems. ﬂows, where nodes encode diverse semantics such as temporal instances,
While eﬀective in capturing distributional shifts, such generative ap- protocol types, and edge-level time dependencies. The relationships
proaches often face limitations in interpretability and scalability. In con- among these nodes are captured in an adjacency matrix that preserves
trast, MAGNN explicitly models structural and semantic dependencies the topological structure of the network traﬃc, enabling MAGNN to efthrough multi-scale contrastive learning on graphs, enhancing both gen- fectively model interaction patterns.
eralization and explainability. MAGNN operates in a self-supervised learning setting using a con-
 The Flow Interaction Relationship Graph Neural Network (FIR- trastive learning objective. To support robust representation learning,
GNN) [36] leverages ﬂow interaction relationships to detect intrusions MAGNN ﬁrst generates two augmented views of the constructed trafin consumer IoT environments using graph neural networks. Our work ﬁc graph through stochastic transformations such as node dropout and
diﬀers by aiming for broader generalization across multiple domains topology-aware edge perturbations guided by graph centrality. These
and by integrating both temporal and edge-level contrastive mecha- augmented views are passed through a shared graph encoder that comnisms. This design enables MAGNN to identify malicious behaviors putes node embeddings reﬂecting both structural and semantic similaracross a wider range of traﬃc environments, beyond smart homes and ities.
into more diverse scenarios. Building on these foundations, our pro- At the core of the MAGNN architecture is a multi-head hierarchical
posed MAGNN framework introduces a multi-scale contrastive learning attention mechanism, which integrates information at three levels: (i)
approach that incorporates temporal-node, edge-level, and multi-head Node-level attention, focusing on the importance of immediate neighhierarchical contrasts. By integrating node and edge features with the bors; (ii) Subgraph-level attention, capturing mid-range dependencies
graph’s topological structure, MAGNN addresses the limitations of ex- within semantic clusters; and (iii) Graph-level attention, aggregating
isting methods and enables the detection of both localized and global global information across the entire graph to provide broader contexmalicious behaviors. Furthermore, the framework leverages advanced tual understanding.
graph augmentation techniques, including edge modiﬁcation and RWR, The representations learned at each level are passed through
to enhance its robustness and adaptability to diverse attack scenarios. contrastive modules, which compute a contrastive loss between

 3
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

Table 1
Comparative summary of addressed research gaps and contributions..
 Challenge/Gap in prior work Limitation in existing studies How MAGNN addresses it

 Static or non-adaptive graph construction. Graphs are often predeﬁned and fail to adapt to traf- MAGNN incorporates adaptive edge modiﬁcation and sampling strategies to
 ﬁc dynamics. dynamically construct graphs from traﬃc data.
 Lack of multiscale feature integration. Prior methods often overlook the hierarchical na- MAGNN fuses multi-scale features using hierarchical contrastive learning
 ture of traﬃc features. modules.
 Vulnerability to adversarial perturbations. Models can be easily misled by crafted or noisy sam- MAGNN incorporates adversarial contrastive learning to improve robustness
 ples. against perturbations.
 Limited ability to generalize across datasets. Models often overﬁt speciﬁc traﬃc types or sources. MAGNN applies generalizable graph augmentation and contrastive objectives
 to improve cross-dataset performance.
 High computational cost of full-graph GNNs. Processing entire graphs increases latency and MAGNN uses subgraph sampling and multi-head attention to reduce compumemory cost. tational overhead.

Table 2 process involves both edge deletion and edge addition to maintain the
Comprehensive list of abbreviations used throughout the paper to enhance graph’s structural properties while ensuring robustness in the learned
clarity and understanding of technical terms.. representations.
Abbreviation Description Let 𝑃 represent the proportion of edges to modify, and 𝑀 denote the
GNN Graph Neural Network
 total number of edges in the original graph. The number of edges to be
MAGNN Multi-Scale Adaptive Graph Neural Network deleted and added is deﬁned as 𝑃 2𝑀 . The modiﬁed adjacency matrix 𝐴′
CoLA Contrastive self-supervised Learning framework for Anomaly is constructed as follows:
AAGNN Abnormality-Aware Graph Neural Network
HIDS Host-based Intrusion Detection System 𝐴′ = 𝐴 − 𝐴delete + 𝐴add (1)
GCN Graph Convolutional Network
GRADATE GRaph Anomaly Detection AugmenTEd
NEGAT Net-ﬂow Edge Graph Attention Network where 𝐴delete represents the matrix with 𝑃 2𝑀 edges uniformly and ran-
RAGN Robust Adaptive Graph Network domly removed, and 𝐴add represents the matrix with 𝑃 2𝑀 edges uni-
RG-GLD Reconstructed Graph neural network with Global-Local Distillation
FIR-GNN Flow Interaction Relationship Graph Neural Network
 formly and randomly added.
RoSA Robust Self-Aligned This edge modiﬁcation ensures that the second view retains criti-
EM Edge Modiﬁcation cal graph properties while introducing suﬃcient variability for robust
RWR Random Walk with Restart representation learning.
MHHC Multi-Head Hierarchical Contrast
MHA Multi-Head Attention
MAE Mean Absolute Error
MSE Mean Squared Error 3.3.2. Random walk with restart
RMSE Root Mean Squared Error
 To eﬀectively capture the local neighborhood structure around a tar-
MAPE Mean Absolute Percentage Error
VPN Virtual Private Network
 get node, we use the RWR strategy [38] for subgraph sampling. This ap-
CTU-13 Czech Technical University Botnet Dataset proach enables the selection of semantically and topologically relevant
ISCXVPN2016 Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset with VPN Traﬃc (2016) nodes based on their proximity to the target node 𝑣𝑖 in the graph. For
CICIDS-2017 Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity Intrusion Detection Dataset (2017) a given target node 𝑣𝑖 , the RWR process deﬁnes an iterative probability
DoHBrw-2020 DNS over HTTPS Browsing Dataset (2020)
 update over time steps 𝑡, governed by the following recurrence relation:
DDP Distributed Data Parallel (PyTorch module)
APTs Advanced Persistent Threats
 𝐩𝑡 = (1 − 𝛼)𝐴𝐩𝑡−1 + 𝛼𝐞𝑖 (2)

 Here, 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1] is the restart probability, which determines the likelicorresponding nodes in the augmented views. This promotes invariance
 hood of jumping back to the starting node 𝑣𝑖 at each step. 𝐴 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑁
to perturbations while preserving meaningful discriminative features. ̂
 denotes the row-normalized adjacency matrix, computed as 𝐴 = 𝐷−1 𝐴,
The resulting embeddings are then evaluated using a malicious score
 where 𝐴̂ = 𝐴 + 𝐼 includes self-loops and 𝐷 is the diagonal degree mafunction, which estimates the likelihood of a node or ﬂow being associtrix. This normalization ensures that each row of 𝐴 represents a valid
ated with anomalous behavior.
 transition probability distribution across neighboring nodes.
 This end-to-end pipeline-spanning graph construction, contrastive
 The initialization of the random walk is explicitly deﬁned by setting
learning, hierarchical attention, and anomaly scoring-enables MAGNN
 𝐩0 = 𝐞𝑖 , where 𝐞𝑖 ∈ ℝ𝑁 is a one-hot vector with a value of 1 at the index
to adapt dynamically to unseen attacks and evolving traﬃc patterns,
 corresponding to the target node 𝑣𝑖 , and 0 elsewhere. This initialization
while maintaining computational eﬃciency through distributed trainassigns the entire probability mass to the starting node, ensuring that
ing and subgraph sampling strategies.
 the walk originates from 𝑣𝑖 . At each subsequent step 𝑡, the probability
 vector 𝐩𝑡 ∈ ℝ𝑁 is updated using the row-normalized adjacency matrix
3.3. Graph augmentation 𝐴.
 The iterative updates continue until the probability vector 𝐩𝑡 con-
 Graph augmentation plays a vital role in the self-supervised learning verges to a stationary distribution, denoted 𝐩∞ . This distribution enparadigm, enabling the model to extract deeper semantic information codes the steady-state probabilities of visiting other nodes from 𝑣𝑖 , effrom the graph structure. In this paper, we employ edge modiﬁcation fectively capturing their proximity and relevance. Nodes with higher
and a random walk with restart to create a second view of the graph and stationary probabilities are considered more structurally and semantisample subgraphs around nodes, respectively. These augmented graph cally related to the target and are thus included in the sampled subviews and subgraphs are fed into the graph contrastive network. graph. This proximity-aware subgraph sampling mechanism facilitates
 the identiﬁcation of meaningful local contexts for contrastive learning.
3.3.1. Edge modiﬁcation Moreover, deviations in feature similarity between the target node and
 Edge Modiﬁcation (EM) generates the second view of the graph by its neighbors in the sampled subgraph can signal potential anomalies in
perturbing the edges in the adjacency matrix 𝐴. Inspired by [37], this the network traﬃc.

 4
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed MAGNN framework. (a) Network traﬃc is represented as graphs where nodes denote devices and edges represent packet ﬂows.
(b) Multi-head hierarchical contrastive module operates at the node, subgraph, and graph levels to learn robust feature representations. (c) Self-supervised learning
process optimizes the model using contrastive loss, leading to accurate malicious score predictions for network entities.

3.4. Graph contrastive network from localized node interactions to global graph-level structures, which
 is crucial for detecting both subtle and large-scale malicious activities
 The contrastive learning paradigm has proven eﬀective for graph in network traﬃc.
anomaly detection [39]. In our proposed framework, the graph contrastive network operates on multiple views of the graph and incorpo-
 3.4.4. Multi-head attention mechanism
rates three types of contrasts: temporal-node contrast, edge-level con-
 Before delving into the MHHC Loss, it is important to clarify the
trast, and multi-head hierarchical contrast.
 structure of the MHA mechanism, which is central to this module. The
3.4.1. Temporal-node contrast MHA allows the model to attend to diﬀerent parts of the input graph
 Temporal-node contrast captures time-dependent anomalies by simultaneously, capturing various types of interactions at diﬀerent levleveraging temporal features (e.g., packet timestamps) in network traf- els of granularity. Each attention head learns an independent similarity
ﬁc. For a target node 𝑣𝑖 , its temporal features are compared across dif- space, enabling the model to focus on diﬀerent types of relations beferent time intervals. The contrastive objective is deﬁned as: tween nodes and subgraphs.
 (𝑡 ) (𝑡 )
 ∑
 𝑁
 exp(sim(𝐳𝑖 1 , 𝐳𝑖 2 )∕𝜏)
temporal-node = − log ∑ (3) Key components of MHA
 (𝑡1 ) (𝑡2 )
 𝑖=1 𝑗∈ exp(sim(𝐳𝑖 , 𝐳𝑗 )∕𝜏) • Number of attention heads (H): This refers to the number of sepa-
 (𝑡 ) (𝑡 )
where 𝐳𝑖 1 and 𝐳𝑖 2 are the embeddings of node 𝑣𝑖 at time intervals 𝑡1 rate attention mechanisms used in parallel. Each attention head operand 𝑡2 , sim(⋅, ⋅) denotes a similarity function (e.g., cosine similarity), 𝜏 ates independently, attending to diﬀerent features of the graph. The
is the temperature parameter, and  is the set of negative samples. number of heads 𝐻 is a hyperparameter that determines the model’s
 ability to capture diverse relationships. In this design, we set 𝐻 to a
3.4.2. Edge-level contrast value that balances performance and computational eﬃciency.
 Edge-level contrast focuses on detecting anomalies at the packet • Query, Key, and Value matrices (Q, K, V): These matrices are used

level by comparing edge embeddings across diﬀerent views. For an edge to project the input feature space into three diﬀerent spaces: queries
𝑒𝑖𝑗 between nodes 𝑣𝑖 and 𝑣𝑗 , the contrastive loss is deﬁned as: (Q), keys (K), and values (V). For each attention head, the matrices 𝑄(ℎ) , 𝐾 (ℎ) , 𝑉 (ℎ) are linearly projected from the subgraph or node
 ∑ exp(sim(𝐳𝑒(1) , 𝐳𝑒(2) )∕𝜏)
edge-level = − log ∑
 𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑗
 (4) embeddings using learnable parameter matrices 𝑊𝑄(ℎ) , 𝑊𝐾(ℎ) , 𝑊𝑉(ℎ) ∈
 (1) (2) ′ 𝑑
 𝑒𝑖𝑗 ∈𝐸 𝑒𝑘𝑙 ∈𝐸 exp(sim(𝐳𝑒𝑖𝑗 , 𝐳𝑒𝑘𝑙 )∕𝜏) ℝ𝑑×𝑑 , where 𝑑 is the input feature dimension and 𝑑 ′ = 𝐻 is the dimensionality per head.
where 𝐳𝑒(1) and 𝐳𝑒(2) are edge embeddings in the two graph views, and 𝐸
 𝑖𝑗 𝑖𝑗 • Scaled dot-product attention: The attention scores are computed
is the set of negative edge samples.
 by measuring the similarity between the query and key vectors using
3.4.3. Multi-head hierarchical contrast the scaled dot-product attention mechanism. This allows each atten-
 The Multi-Head Hierarchical Contrast (MHHC) module is designed tion head to weigh the importance of diﬀerent elements in the graph
to capture multi-scale structural dependencies by applying a Multi-Head for a given query:
Attention (MHA) mechanism across hierarchical levels of the graph- ( )
 𝑄(ℎ) (𝐾 (ℎ) )𝑇
namely, nodes, subgraphs, and the entire graph [40]. This design al- Attention(𝑄(ℎ) , 𝐾 (ℎ) , 𝑉 (ℎ) ) = softmax √ 𝑉 (ℎ) (5)
lows the model to simultaneously focus on diverse relational patterns, 𝑑′

 5
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

Fig. 2. MAGNN integrates temporal node, edge-level, and multi-head hierarchical attention modules, captures dependencies at nodes, subgraph, and global levels
using multiple attention heads.

 √
 where 𝑑 ′ is a scaling factor to stabilize the gradients during train- the model to capture both static and dynamic characteristics of network
 ing. traﬃc. The total training loss is deﬁned as:
 • Concatenation of outputs: After the attention mechanism is applied total = 𝜆1 ⋅ contrastive + 𝜆2 ⋅ regression (9)
 in each head, the results from all heads are concatenated to form a
 Here, contrastive is the integrated loss from Eq. 8, and regression is comuniﬁed representation:
 puted using MAE, MSE, RMSE, and MAPE between predicted and actual
 𝐳𝑆𝑖 = Concat(𝐳𝑆(1) , … , 𝐳𝑆(𝐻) )𝑊𝑂 (6) traﬃc feature values. 𝜆1 and 𝜆2 are task-level weighting coeﬃcients used
 𝑖 𝑖
 to balance the classiﬁcation and regression objectives.
 where 𝑊𝑂 ∈ ℝ𝑑×𝑑 is a learnable output projection matrix that com- This multi-task loss enables MAGNN to learn temporally aware and
 bines the concatenated outputs into the ﬁnal subgraph representa- semantically rich representations, improving its robustness in detecting
 tion. evolving or stealthy attack patterns.
 Attributed graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝑋), where: 𝑉 is the set of nodes, 𝐸 is
3.4.5. Multi-head hierarchical contrast loss the set of edges, 𝑋 ∈ ℝ|𝑉 |×𝑑 is the node feature matrix, where each row
 The MHHC loss utilizes the multi-head attention mechanism de- 𝐱𝑣 ∈ ℝ𝑑 represents a 𝑑-dimensional feature vector for node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 .
scribed above to impose a contrastive learning objective across multiple
hierarchical levels of the graph. The attention-based hierarchical con- 3.5. Optimization and complexity analysis
trastive loss is deﬁned as:
 ( )
 The proposed MAGNN framework is end-to-end trainable using back-
 ∑𝑁 exp sim(𝐳𝑆𝑖 , 𝐳𝐺 )∕𝜏
MHHC = − log ∑ ( ) (7) propagation and gradient descent. During training, the model simultaneously minimizes the classiﬁcation-driven contrastive loss and the aux-
 𝑖=1 𝑗∈𝑆 exp sim(𝐳𝑆𝑖 , 𝐳𝑆𝑗 )∕𝜏
 iliary regression loss using the multi-task formulation in Eq. 9.
where: 𝐳𝐺 is the embedding of the entire graph, 𝑆 is the set of negative In terms of computational complexity, the time complexity of
subgraph samples, sim(⋅, ⋅) denotes the cosine similarity between embed- MAGNN is dominated by graph propagation and embedding transfordings, 𝜏 is a temperature scaling parameter that controls the sharpness mation steps. As shown in Section 3.5.1, the model scales linearly with
of the probability distribution. the number of nodes and edges, making it suitable for large-scale net-
 This loss encourages the model to bring similar subgraphs (positive work traﬃc datasets.
samples) closer together in the embedding space while pushing dissim- By leveraging multi-scale contrastive learning objectives, our model
ilar subgraphs (negative samples) apart, leading to improved general- can be eﬃciently optimized using gradient descent. The optimization
ization across hierarchical levels. The multi-head design in the MHA process integrates the three contrastive losses- temporal-node contrast,
mechanism improves the model’s capacity to generalize across varying edge-level contrast, and hierarchical contrast -into a single uniﬁed loss
structural contexts, enabling robust detection of both local anomalies function as shown in Eq. 8.
and global threats in dynamic traﬃc graphs.
 3.5.1. Time complexity
3.4.6. Integrated contrastive loss The time complexity of the MAGNN framework is primarily inﬂu-
 The MAGNN framework combines three contrastive objectives to enced by two key operations: (i) neighborhood aggregation through
guide representation learning at diﬀerent levels of graph structure: graph neural network layers, and (ii) feature transformation via contrastive projection heads [41]. For a graph with 𝑁 = |𝑉 | nodes and
contrastive = 𝛼1 temporal-node + 𝛼2 edge-level + 𝛼3 MHHC (8)
 𝑀 = |𝐸| edges, and assuming 𝑓𝑖 is the dimensionality of the 𝑖-th layer
where 𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , and 𝛼3 are hyperparameters that balance the contribution and 𝐿 is the total number of layers.
 ∑
of each contrastive component. This integrated contrastive loss consti- The ﬁrst term, 𝑀 𝐿 𝑖=0 𝑓𝑖 , corresponds to the cost of message passing
tutes the classiﬁcation-driven objective in the MAGNN framework. and attention computation across edges for each GNN layer. At each
 layer, messages (or neighbor features) are aggregated per edge, scaled
3.4.7. Multi-task loss function by the dimensionality of the current layer’s features.
 MAGNN is formulated as a multi-task learning framework that si- ( )
 ∑𝐿 ∑𝐿
multaneously performs malicious traﬃc detection (classiﬁcation) and  𝑀 𝑓𝑖 + 𝑁 𝑓𝑖−1 𝑓𝑖 (10)
temporal traﬃc prediction (regression). This joint optimization helps 𝑖=0 𝑖=1

 6
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 ∑
The second term, 𝑁 𝐿 𝑖=1 𝑓𝑖−1 𝑓𝑖 , represents the cost of feature transfor-
 2. The ISCXVPN2016 [43] dataset, also developed by the Canadian Inmation at each node, where node features are projected from 𝑓𝑖−1 to stitute for Cybersecurity, focuses on Virtual Private Network (VPN)
𝑓𝑖 dimensions using learned linear transformations. Together, these two traﬃc analysis. This dataset simulates realistic network traﬃc patterms capture the computational load of the entire model during train- terns, including both encrypted (VPN) and unencrypted traﬃc. It
ing. Importantly, this formulation conﬁrms that the time complexity is includes a variety of application types such as web browsing, Email,
linear with respect to the number of nodes and edges ((𝑁 + 𝑀) when ﬁle transfer, and multimedia streaming, with malicious activities in-
𝑓𝑖 is bounded), thus ensuring the MAGNN framework is scalable and terspersed. The dataset is particularly valuable for evaluating the
eﬃcient for processing large-scale network traﬃc graphs. eﬀectiveness of intrusion detection systems in handling encrypted
 traﬃc, which poses unique challenges for cybersecurity research.
Algorithm 1 Proposed model: MAGNN framework. 3. The CICIDS-2017 [44] dataset, developed by the Canadian Institute
 for Cybersecurity, provides a comprehensive benchmark for intru-
Require: Attributed graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸, 𝑋), where 𝑉 is the set of nodes, 𝐸
 sion detection systems. It includes network traﬃc data from both
 is the set of edges, and 𝑋 ∈ ℝ|𝑉 |×𝑑 is the node feature matrix, where
 benign activities and a wide range of modern attack scenarios. This
 each row 𝐱𝑣 ∈ ℝ𝑑 represents a 𝑑-dimensional feature vector for node
 dataset simulates realistic day-to-day network traﬃc alongside mali-
 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 ; number of training epochs 𝑇 , batch size 𝐵, augmentation
 cious behavior, oﬀering detailed features and diverse attack patterns.
 parameter 𝑃 , restart probability 𝛼.
 Its realism and scope make it an invaluable resource for evaluating
Ensure: Malicious score function 𝑓 (𝑣) for each node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 .
 the performance of malicious traﬃc detection models.
 1: Initialization: Randomly initialize the parameters of the MAGNN
 4. The CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 [45] dataset, created by the Canadian
 framework.
 Institute for Cybersecurity, focuses on the detection of malicious traf-
 2: for 𝑡 = 1 to 𝑇 do
 ﬁc using DNS over HTTPS (DoH) communication. The dataset in-
 3: Generate two graph views by randomly deleting and adding 𝑃 ⋅
 cludes a variety of benign and malicious web traﬃc scenarios, rep-
 |𝐸| edges to simulate structural perturbation.
 resenting a wide range of real-world browsing activities. Its detailed
 4: Sample subgraphs for each node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 using random walk with
 feature set captures the unique characteristics of encrypted DoH trafrestart with restart probability 𝛼.
 ﬁc, enabling researchers to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of detection
 5: Compute node embeddings 𝐳𝑣 using a multi-layer GNN with
 methods in handling this emerging and challenging network commulti-head attention.
 munication protocol.
 6: Compute edge embeddings 𝐳𝑒 via concatenation and multi-layer
 perceptron on node pairs.
 4.2. Evaluation metrics
 7: Compute subgraph embeddings 𝐳𝑆 using hierarchical attention
 pooling.
 To comprehensively evaluate the performance of MAGNN, we em-
 8: Compute the temporal-node contrast loss temporal-node by comploy both classiﬁcation and error-based metrics.
 paring node embeddings across diﬀerent time intervals.
 Classiﬁcation metrics: We use accuracy, precision, recall, and f1-
 9: Compute the edge-level contrast loss edge-level by comparing
 score to assess the model’s ability to correctly identify malicious and beedge embeddings across augmented graph views.
 nign traﬃc. These metrics are computed using predicted class labels and
10: Compute the multi-head hierarchical contrast loss MHHC using
 are standard for evaluating binary and multiclass classiﬁcation tasks.
 Eq. 7, capturing relationships between subgraph and global graph
 Precision and Recall are particularly important in cybersecurity contexts
 embeddings.
 where minimizing false positives and false negatives is critical.
11: Combine all contrastive losses into the integrated loss function
 using Eq. 8. TP + TN
 Accuracy = (11)
12: Perform backpropagation and update the model parameters us- TP + TN + FP + FN
 ing gradient descent.
13: end for Precision =
 TP
 (12)
14: Compute the malicious score 𝑓 (𝑣) ∈ [0, 1] for each node 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 based TP + FP
 on the learned embeddings and aggregated contrastive objectives.
15: Return Malicious score function 𝑓 (𝑣) for all nodes 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 . Recall =
 TP
 (13)
 TP + FN

 Precision ⋅ Recall
4. Experimental setup F1-Score = 2 ⋅ (14)
 Precision + Recall
 Error-based metrics: In addition to classiﬁcation metrics, we report
4.1. Datasets description
 error-based metrics-Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Mean Squared Error
 (MSE), Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and Mean Absolute Percent-
 We used four benchmark datasets to evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the
 age Error (MAPE)-to assess the model’s prediction conﬁdence and misproposed MAGNN framework for malicious network traﬃc detection.
 classiﬁcation cost. These metrics are calculated on the model’s predicted
These datasets represent diverse network traﬃc scenarios, attack types,
 probability scores (i.e., soft outputs from the ﬁnal layer before threshand real-world network conditions.
 olding). Their inclusion provides insight into how well the model’s prob-
1. The CTU-13 [42] dataset is a well-known benchmark dataset for bot- abilistic outputs align with ground truth labels and helps quantify unnet traﬃc analysis, developed by the Czech Technical University certainty or deviation from expected classiﬁcation behavior.
 (CTU). It contains network traﬃc traces of both normal and mali- Let 𝑦𝑖 ∈ {0, 1} denote the true label and 𝑦̂𝑖 ∈ [0, 1] denote the precious botnet activities across 13 distinct scenarios. The dataset in- dicted probability for the 𝑖-th sample, with 𝑛 total samples. The formulas
 cludes a mix of real botnet infections, background traﬃc, and be- for the error metrics are as follows:
 nign user activities, making it a valuable resource for evaluating the • MAE measures the average absolute diﬀerence between predicted
 performance of intrusion detection and network anomaly detection
 probabilities and actual binary labels.
 systems. Its detailed annotations and realistic traﬃc patterns have
 1∑
 𝑛
 made it a popular choice for research in cybersecurity and botnet
 MAE = |𝑦 − 𝑦̂𝑖 | (15)
 detection. 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖

 7
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 • MSE penalizes larger errors more heavily, reﬂecting overall predic- objective by encouraging the model to learn generalized and robust feation deviation. tures. MAGNN was trained end-to-end using backpropagation with an
 1∑
 𝑛 integrated loss function that combined temporal-node, edge-level, and
 MSE = (𝑦 − 𝑦̂𝑖 )2 (16) hierarchical contrastive components. The weighting coeﬃcients 𝜆1 , 𝜆2 ,
 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖
 and 𝜆3 were tuned empirically to balance the contributions of each con-
 • RMSE provides a more interpretable error scale by taking the square trastive mechanism. The overall setup ensured eﬃcient scalability and
 root of MSE. robust performance across multiple datasets and traﬃc scenarios.
 √
 √ 𝑛
 √ √1 ∑
 RMSE = MSE = √ (𝑦 − 𝑦̂𝑖 )2 (17) 4.4. Baseline methods
 𝑛 𝑖=1 𝑖
 • Anomal-E [18] employs a self-supervised approach to leverage edge
 • MAPE expresses the error as a percentage, oﬀering an intuitive sense features and graph topology for network intrusion detection. It genof prediction quality relative to actual values. erates edge embeddings without relying on labeled data, which can
 1 ∑ || 𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̂𝑖 ||
 𝑛 then be used with traditional malicious detection algorithms, such
 MAPE =
 𝑛 𝑖=1 || 𝑦𝑖 + 𝜖 ||
 (18) as isolation forests.
 • NEGAT [17]: is used of NetFlow-based network traﬃc ﬂows. The
 where 𝜖 is a small constant added to avoid division by zero. model integrates network ﬂow insights into node representations,
 enhancing graph representation with self-supervision. It is designed
 These error-based metrics complement traditional classiﬁcation met- to distinguish network attacks from hackers in real-time by monitorrics by oﬀering a ﬁner-grained view of model calibration and misclas- ing network traﬃc ﬂows across routers and identifying speciﬁc types
siﬁcation impact, especially important in real-time applications where of ﬂows.
false conﬁdence can be costly. • E-GraphSAGE [46] leverages GNNs to detect and mitigate network

 traﬃc-based cyberattacks. By incorporating both edge features and
4.3. Implementation details topological information, it eﬀectively models network traﬃc in a
 graph representation to identify malicious activities.
4.3.1. Experimental platform and software • TCGNN [47] is designed for packet-grained network traﬃc classiﬁ-
 All experiments were conducted on a Linux-based high-performance cation using GNNs. It transforms each network packet into an undiworkstation equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24 GB VRAM), rected graph and employs a two-layer graph convolutional network
64 GB of RAM, and an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X CPU, running Ubuntu 22.04. with three distinct aggregation strategies to enhance classiﬁcation
The implementation was carried out using Python 3.9. We employed accuracy and performance.
PyTorch 2.0 and PyTorch Geometric 2.3.1 as the primary frameworks • DE-GNN [48]: A graph-based structure that learns packet-level repfor deep learning and graph-based processing. Data preprocessing and resentations directly from raw bytes. It constructs network ﬂows
manipulation were performed using NumPy (v1.24) and Pandas (v1.5). as a Traﬃc Interaction Graph, integrating behavioral patterns and
This setup was chosen to ensure reproducibility, scalability, and com- packet-level features. It utilizes GNNs to extract ﬂow-level features,
patibility with GPU-accelerated computation. providing a comprehensive view of network interactions.

4.3.2. Model architecture and training setup 5. Experimental results
 The MAGNN framework was developed using these open-source libraries to facilitate eﬃcient deep learning computations and scalable 5.1. Comparative performance evaluation against baseline methods on
graph processing. PyTorch Geometric was selected due to its robust sup- multiple datasets
port for graph operations and seamless integration with PyTorch. This
enabled eﬃcient implementation of the model’s components, including The performance of the proposed MAGNN model is evaluated against
the graph attention mechanisms, multi-scale contrastive learning mod- several baseline methods across four benchmark datasets: CTU-13, ISules, and hierarchical aggregation strategies. MAGNN learns network CXVPN2016, CICIDS-2017, and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020. Fig. 3 illustraﬃc representations through a combination of temporal-node, edge- trates the accuracy comparison of MAGNN with Anomal-E, NEGAT, Elevel, and hierarchical contrastive learning objectives. Temporal depen- GraphSAGE, TCGNN, and DE-GNN under varying convergence steps.
dencies were modeled using a graph attention mechanism with four at- The results demonstrate that MAGNN consistently outperforms all basetention heads and a hidden dimension size of 128, capturing sequential line models across the datasets. For instance, on the CTU-13 dataset,
patterns while maintaining computational eﬃciency. The hierarchical MAGNN achieves an accuracy of approximately 97.80% at 100 converstructure was built using three graph convolutional layers, each pro- gence steps, surpassing all competitors. On the ISCXVPN2016 dataset,
cessing up to two-hop neighborhoods to capture both local and global it attains 98.60% accuracy, showing steady improvement throughout
dependencies. convergence and strong generalization capabilities. On the CICIDS-2017
 dataset, MAGNN achieves an accuracy close to 99.13%, outperforming
4.3.3. Training conﬁguration and hyperparameters baseline models. Similarly, on the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 dataset, the
 To optimize model performance, hyperparameter tuning was con- model reaches a peak accuracy of 99.30%, conﬁrming its robustness and
ducted. The learning rate was set to 0.001 with a scheduler that de- adaptability to diverse traﬃc patterns.
cayed it by a factor of 0.1 after ten epochs without validation loss Fig. 4 shows the F1-score performance of MAGNN compared to the
improvement. The Adam optimizer was used with a weight decay of baselines under varying convergence steps. On the CTU-13 dataset,
0.00001 to mitigate overﬁtting. A batch size of 64 was selected to bal- MAGNN achieves the highest F1-score of 98.94% at 100 steps, sigance memory and training eﬃciency. Training was performed over 100 niﬁcantly outperforming models such as TCGNN and DE-GNN. On ISepochs, with early stopping based on validation performance. Dirich- CXVPN2016, it steadily improves to reach an F1-score of 99.36%,
let neighbor sampling (size = 30) was adopted to ensure robustness eﬀectively addressing encrypted traﬃc challenges. For CICIDS-2017,
in sparse environments and to reduce sensitivity to noise. Graph aug- MAGNN records an F1-score of approximately 98.97%, demonstrating
mentation was applied through edge modiﬁcation by randomly adding its capacity to detect complex and diverse attack patterns. On CIRA-CICor deleting edges to generate diverse graph views for contrastive learn- DoHBrw-2020, it achieves a peak F1-score of 99.10%, highlighting its
ing. This technique complemented the multi-scale contrastive learning adaptability to evolving network anomalies and malicious behaviors.

 8
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 Fig. 3. Accuracy of diﬀerent methods under varying convergence steps.

 Fig. 4. F1 score of diﬀerent methods under varying convergence steps.

 These results validate the superiority of the MAGNN framework over In contrast, MAGNN combines edge modiﬁcation, subgraph samexisting methods. MAGNN consistently achieves higher accuracy and pling, and contrastive learning at multiple levels (node, edge, and hi-
F1-scores across all datasets and convergence steps, reﬂecting faster con- erarchy), enabling it to learn more robust and generalizable represenvergence, improved classiﬁcation performance, and strong generaliza- tations of network traﬃc. These design elements collectively contribute
tion to varying traﬃc conditions. The consistent improvements further to MAGNN’s superior detection capabilities, especially in scenarios inconﬁrm its robustness and scalability. By integrating multi-scale adap- volving sparse or imbalanced traﬃc.
tive graph learning and contrastive mechanisms, MAGNN oﬀers a powerful and eﬃcient solution for malicious network traﬃc detection.
 5.2. Network traﬃc prediction and analysis of prediction accuracy
 Table 3 summarizes the performance of MAGNN compared to ﬁve
baseline models across four benchmark datasets. On the CTU-13 dataset,
 Fig. 5 illustrates the MAE performance of all models across vary-
MAGNN achieves the highest accuracy (98.45%), precision (97.88%),
 ing temporal steps on the four benchmark datasets. As expected, MAE
recall (97.30%), and F1-score (97.58%), along with the lowest error
 values increase with longer prediction horizons, reﬂecting the growing
metrics (MSE: 0.06, RMSE: 0.20, MAE: 0.31, MAPE: 1.08). DE-GNN
 diﬃculty of modeling long-term patterns. Nevertheless, the proposed
ranks second with an F1-score of 96.06%. For ISCXVPN2016, MAGNN
 MAGNN consistently achieves the lowest MAE across all datasets. On the
maintains superior performance (Acc: 98.10%, F1: 97.12%) and low er-
 CTU-13 dataset, MAGNN exhibits minimal error growth, consistently
rors (MSE: 0.07, RMSE: 0.22). While TCGNN performs well, it falls short
 outperforming Anomal-E and NEGAT. Similarly, on ISCXVPN2016,
in classiﬁcation accuracy and error reduction. On CICIDS-2017, MAGNN
 MAGNN demonstrates signiﬁcantly lower MAE values than TCGNN
reaches an F1-score of 97.45% and again records the lowest error values.
 and DE-GNN. For CICIDS-2017, MAGNN maintains clear superiority
DE-GNN and TCGNN follow, but with weaker generalization. On the
 over all baselines, particularly NEGAT and E-GraphSAGE. On CIRA-CIC-
DoHBrw-2020 dataset, MAGNN attains the best results across all metrics
 DoHBrw-2020, MAGNN sustains robust performance, achieving the low-
(Acc: 99.20%, F1: 98.35%, MSE: 0.05), showcasing strong adaptabilest MAE throughout, indicating strong generalization to complex traﬃc
ity to complex traﬃc. E-GraphSAGE and DE-GNN are competitive but
 patterns.
still lag behind. Overall, MAGNN consistently outperforms all baselines
 Fig. 6 presents MAPE values across increasing prediction steps. As a
in both classiﬁcation accuracy and error minimization. Its multi-scale
 relative error metric, MAPE highlights prediction reliability. MAGNN
adaptive graph learning and contrastive mechanisms enable robust genconsistently yields lower MAPE values across all datasets. On CTUeralization across diverse and evolving network traﬃc scenarios.
 13, it maintains minimal error growth compared to E-GraphSAGE and
 Anomal-E. For ISCXVPN2016, MAGNN achieves the lowest MAPE at
5.1.1. Analysis of model design relative to prior work longer horizons, outperforming NEGAT and TCGNN. In the CICIDS-
 To contextualize the performance of the proposed MAGNN frame- 2017 scenario, MAGNN generalizes eﬀectively, signiﬁcantly reducing
work, we conducted a comprehensive comparison with several state- MAPE relative to DE-GNN and other baselines. Similarly, for CIRA-CICof-the-art models. As presented in Tables 3 to 5, MAGNN consistently DoHBrw-2020, MAGNN sustains low and stable MAPE growth, reinforcoutperforms all baseline methods across multiple datasets and a range of ing its resilience to evolving traﬃc patterns.
evaluation metrics, including error-based performance measures. Com- Fig. 7 displays MSE trends as temporal steps increase. As a squared
pared to models like Anomal-E and NEGAT, MAGNN’s superior perfor- error metric, MSE is particularly sensitive to larger deviations. MAGNN
mance can be attributed to its multi-scale hierarchical design, which achieves the lowest MSE across all datasets. On CTU-13, it surpasses
captures both local and global topological patterns. While E-GraphSAGE NEGAT, TCGNN, and E-GraphSAGE. On ISCXVPN2016, it consistently
integrates edge features, it lacks hierarchical contrastive objectives, lim- outperforms DE-GNN and TCGNN by a clear margin. For CICIDS-2017,
iting its robustness to structural perturbations. DE-GNN and TCGNN at- MAGNN again records the lowest MSE, validating its accuracy and
tempt to capture deeper graph semantics, but they do not integrate ex- stability. On CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020, it demonstrates outstanding erplicit augmentation strategies, making them more sensitive to noisy or ror minimization, maintaining the best performance at all prediction
incomplete data. horizons.

 9
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 Table 3
 Comparative performance of MAGNN and baseline methods on benchmark datasets..
 Dataset Model Acc. Pre. Rec. F1 MSE RMSE MAE MAPE

 Anomal-E 91.23 90.45 89.80 90.12 0.15 0.35 0.79 1.45
 NEGAT 93.75 92.90 91.87 92.38 0.12 0.31 0.72 1.38
 E-GraphSAGE 95.10 94.62 93.85 94.23 0.10 0.28 0.58 1.28
 CTU-13
 TCGNN 96.45 95.82 94.93 95.37 0.09 0.26 0.50 1.22
 DE-GNN 97.12 96.34 95.78 96.06 0.08 0.24 0.42 1.15
 MAGNN 98.45 97.88 97.30 97.58 0.06 0.20 0.31 1.08

 Anomal-E 90.90 89.87 88.65 89.25 0.16 0.38 0.81 1.50
 NEGAT 92.80 91.45 90.85 91.15 0.13 0.34 0.75 1.40
 E-GraphSAGE 94.50 93.60 92.90 93.25 0.11 0.30 0.61 1.30
 ISCXVPN2016
 TCGNN 95.80 94.75 94.05 94.40 0.10 0.27 0.54 1.22
 DE-GNN 96.50 95.80 95.10 95.45 0.09 0.25 0.45 1.17
 MAGNN 98.10 97.45 96.80 97.12 0.07 0.22 0.33 1.10

 Anomal-E 92.35 91.50 90.90 91.20 0.14 0.32 0.77 1.42
 NEGAT 94.25 93.50 92.80 93.15 0.11 0.29 0.68 1.32
 E-GraphSAGE 95.65 94.80 94.15 94.45 0.10 0.26 0.55 1.25
 CICIDS-2017
 TCGNN 96.90 96.00 95.30 95.65 0.09 0.24 0.48 1.20
 DE-GNN 97.55 96.85 96.10 96.45 0.08 0.23 0.39 1.13
 MAGNN 98.65 98.00 97.40 97.70 0.06 0.19 0.29 1.05

 Anomal-E 93.10 92.20 91.60 91.90 0.13 0.31 0.74 1.38
 NEGAT 95.00 94.10 93.50 93.80 0.10 0.28 0.66 1.28
 E-GraphSAGE 96.20 95.50 94.80 95.15 0.09 0.25 0.51 1.20
 DoHBrw-2020
 TCGNN 97.35 96.55 95.95 96.25 0.08 0.24 0.43 1.15
 DE-GNN 98.00 97.25 96.70 97.00 0.07 0.22 0.38 1.10
 MAGNN 99.20 98.60 98.10 98.35 0.05 0.18 0.27 1.02

 Fig. 5. MAE of diﬀerent methods under varying prediction temporal steps.

 Fig. 8 depicts RMSE values for MAGNN and the baseline models. 5.3. Analysis of computational eﬃciency across temporal snapshot sizes
As the square root of MSE, RMSE reﬂects the magnitude of overall
prediction error. MAGNN again achieves the lowest RMSE across all The computational eﬃciency of the proposed MAGNN model and
datasets. On CTU-13, it demonstrates reduced RMSE growth, outper- baseline methods is evaluated by measuring the training duration per
forming Anomal-E, NEGAT, and E-GraphSAGE. For ISCXVPN2016 and epoch across four benchmark datasets. Fig. 9 presents the time required
CICIDS-2017, MAGNN maintains clear advantages over all baselines, for a single training epoch at varying temporal sizes (300s, 600s, and
particularly under longer prediction horizons. On CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw- 900s). As expected, computational cost increases with longer snapshot
2020, it consistently achieves the lowest RMSE, highlighting its robust- durations due to greater data volume and complexity.
ness and precision. For the CTU-13 dataset (Fig. 9(a)), MAGNN demonstrates compet-
 These results demonstrate that MAGNN signiﬁcantly outperforms all itive training eﬃciency. While DE-GNN and TCGNN experience a nobaseline methods across MAE, MAPE, MSE, and RMSE metrics. Its supe- ticeable increase in training time at 900s, MAGNN maintains a relarior performance is attributed to its multi-scale adaptive graph learning tively low training duration, highlighting its eﬃciency. Similarly, for
and contrastive mechanisms, which enable eﬀective modeling of both ISCXVPN2016 (Fig. 9(b)), MAGNN strikes an eﬀective balance between
local and global dependencies. The consistent improvements across in- performance and training time. Although NEGAT and E-GraphSAGE
creasing prediction horizons further underscore MAGNN’s robustness, show slightly lower durations at 300s and 600s, MAGNN scales more
scalability, and eﬀectiveness in accurately detecting malicious network eﬃciently at 900s, outperforming others in both speed and accuracy.
traﬃc. On the CICIDS-2017 dataset (Fig. 9(c)), MAGNN consistently exhibits
 Table 4 presents the experimental results of the proposed MAGNN lower training times than DE-GNN and TCGNN, whose durations inframework compared to baseline models, with all results reported to crease sharply with larger temporal sizes. This illustrates the architecfour decimal places. It can be observed that the proposed MAGNN tural eﬃciency of MAGNN in handling more complex, time-extensive
achieves the smallest values for RMSE, MAE, MSE, and MAPE across data. For the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 dataset (Fig. 9(d)), MAGNN again
all four datasets. These lower error values indicate that the predictions achieves superior scalability, maintaining the lowest training time at
made by the MAGNN model are closer to the actual network traﬃc 900s among all compared models.
values, demonstrating its superior accuracy and reliability. The results The observed trends conﬁrm that MAGNN oﬀers both fast convershow that the MAGNN framework is more eﬀective and competitive for gence and reduced computational cost while sustaining high predictive
malicious network traﬃc detection tasks compared to other baseline performance. In contrast, baseline models such as DE-GNN and TCGNN
models. incur substantial overhead at larger temporal sizes. The eﬃciency of

 10
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 Table 4
 Error-based performance comparison of MAGNN and baseline models across four benchmark
 datasets.
 Data sets Model RMSE MAE MSE MAPE

 Anomal-E 78.1240 61.2413 6103.2354 11.1023
 NEGAT 75.8967 58.7856 5769.4301 10.4321
 E-GraphSAGE 74.5893 57.6842 5567.8902 10.0516
 CTU-13
 TCGNN 73.2384 56.5423 5362.9284 9.7562
 DE-GNN 72.1032 54.9140 5198.1235 9.4213
 MAGNN 69.8452 51.7631 4879.1320 8.9456

 Anomal-E 65.2481 50.9243 4256.9341 9.4212
 NEGAT 63.5674 48.8562 4057.8924 8.7623
 E-GraphSAGE 61.9843 47.2314 3849.4351 8.2345
 ISCXVPN2016
 TCGNN 60.4821 45.9852 3695.1423 7.9421
 DE-GNN 59.2340 44.8230 3567.1243 7.6512
 MAGNN 56.7123 42.3412 3218.5342 7.1435

 Anomal-E 70.7841 55.2384 5012.9843 10.3412
 NEGAT 68.4921 52.8342 4789.1234 9.8745
 E-GraphSAGE 66.9812 50.8921 4489.3214 9.5643
 CICIDS-2017
 TCGNN 65.4320 49.2356 4287.2134 9.2342
 DE-GNN 63.8924 47.9841 4056.8942 8.9245
 MAGNN 61.0234 45.2312 3735.1284 8.3456

 Anomal-E 82.3412 66.2314 6194.9834 11.5243
 NEGAT 79.8642 63.8941 5982.3412 10.8723
 E-GraphSAGE 77.2845 61.3212 5723.4501 10.5412
 CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020
 TCGNN 75.7642 59.8324 5498.3214 10.1123
 DE-GNN 74.1231 58.4210 5287.8912 9.8456
 MAGNN 71.4532 55.2341 4987.4512 9.3412

 Fig. 6. MAPE of diﬀerent methods under diﬀerent prediction temporal steps.

 Fig. 7. MSE of diﬀerent methods under diﬀerent prediction temporal steps.

 Fig. 8. RMSE of diﬀerent methods under diﬀerent prediction temporal steps.

 11
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 Fig. 9. Duration of a single training epoch when using the diﬀerent dataset.

MAGNN’s design ensures computational viability, making it suitable for Table 5
deployment in dynamic and large-scale network environments. Training and inference time per epoch (in seconds) of MAGNN compared to
 baseline models across four benchmark datasets.

5.4. Computation time analysis Dataset Method Training (s/epoch) Inference (s/epoch)

 Anomal-E 35.2 3.5
 In this section, we analyze the computational time overhead of the NEGAT 32.8 3.2
proposed MAGNN framework compared to the state-of-the-art models. E-GraphSAGE 30.1 2.9
 CTU-13
 TCGNN 28.4 2.6
It can be seen from Table 5 that the proposed MAGNN model consis-
 DE-GNN 26.7 2.3
tently achieves the lowest training and inference times compared to MAGNN 18.5 1.4
the baseline models across all datasets. Speciﬁcally, the training time
 Anomal-E 40.1 4.1
for MAGNN is signiﬁcantly reduced, demonstrating its computational
 NEGAT 37.5 3.8
eﬃciency in handling malicious network traﬃc detection tasks. For in- E-GraphSAGE 35.2 3.5
 ISCXVPN2016
stance, on the CTU-13 dataset, MAGNN achieves a training time of 18.5s TCGNN 32.8 3.2
per epoch, while the closest competing model, DE-GNN, requires 26.7s DE-GNN 30.6 3.0
 MAGNN 21.4 1.6
per epoch. Similarly, the inference time for MAGNN on the same dataset
is 1.4s per epoch, which is notably faster than all baseline models. Anomal-E 45.7 4.8
 The superior computational eﬃciency of MAGNN can be attributed NEGAT 42.3 4.5
 E-GraphSAGE 39.8 4.2
to the following reasons: CICIDS-2017
 TCGNN 37.2 3.8
 DE-GNN 35.4 3.6
 • The multi-scale adaptive architecture of MAGNN eﬃciently pro- MAGNN 24.5 1.9
 cesses both node-level and edge-level information while reducing
 Anomal-E 50.8 5.2
 redundant computations. NEGAT 48.3 4.9
 • The integrated contrastive learning mechanism is optimized to min-
 E-GraphSAGE 44.6 4.5
 CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020
 imize the computational overhead during both training and infer- TCGNN 42.1 4.2
 ence. DE-GNN 40.4 4.0
 • MAGNN avoids complex recursive operations and computational
 MAGNN 28.7 2.4

 bottlenecks often encountered in models like TCGNN and DE-GNN.

 While models such as E-GraphSAGE and TCGNN perform well in Fig. 10 provides a conceptual and performance comparison of
terms of training eﬃciency, their inference times remain higher com- the three paradigms across four widely used datasets: CTU-13, ISpared to MAGNN. For instance, on the CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 dataset, CXVPN2016, CICIDS-2017, and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020. The results
MAGNN achieves an inference time of 2.4s per epoch, whereas E- clearly show that our host-centric paradigm consistently outperforms
GraphSAGE and TCGNN take 4.5s and 4.2s, respectively. the other two across all datasets and evaluation metrics. For instance,
 These results highlight the ability of MAGNN to achieve a balance on CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020, the host-centric approach achieves an acbetween computational eﬃciency and detection accuracy. The reduced curacy of 98.91%, compared to 94.61% for the ﬂow-centric model and
training and inference times make MAGNN highly suitable for real-time 90.70% for the feature-centric model. Similar trends are observed across
malicious traﬃc detection, where fast and eﬃcient processing is critical. the remaining datasets, with an average improvement of 4-8% in each
Additionally, the scalability of MAGNN across multiple datasets further metric.
validates its robustness and practical applicability for large-scale cyber- These ﬁndings validate our design choice to represent devices as
security systems. nodes and model the communication ﬂow between them. This structure preserves both topological and temporal context, enabling more
5.5. Comparison of graph construction paradigms robust multi-scale behavioral pattern learning. In contrast, while the
 ﬂow-centric approach captures localized ﬂow relationships, it lacks
 To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of the graph construction strategy, we broader structural awareness. The feature-centric paradigm, although
compare three diﬀerent paradigms for representing network traﬃc as lightweight, struggles to encode sequential dependencies or hierarchigraphs, each integrated into the MAGNN framework: (a) a host-centric cal semantics, especially in encrypted or high-volume traﬃc scenarios.
graph, where nodes represent IPs or devices and edges represent communication ﬂows; (b) a ﬂow-centric graph, where nodes correspond to 5.6. Distributed training evaluation
individual traﬃc ﬂows and edges capture topological or temporal relationships (e.g., shared hosts or adjacent timestamps); and (c) a feature- To further validate the scalability and computational eﬃciency of
level graph, where nodes represent ﬂow features and edges reﬂect sta- the proposed MAGNN framework, we conducted a comprehensive evaltistical correlations among them. uation of its training behavior under both non-distributed (single GPU)

 12
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

Fig. 10. Comparative performance of diﬀerent graph construction paradigms on four network traﬃc datasets: (a) IPs or devices as nodes with communication ﬂows
as edges, (b) Traﬃc ﬂows as nodes with topological relationships as edges, and (c) Flow features as nodes with feature correlation-based edges.

and distributed (multi-GPU) conﬁgurations. The distributed implemen- Table 6
tation employs PyTorch’s Distributed Data Parallel (DDP) module across Ablation study of the proposed MAGNN model.
multiple NVIDIA GPUs, enabling parallel gradient computations and Ablation Component Acc. F1-Score MSE RMSE MAE MAPE
synchronized parameter updates. We selected PyTorch DDP due to its
 Full Model (MAGNN) 98.45 97.58 0.06 0.20 0.31 1.08
communication eﬃciency and widespread adoption in research and pro- Without Multi-Head Contrast 97.30 96.85 0.09 0.25 0.42 1.15
duction environments, establishing a reliable baseline for scalable train- Without Edge-Level Contrast 97.10 96.45 0.10 0.26 0.48 1.22
ing evaluation. Without Temporal-Node Contrast 96.80 96.00 0.12 0.28 0.50 1.25
 Figs. 11(a)-11(d) present the normalized distribution of network traf- Without Graph Augmentation 96.50 95.75 0.13 0.30 0.54 1.28
 Without Integrated Loss 96.90 96.20 0.11 0.27 0.49 1.20
ﬁc data (nodes and edges) across 1, 2, 3, and 4 GPUs for the CTU-13,
ISCXVPN2016, CICIDS-2017, and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 datasets, respectively. The results show that the graph partitioning achieves a stable and eﬃcient distribution of traﬃc data even as the number of GPUs (97.58%) across all metrics. Additionally, the full model recorded the
increases. For instance, on the CTU-13 dataset (Fig. 11(a)), the node lowest error values for MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE, highlighting its
and edge traﬃc distribution remained between approximately 88% and superior predictive capability and robustness.
110% as the number of GPUs increased from 1 to 4, indicating consis- When the multi-head hierarchical contrast module was removed,
tent workload sharing. Similar trends are observed for the ISCXVPN2016 the performance dropped signiﬁcantly, with a reduction in accuracy
(Fig. 11(b)), CICIDS-2017 (Fig. 11(c)), and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 (97.30%) and F1-score (96.85%), indicating that this component is
(Fig. 11(d)) datasets, demonstrating that MAGNN maintains stable and crucial for capturing multi-scale hierarchical dependencies within the
eﬃcient distribution of network traﬃc data across GPUs. graph. Similarly, disabling the edge-level contrast resulted in further
 Figs. 12(a)-12(d) report the normalized training time and speedup degradation of performance, particularly in error metrics, with MSE and
percentages achieved with distributed conﬁgurations. For all datasets, RMSE increasing to 0.10 and 0.26, respectively. This underscores the imthe training time at 1 GPU is normalized to 100%, and the relative train- portance of edge embeddings in capturing packet-level relationships for
ing times for 2, 3, and 4 GPUs show signiﬁcant reductions. For instance, malicious traﬃc detection.
on the CTU-13 dataset (Fig. 12(a)), the training time decreases by ap- The temporal-node contrast, designed to model temporal dependenproximately 39.52% when using two GPUs, and by up to 59.83% with cies in network traﬃc, also proved essential. Its removal led to further
four GPUs. Similar improvements are observed on the ISCXVPN2016 performance reductions, with an F1-score dropping to 96.00%, empha-
(Fig. 12(b)), CICIDS-2017 (Fig. 12(c)), and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020 sizing the role of temporal information in identifying evolving threats
(Fig. 12(d)) datasets, with speedup rates consistently exceeding 50% and malicious behaviors. The absence of the graph augmentation modwhen utilizing three or more GPUs. ule, which incorporates edge modiﬁcations and random walk sampling,
 Importantly, distributed training did not compromise detection per- resulted in the most signiﬁcant degradation in error metrics, with MAE
formance. The convergence rates and classiﬁcation metrics remained and MAPE increasing to 0.54 and 1.28, respectively. This highlights the
comparable between single-GPU and multi-GPU settings, ensuring that importance of augmentation strategies in improving model generalizathe parallelization process preserved model eﬀectiveness. The workload tion and robustness to diverse network scenarios.
variations observed during graph partitioning did not adversely impact Finally, replacing the integrated loss function with individual loss obmodel convergence or stability. jectives revealed the importance of the multi-scale optimization frame-
 These results demonstrate that MAGNN not only achieves high detec- work. The performance of the model decreased across all metrics, with
tion accuracy but also scales eﬃciently with additional computational accuracy dropping to 96.90% and F1-score to 96.20%. This demonresources. This capability makes MAGNN a practical and robust solu- strates that the integrated loss function enables the framework to eﬀection for large-scale, real-time network traﬃc detection scenarios, where tively combine hierarchical, temporal, and edge-level information for
rapid model updates and the ability to handle massive graph structures optimal performance.
are essential. Finally, the ablation study validates the design choices in the
 MAGNN framework, with each component contributing signiﬁcantly to
5.7. Ablation study the overall performance. The results highlight the eﬀectiveness of combining multi-scale adaptive graph learning, contrastive mechanisms,
 The eﬀectiveness of the proposed MAGNN framework was ana- and augmentation strategies for malicious network traﬃc detection.
lyzed by conducting an ablation study, systematically disabling speciﬁc
modules to assess their contributions to overall performance. Table 6 5.8. Adaptability to evolving threats
presents the results, demonstrating the critical role of each component
in achieving optimal results for malicious network traﬃc detection. MAGNN is inherently designed to enhance generalization through
 The complete MAGNN Model consistently outperformed its ab- contrastive learning with graph augmentation and hierarchical reprelated variants, achieving the highest accuracy (98.45%) and F1-score sentations, which can help improve resilience to zero-day attacks and

 13
M. Ahmed, J. Chen, E. Akpaku et al. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 211 (2026) 105240

 Fig. 11. MAGNN achieves stable and eﬃcient workload distribution across multiple GPUs, with node and edge partitioning.

 Fig. 12. MAGNN achieves substantial training eﬃciency gains as the number of GPUs increases, demonstrating its scalability under distributed training setups.

unforeseen anomalies. Speciﬁcally, the multi-scale contrastive frame- work. First, incorporating advanced graph augmentation techniques and
work enables the model to learn robust structural and semantic patterns dynamic graph representations could further enhance adaptability to
rather than relying solely on known attack signatures. This capability rapidly changing network conditions. Integrating additional contextual
supports the detection of zero-day threats that exhibit novel behaviors. features-such as application-layer protocols or user behavior metrics-
 While MAGNN does not explicitly model long-term temporal depen- may improve the detection of previously unseen attack patterns.
dencies associated with Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs), its hier- Expanding evaluations to include larger, more diverse datasets and
archical and edge-level encoding can capture ﬁne-grained interactions real-time network traﬃc would further validate the framework’s practhat may indicate dormant or stealthy patterns. Additionally, the use of tical applicability. Exploring hybrid models that combine graph-based
stochastic graph augmentations (e.g., edge modiﬁcations and subgraph learning with other paradigms, such as transformers or reinforcement
sampling) promotes adaptability to dynamic changes in traﬃc feature learning, also holds potential. Lastly, addressing explainability in graph
distributions. neural networks remains critical; developing interpretable mechanisms
 Nonetheless, we acknowledge that further improvements could be within MAGNN will be key to fostering trust and adoption in operational
achieved by integrating online learning mechanisms or memory-based cybersecurity environments. These future directions aim to further rearchitectures to track evolving behaviors over time. Future work may ﬁne MAGNN’s capabilities, ensuring its continued eﬀectiveness in the
explore continual contrastive learning or temporal memory networks to face of evolving network threats.
enhance MAGNN’s responsiveness to concept drift and long-term attack
evolution.

6. Conclusion

 The proposed MAGNN framework presents signiﬁcant advancements
in malicious network traﬃc detection by leveraging multi-scale adaptive
graph learning and contrastive mechanisms. By integrating temporalnode, edge-level, and hierarchical contrastive learning, MAGNN eﬀectively captures both local and global dependencies within network traf-
ﬁc data, ensuring robustness and scalability across diverse environments. Experimental evaluations on four benchmark datasets-CTU-13,
ISCXVPN2016, CICIDS-2017, and CIRA-CIC-DoHBrw-2020-demonstrate
the consistent superiority of MAGNN over state-of-the-art baseline models, including Anomal-E, NEGAT, E-Graph SAGE, TCGNN, and DE-GNN.
MAGNN achieved higher accuracy and F1-scores while maintaining
lower error rates across all datasets, conﬁrming its ability to handle
complex and evolving traﬃc patterns. The use of a novel graph augmentation strategy and a self-supervised learning paradigm further reduced
dependency on labeled data, enhancing its applicability to real-world
cybersecurity challenges.
 The results highlight MAGNN’s robustness, faster convergence, and
computational eﬃciency compared to existing approaches. Its strong
generalization capability across heterogeneous network environments
and its eﬀectiveness in detecting emerging threats position it as a
practical and scalable solution for large-scale cybersecurity systems.
Looking ahead, several promising directions exist for extending this