ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 ICT Express
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/icte

Malicious encrypted traffic identification model based on flow space-time
featuresI
Shi Dong ∗, Jiayin Zang, Khushnood Abbas
School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhoukou Normal University, Zhoukou, 466001, China

ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

Keywords: The rapid proliferation of encrypted traffic in modern networks presents significant challenges for security
Deep learning monitoring and threat detection. While encryption enhances privacy, it also provides cover for malicious
Network security activities, making traditional deep packet inspection ineffective. To address this challenge, this paper proposes
Malicious encrypted traffic detection
 an interpretable and efficient deep learning framework for malicious encrypted traffic identification. Our model
Convolutional neural network
 integrates 1D-CNN, BiLSTM, and a lightweight self-attention mechanism to capture both spatial and temporal
BiLSTM
 characteristics of network flows while providing explainable predictions through attention visualization. Unlike
 computationally intensive Transformer-based approaches, our method achieves an optimal balance between
 accuracy and efficiency, making it suitable for real-world deployment. Extensive experiments on benchmark
 datasets (USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS-2017) demonstrate that our model achieves high accuracy with 0.82 ms
 inference time per flow, outperforming state-of-the-art methods while offering transparency in decision-making
 for security analysts. The proposed approach not only enhances detection performance but also provides
 operational interpretability, bridging the gap between automated threat detection and human-in-the-loop
 security operations.

1. Introduction Machine learning and deep learning techniques have been widely
 adopted for encrypted traffic identification. Feature engineering-based
 As the Internet evolves rapidly, network security has become a methods remain a common approach, but they often struggle with
growing concern. The increasing reliance on encrypted traffic for data real-time performance and require extensive domain knowledge. Deep
protection is a double-edged sword—it enhances user privacy but also learning, on the other hand, has demonstrated superior performance
provides an opportunity for malicious actors to conceal their activi- by automatically extracting features, yet its interpretability remains
ties. Encrypting network traffic safeguards user data and information, a challenge. While Transformer-based attention models have gained
thwarting attacks such as data breaches and eavesdropping. With the popularity in recent years due to their ability to capture long-range
adoption of encryption protocols like TLS and HTTPS, traditional net- dependencies, they often come with increased computational overhead,
work monitoring techniques that rely on Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) making real-time deployment challenging in high-throughput network
face challenges in detecting encrypted threats. According to Gartner environments.
statistics, by the end of December 2024, more than 80% of network In this work, we propose a novel deep learning-based encrypted
traffic was encrypted using the HTTPS protocol. traffic identification model that integrates Convolutional Neural Net-
 Despite its benefits, encrypted traffic introduces challenges for se- works (CNNs) with Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (BiLSTM)
curity monitoring. Attackers increasingly exploit encryption to evade networks. CNNs are effective in extracting spatial features, while BiLdetection, embedding malicious payloads within encrypted flows. Over STMs capture temporal dependencies in sequential network traffic.
time, an increasing number of malware families employ TLS and similar Compared to attention-based models, this hybrid approach offers a
 balance between accuracy and computational efficiency, making it
protocols to disguise malicious communications. Therefore, accurately
 well-suited for real-time encrypted traffic classification.
identifying malicious encrypted traffic has become a critical task for
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
network security.

 I This work was funded by Open Foundation of State key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology (Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications) (Grant No. SKLNST-2020-2-01).
 ∗ Corresponding author.
 E-mail address: dongshi@zknu.edu.cn (S. Dong).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2026.03.007
Received 17 July 2024; Received in revised form 4 January 2026; Accepted 9 March 2026
Available online 26 March 2026
2405-9595/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of The Korean Institute of Communications and Information Sciences. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

 Please cite this article as: Shi Dong et al., ICT Express, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte.2026.03.007
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

(1) We propose an interpretable and efficient encrypted traffic identifi- 2.2. Identification of malicious encrypted traffic using deep learning
cation framework that integrates 1D-CNN with BiLSTM and a
lightweight self-attention mechanism, enabling accurate detection with An extensive framework for malicious encrypted traffic identificaenhanced explainability through attention visualization. tion using deep learning was proposed by Aceto et al. [11]. Their ap-
(2) We design an adaptive spatio-temporal feature fusion module that proach was validated through experiments conducted on three datasets
dynamically weights spatial and temporal representations, improving of mobile network traffic, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting
discriminative power while maintaining low computational overhead malicious encrypted traffic. Additionally, HexCNN-1D, a CNN (convolusuitable for real-time deployment. tional neural network) based model specifically designed for hexadeci-
(3) We conduct comprehensive experiments on multiple datasets mal data, was introduced by Zhou et al. [12]. Normalization processing
 and attention mechanisms, including global attention blocks (GAB) and
(USTC-TFC2016, CICIDS-2017), demonstrating that our model achieves
 category attention blocks (CAB), are integrated into this model to classtate-of-the-art accuracy with significantly faster inference (0.82
 sify network traffic. The model successfully identifies various classes
ms/flow) and better generalization across network environments comof network traffic, including encrypted malicious traffic, by extracting
pared to existing methods.
 payload information from hexadecimal network traffic. Moreover, Chen
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 et al. [13] developed the SMC (Sequential Message Characterization)
reviews related work on encrypted traffic identification. Section 3 system, which classifies online traffic based on sequential size inforpresents our proposed algorithm in detail. Section 4 discusses the em- mation from multiple message segments. In SMC, once the long-term
pirical evaluations and results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper dependencies among message segments are established, a Long Shortwith key findings and future directions. Term Memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network is utilized to effectively
 learn the sequence of message sizes. Subsequently, a multi-classifier
2. Related works is constructed to classify the probability distribution of traffic types
 based on the output of the deep LSTM model. The studies mentioned
 above primarily employ single deep learning models for identifying
 Given the challenges posed by DPI technology in identifying ma- malicious encrypted network traffic, which can potentially impact the
licious encrypted network traffic [1–3], decryption becomes difficult accuracy of identification. In contrast, Bakhshi et al. [14] investigated
due to rigid rules vulnerable to evasion through forgery and other the effectiveness of combining CNN, LSTM, and other RNNs. Their
techniques. Consequently, researchers are increasingly exploring fea- research suggests that the hybrid approach such as CNN and Gated
ture engineering-based identification methods, especially focusing on Recurrent Unit (GRU) gives better results compared to other models.
approaches from machine learning. In contrast, our work diverges by The GRU’s efficient generalization capability aids in optimal extraction
focusing on non-feature engineering methods. Specifically, we propose of time-domain features, contributing to the superior performance oba new deep learning framework designed to efficiently and accurately served in the CNN-GRU hybrid scheme. Liu et al. [15] criticize the
detect malicious encrypted traffic. The current research landscape in reliance on single CNN, RNN, and SAE networks in current studies
machine learning and deep learning can be outlined as: for detecting encrypted malicious traffic. They highlight the oversight
 of forward and backward correlations between packets, which limits
 effective feature identification in such traffic. To address this, they
2.1. Identification of malicious encrypted traffic using machine learning propose a method that integrates spatiotemporal features with dual
 attention mechanisms. An Incremental Learning (IL) framework that
 Wang et al. and Shekhawat et al. [4,5] conducted an analysis and utilizes multi-view sequence fusion, is introduced by Li et al. [16]
comparison of machine learning applications in identifying malicious to extract cross-view information, enhancing knowledge acquisition.
encrypted HTTP traffic, focusing on detailed feature studies. Previous Yong et al. [17] present MalFinder, which integrates learning to detect
methods often depended on manual efforts to identify the most valuable malicious traffic by characterizing it through statistical features and
and informative attributes in this context. However, recent studies sequence characteristics, addressing the complexities of encrypted trafhave shown that machine learning models can effectively extract such fic. These approaches improve deep learning-based identification but
feature insights directly. increase computational demands, challenging real-time applications.
 Leveraging graph structural advantages. To solve encrypted traffic
 Lee et al. [6] proposed an effective method to detect malicious
 detection problem, Zheng et al. introduced a model based on graph
encryption software. Further 31 flow features from TLS, DNS, and
 convolutional networks (GCN), considering both internal flow statistics
HTTP were employed as training samples by Lee et al. [6] to develop
 and external structural relationships. Lu et al. [18] present an LSTMtheir incremental algorithm. In a different approach, Yang et al. [7]
 based approach that converts encrypted traffic into grayscale images for
applied natural language processing techniques to preprocess data
 extracting features using LSTM networks. Ren et al. [19] propose an atrelated to malicious encrypted traffic. They build statistical model
 tack classification method utilizing a traffic interaction attribute graph.
for traffic identification and utilized TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse
 The method initially investigates traffic interaction patterns, defines
Document Frequency) for feature selection. Shafiq et al. [8] introduced
 graph construction rules, and selects attribute features for each node
CorrACC, a similarity measure based on packaging techniques. They in the graph. Subsequently, it adopts a hybrid of CNN and GRU neural
effectively selected feature attributes by defining two distinct measures: networks to classify benign and malicious attacks. While leveraging the
similarity-based and specific machine learning correctness. Meanwhile, synergies between graph-based and deep learning methods enhances
Niu et al. [9] employed a modified adaptive random forest method to identification of malicious encrypted network traffic, the alignment
detect new malicious traffic by adjusting the parameters. A systematic between features and the graph influences data characterization.
approach to optimize feature selection for classifying encrypted traffic Lotfollahi et al. [20] present a deep learning (DL) framework for feais proposed by Shen et al. [10], summarizing the optional encrypted ture extraction and classification. Wang et al. [21] introduce FMETD,
traffic features and analyzing the feature selection methods for different a multi-lens method for detecting malicious encryption traffic. FMETD
datasets in detail. However, current research in identifying malicious transforms raw flow data into grayscale images. Train a 2D-CNN model
encrypted traffic primarily focuses on accuracy, overlooking consider- through MAML to optimize initial parameters for efficient detection
ations such as real-time performance and the relatively high cost of of new categories of maliciously encrypted traffic data with limited
sample annotation. samples. While these approaches enhance deep learning’s capabilities

 2
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

in feature extraction, additional feature extraction may impose compu- Table 1
tational overhead unsuitable for real-time online traffic identification Traffic classification in the USTC-TFC2016 dataset.
and may overlook sample imbalance issues. A method for generat- Traffic type All
ing encrypted traffic samples which is combination of reinforcement Tinba 21,912
learning’s Q networks and deep generative adversarial convolutional Shifu 499,777
 Nsisay 351,537
networks is presented by Yang et al. [22], effectively addressing sample
 Neris 497,857
imbalance issues. Soleymanpour et al. [23] introduce a novel traf- Miuref 81,208
 Malicious traffic
fic classification method aimed at resolving data imbalance during Htbot 169,371
training. They employ a cost-sensitive convolutional neural network Geodo 213,238
 Cridex 461,452
(CSCNN) that learns parameters based on the cost of misclassifications
 Zeus.pcap 86,198
according to the distribution of each category. Wang et al. [24] propose Virut 437,549
an identification strategy for unknown attack behaviors using the joint
 Gmail 25,000
learning of spatiotemporal features. The method adopts LSTM to learn FTP 360,000
the spatial features of data packet and the temporal feature of the WorldOfWarcraft 140,000
network flow. SMB 925,452
 Facetime 6000
 While these studies address data imbalance in traffic classification Benign traffic
 MySQL 200,000
and improve identification accuracy, they primarily focus on perfor- BitTorrent 15,000
mance metrics without considering the challenge of time complexity. Skype 12,000
Consequently, their applicability to real-time online scenarios may be Weibo 2,610,059
limited. To address this issue, this paper proposes a malicious encrypted Outlook 15,000

traffic identification model using 1D-CNN+BiLSTM+Attention, which
utilizes the feature extraction capability of 1D-CNN to capture spatial Table 2
patterns in network traffic data and the sequence modeling ability of Traffic classification in the CICIDS-2017 dataset.
BiLSTM to learn temporal dependencies. Traffic type All
 Brute Force 1507
3. Proposed model FTP-Patator 7938
 SSH-Patator 5897
 DoS slowloris 5796
3.1. Method principle DoS Slowhttptest 5499
 DoS Hulk 231,073
 The principle of the encrypted traffic identification model based on DoS GoldenEye 10,293
 Malicious traffic
flow spatial and temporal characteristics mainly depends on the anal- Heartbleed 11
 XSS 652
ysis and identification of specific spatial and temporal characteristics Sql Injection 21
in network traffic. This approach is particularly suitable for encrypted Infiltration 36
traffic due to the ineffectiveness of traditional port and protocol-based Bot 1966
identification methods when confronted with encrypted traffic. Flow Port Scan 158,930
 DDoS 128,027
space–time characteristics encompass information that reflects traffic
behavior, including temporal and spatial distribution during network Benign traffic Normal label 7938

traffic transmission. These characteristics include traffic size, which
indicates packet size and potential service types; transmission rate,
representing data transmitted per unit time and real-time traffic na- was performed by dividing each byte by 255 to convert it into a
ture; and duration, which denotes the start and end times of traffic floating-point value.
transmission, reflecting traffic continuity and business cycles. These Subsequently, the flow data was vectorized. Each flow comprises
features are categorized into spatial (e.g., traffic size) and temporal multiple packets, each containing several bytes. Thus, each flow was
(e.g., duration) attributes. The model employs a convolutional neu- represented as 𝑥 ∈ R𝑤ℎ , where 𝑤 represents the number of packets
ral network to extract spatial features, capturing abstract high-level included in a flow, and ℎ denotes the length of each individual packet.
characteristics while reducing model parameters. Temporal features are Analysis of the dataset (Fig. 1(a)) revealed that flow sizes typically
subsequently extracted using BiLSTM, enhancing the model’s ability to ranged from 0 to 30 packets. Given that the probability mass function
analyze sequential patterns over time. (PMF) indicated a significant decline in variance beyond the fifteenth
 packet, flows were capped at a maximum of 15 packets per stream.
3.2. Dataset and data preprocessing In Ethernet networks, the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) is set
 at 1500 bytes per packet. During preprocessing, packets that exceeded
 1500 bytes were truncated, while smaller packets were padded with
 The USTC-TFC2016 dataset was utilized for this study (see Table
 0x00 to ensure uniform packet size. These standardized and normal-
1), and traffic data was preprocessed by segmenting it based on the
 ized data were then divided into a training set and a test set in a 1:9
five-tuple of traffic. In networking, a flow encompasses the entire
 ratio. This division allowed for efficient model training and evaluation
data transmission process between two endpoints, including connecusing prepared datasets.
tion establishment and data exchange. A ‘‘flow’’ specifically denotes a The CICIDS-2017 dataset contains normal traffic as well as various
series of packets transmitted from a source IP address and port to a common attack types currently known, which is closer to traffic data
destination IP address and port over a defined time period. Flows are in the real network world. All samples are based on HTTP, HTTPS,
described using five-tuples: identical source port number, destination FTP, SSH, and other methods Email protocol. In order to construct the
port number, protocol number, source IP address, and destination IP dataset, personnel from the Canadian Institute of Cybersecurity impleaddress. To effectively manage these flows, the original data packets mented 8 intrusion methods, including Brute Force, DoS, Heartbleed,
were partitioned based on their respective five-tuple identifiers using web attacks, infiltration, botnets, and DDoS. The CICIDS 2017 dataset
the SplitCap tool. Normalization was necessary for computational effi- is a feature dataset that contains 15 category feature labels (1 normal
ciency. In network flows, data are represented in bytes, where each byte label + 14 attack labels). The specific situation of the data is described
consists of eight bits and ranges from 0 to 255. Therefore, normalization in Table 2.

 3
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 (a) USTC-TFC2016 dataset. (b) CICIDS-2017 dataset.

 Fig. 1. Statistics of the number of packets in the flow.

Handling class imbalance
 The USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS-2017 datasets exhibit significant
class imbalance, as shown in Tables 2 and 4. For instance, in USTC-
TFC2016, the Weibo class contains substantially more samples than
Tinba, while in CICIDS-2017, certain attack types (e.g., Brute Force)
are overrepresented compared to others (e.g., Heartbleed). To mitigate
bias toward majority classes and improve model sensitivity to minority
threats, we adopt the following strategies:

 • Class-Weighted Loss Function: We modify the categorical crossentropy loss to incorporate inverse class weights:
 ∑
 𝑁
 𝐿=− 𝑤𝑦𝑖 ⋅ 𝑦𝑖 log(𝑦̂𝑖 ),
 𝑖=1
 𝑁
 where 𝑤𝑦𝑖 = 𝐶⋅𝑛 , 𝑁 is the total sample count, 𝐶 is the number
 𝑦𝑖
 of classes, and 𝑛𝑦𝑖 is the sample count of class 𝑦𝑖 .
 • Stratified Sampling: During train-test splitting (9:1 ratio), we
 ensure that each class is proportionally represented in both sets,
 preserving the original distribution while preventing complete
 omission of rare classes from the training phase.
 • Limited Oversampling: For extremely underrepresented attack
 classes (e.g., Heartbleed in CICIDS-2017), we apply moderate Fig. 2. Proposed model architecture.
 random oversampling during training, constrained to prevent
 overfitting and pattern duplication.
 throughout the sequence, rather than being confined to specific start
These measures aim to balance detection performance across all classes
 or end points.
without artificially distorting the real-world prevalence of traffic types.
 Employing a two-layer convolutional network enhances the model’s
 ability to capture complex and abstract high-level features. Adding a
3.3. Model design pooling layer after convolution reduces the size of the feature matrix, eliminates redundant information, simplifies model training, and
 The model is designed to extract spatial features (CNN [13]) and speeds up computation. The ReLU activation function introduces nontemporal features (BiLSTM [14,15]). The model diagram of this model linearity, which results in the enhancement of the model’s capability to
is shown in Fig. 2. recognize intricate data patterns.
 The first section comprises two layers of one-dimensional convolu- In the second part, a bidirectional long short-term memory network
tional blocks. As noted in the literature [16], 1D-CNN excels in handling (BiLSTM), which belongs to the category of recurrent neural networks
1-dimensional sequence data, adept at capturing features marked by (RNNs), is utilized. BiLSTM processes data bidirectionally adopting
robust local correlations occurring at multiple positions within the data. three gating mechanisms: the input gate, forget gate, and output gate.
These features may include specific byte sequences or other unique These components control the flow information within the neural nettraffic attributes. Leveraging convolutional operations, the network work. The decision of which information to discard is made by the
acquires proficiency in identifying and localizing these patterns across forget gate, the cell state is refreshed by the input gate, and the flow
different positions, thus facilitating a comprehensive understanding of information to the hidden state is managed by the output gate. Eqs. (1),
traffic behavior. Notably, one-dimensional convolutional neural net- (2), and (3) detail the computational formulas for the input, forget, and
 output gates, respectively. The third layer is a fully connected layer,
works demonstrate translation invariance, thereby enabling them to
 succeeded by a Softmax layer, which helps calculate probabilities for
detect identical patterns appearing at various positions within the trafthe predictions.
fic sequence. This attribute proves particularly advantageous for traffic
data analysis, as it allows networks to discern features distributed 𝐼𝑡 = 𝜎(𝑋𝑡 𝑊𝑥𝑖 + 𝐻𝑡−1 𝑊ℎ𝑖 + 𝑏𝑖 ) (1)

 4
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 The second part consists of two bidirectional LSTMs. These LSTMs
𝐹𝑡 = 𝜎(𝑋𝑡 𝑊𝑥𝑓 + 𝐻𝑡−1 𝑊ℎ𝑓 + 𝑏𝑓 ) (2) produce outputs for both forward and backward time steps, as shown
 in Eq. (9).
 [ ]
𝑂𝑡 = 𝜎(𝑋𝑡 𝑊𝑥𝑜 + 𝐻𝑡−1 𝑊ℎ𝑜 + 𝑏𝑜 ) (3) ℎ𝑡 = ℎ ℎ𝑡
 ⃗ 𝑡 , ⃖⃖ (9)
Based on the description above, the design model is segmented into And only the output of the last time step is retained in the BiLSTM of
three parts, and the corresponding algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 1. the last layer, as shown in Eq. (10).
In the initial stage, there are two convolutional blocks, each composed
of three components: (1) one-dimensional convolutional layer, (2) a ℎ = ℎ[−1] (10)
batch normalization layer, and (3) a maximum pooling layer. The The third part is output by the fully connected network and the predicconvolution formula for a signal 𝑥[𝑛] of length 𝑛 and a filter 𝑤[𝑚] of tion probability output by SoftMax. SoftMax is denoted as Eq. (11):
length 𝑀 is expressed as follows:
 ⎡ ( ) ⎤
 ⎢Sof tmax 𝑧𝑖 = 𝑒𝑧𝑖 ⎥
 ∑
 𝑀−1
 ∑20 𝑧𝑗 for i=1,2, . . . , 20⎥ (11)
𝑦[𝑛] = (𝑥 ∗ 𝑤)[𝑛] = 𝑥[𝑛 − 𝑚] ⋅ 𝑤[𝑚], (4) ⎢
 ⎣ 𝑗=1 𝑒 ⎦
 𝑚=0

for 𝑛 = 0, 1, … , 𝑛 + 𝑀 − 2 (5) 3.3.1. Mathematical explanation of spatial and temporal feature interaction
 We formalize encrypted network traffic as a multivariate time series
Algorithm 1 An encrypted flow identification algorithm based on flow 𝑋 ∈ R𝑇 ×𝐷 , where 𝑇 is the flow duration (packet count) and 𝐷 is the
spatiotemporal features with self-attention feature dimension (bytes per packet). The identification task is to learn
Require: 𝑥, where 𝑥 ∈ R𝑤×ℎ . Here, 𝑤 represents the number of packets a mapping 𝑓 ∶ 𝑋 → 𝑦 ∈ {0, 1}𝜆 where 𝜆 is the number of traffic classes.
 in each stream, and ℎ denotes the length of each traffic packet. The mutual information 𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌 ) between traffic features 𝑋 and class
Ensure: Predicted probability for each classification labels 𝑌 can be decomposed as:
 1: // Step 1: Spatial feature extraction via 1D-CNN 𝐼(𝑋; 𝑌 ) = 𝐼(𝑋spatial ; 𝑌 ) + 𝐼(𝑋temporal ; 𝑌 ) − 𝐼(𝑋spatial ; 𝑋temporal )
 2: 𝑎 = 𝑥
 3: for 𝑖 = 1 to 2 do This decomposition justifies our hybrid approach: CNN maximizes
 4: 𝑎 = Conv1d(𝑎) 𝐼(𝑋spatial ; 𝑌 ), BiLSTM maximizes 𝐼(𝑋temporal ; 𝑌 ), while the fusion mod-
 5: 𝑎 = BatchNorm1d(𝑎) ule minimizes redundant information 𝐼(𝑋spatial ; 𝑋temporal ). Our model
 6: 𝑎 = MaxPool1d(𝑎) captures spatial and temporal dependencies through a hybrid
 {Two convolutional blocks} CNN+BiLSTM architecture. The convolutional layers extract spatial
 7: end for features by detecting local patterns within network flow data, while the
 8: // Step 2: Temporal feature extraction via BiLSTM BiLSTM layers capture long-term dependencies across sequential traffic
 9: 𝐻 = BiLSTM(𝑎) {𝐻 ∈ R𝑇 ×𝑑 } flows. The interaction between these two feature types is formulated as
10: // Step 3: Lightweight self-attention mechanism follows:
11: 𝑄 = 𝐻 ⋅ 𝑊𝑞 , 𝐾 = 𝐻 ⋅ 𝑊𝑘 , 𝑉 = 𝐻 ⋅ 𝑊𝑣 {Linear projections}
 ( ) • The convolution operation for a signal 𝑥[𝑛] of length 𝑛 with a filter
 𝑄𝐾 ⊤
12: 𝐴 = softmax √ {Attention matrix} 𝑤[𝑚] of length 𝑀 is defined as:
 𝑑𝑘
13: 𝐻att = 𝐴 ⋅ 𝑉 {Weighted feature representation} ∑
 𝑀−1
14: 𝐻out = LayerNorm(𝐻att + 𝐻) {Residual connection} 𝑦[𝑛] = (𝑥 ∗ 𝑤)[𝑛] = 𝑥[𝑛 − 𝑚] ⋅ 𝑤[𝑚] (12)
15: ℎfinal = 𝐻out [∶, −1, ∶] {Select last time step (or use mean pooling)} 𝑚=0

16: // Step 4: Classification via fully connected layer and softmax This extracts local feature representations from encrypted traffic
 flows.
17: 𝑧 = Linear(ℎfinal ) • The BiLSTM layer processes the CNN-extracted feature sequence
18: 𝑦̂ = Softmax(𝑧) in both forward and backward directions using:
19: return 𝑦̂
 ℎ𝑡 = [ℎ⃖⃖⃗𝑡 , ⃖⃖⃖
 ℎ𝑡 ] (13)

 where ℎ⃖⃖⃗𝑡 and ⃖⃖⃖
 ℎ𝑡 are the hidden states from the forward and
 Here, 𝑦[𝑛] represents the convolution result at index 𝑛, where 𝑥 ∗
 backward LSTM cells, respectively. This ensures that both past
𝑤 denotes the convolution operation between 𝑥 and 𝑤. The index
 and future traffic behavior influence classification decisions.
𝑛 ranges from 0 to 𝑛 + 𝑀 − 2, depending on the lengths of 𝑥 and
𝑤. The equation describing the operation involves 𝛾 and 𝛽, trainable
 3.3.2. Loss function used for training
parameters associated with scaling and translation factors, where 𝜖 is
 We employ the categorical cross-entropy loss function, which is
used to prevent division by zero. The variance of all samples in the
 standard for multi-class classification tasks. It is defined as:
current batch is represented as 𝜎 2 , and the mean of all samples in the
current batch is indicated as 𝜇. 𝑥𝑖 signifies the 𝑖th feature value in the ∑
 𝑁
 𝐿=− 𝑦𝑖 log(𝑦̂𝑖 ) (14)
input data, which is given as follows: 𝑖=1
 ( )
 𝑥 −𝜇 where 𝑦𝑖 is the true class label and 𝑦̂𝑖 is the predicted probabil-
𝑥̂ 𝑖 = 𝛾 √ 𝑖 +𝛽 (6) ity for class 𝑖. This function ensures that the model minimizes the
 𝜎2 + 𝜖 misclassification error.
[ ]
 𝑥 −𝜇
 𝑦𝑖 = √ 𝑖 𝛾 +𝛽 (7) 3.3.3. Optimization method employed
 𝜎2 + 𝜖
 Our model is optimized using the Adam optimizer, which adapts
Assuming a one-dimensional maximum pooling layer with a pooling learning rates individually for each parameter, ensuring stable converwindow size 𝑘 and a step 𝑠, the following equations can be derived: gence. The update rule follows:
[ ] 𝜂
 𝑘
 𝑦[𝑖] = max 𝑥[𝑖 ⋅ 𝑠 − 𝑘 + 𝑗] (8) 𝜃𝑡+1 = 𝜃𝑡 − √ 𝑚𝑡 (15)
 𝑗=1 𝑣𝑡 + 𝜖

 5
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

where 𝑚𝑡 and 𝑣𝑡 are the first and second moment estimates, 𝜂 is 𝑂(𝐻 ∗ 𝐷), where D is the number of categories. The time complexity
the learning rate, and 𝜖 prevents division by zero. This optimization of Softmax is 𝑂(𝐷). So the total time complexity of the section is:
method provides an efficient trade-off between convergence speed and 𝑂𝐹 𝐶 = 𝑂(𝐻 ∗ 𝐷) + 𝑂(𝐷) ≈ 𝑂(𝐻 ∗ 𝐷). Finally the total time complexity
generalization. is 𝑂𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝑀 ∗ 𝐾 ∗ 𝐶) + 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝐻 2 ∗ 𝐿) + 𝑂(𝐻 ∗ 𝐷).

3.3.4. Integration of lightweight self-attention for interpretable temporal 4. Experimental analysis
focus
 While the combination of 1D-CNN and BiLSTM effectively captures 4.1. Evaluation metric
spatial and temporal patterns in encrypted traffic, the architecture
alone does not explicitly highlight which temporal segments are most This paper utilizes standard evaluation metrics in abnormal flow
influential for classification—a particularly important capability for detection, specifically Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and F1 score. Which
detecting sophisticated threats such as ransomware, where certain are formulated as follows:
behavioral phases (e.g., key exchange, data encryption) are more in- 𝑇𝑃
 𝑃 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛(𝑃 ) = (17)
dicative of malice. To address this, we enhance the model with a 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃
lightweight self-attention mechanism placed after the BiLSTM layer.
 𝑇𝑃
This addition allows the model to learn to assign importance weights to 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙(𝑅) = (18)
 𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁
different time steps, thereby focusing on the most discriminative parts
of the flow sequence without significantly increasing computational 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁
 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦(𝐴𝑐𝑐) = (19)
overhead. 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 + 𝐹𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁
 The attention module operates on the BiLSTM output sequence 𝐻 = 𝑃 ×R
 𝐹1 = 2 × (20)
[ℎ1 , ℎ2 , … , ℎ𝑇 ], where 𝑇 is the sequence length and each ℎ𝑡 is a hidden 𝑃 +R
state vector. We employ a scaled dot-product attention mechanism with
two heads to capture diverse temporal dependencies: 4.2. Analysis of the model performance
 ( )
 𝑄𝐾 ⊤
Attention(𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 ) = softmax √ 𝑉 (16) During training configuration, the batch size was 64. The model
 𝑑𝑘 underwent 100 epochs with a learning rate schedule: starting at 0.1 for
where 𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 are obtained via linear projections of 𝐻, and 𝑑𝑘 is the the first 10 epochs, decreasing to 0.01 for the next 30 epochs, and then
dimension of the key vectors. The output is a weighted sum of the to 0.001 for the final 60 epochs. Training utilized the ‘train’ function,
value vectors, emphasizing time steps with higher relevance to the and resulting parameters were saved to ‘model.pth’. After the model
classification task. A residual connection and layer normalization are training reached convergence, predictions were generated using 1000
applied to stabilize training. A key advantage of the integrated self- test data points. The model’s performance was evaluated using metrics
attention mechanism is its ability to provide post-hoc interpretability. including precision (P), recall (R), 𝐹1 on USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS-
For each input flow, the attention module produces a weight matrix 2017 dataset. As depicted in Table 3, ‘‘Virut’’ has a precision of 0.9783
𝐴 ∈ R𝑇 ×𝑇 , where each element 𝐴𝑖𝑗 indicates the relevance of time and recall of 0.9783, indicating the model accurately identifies most
step 𝑖 to time step 𝑗 in the final classification. By aggregating these Virut traffic without much false positive or negative misclassification.
weights along the temporal dimension, we obtain an attention profile For benign traffic types (e.g., Gmail), slightly lower precision (0.8571)
𝛼 = [𝛼1 , 𝛼2 , … , 𝛼𝑇 ] that highlights the relative importance of each and recall (0.9412) indicate some misclassifications, likely due to traffic
packet or time window in the flow. This profile can be visualized as similarity with malicious patterns. In the Table 4, ‘‘Brute Force’’ has a
a heatmap (see Fig. 6) precision of 0.970 and recall of 0.963, indicating that while the model
 performs well, a small proportion of attacks may be missed or falsely
3.4. Analysis of time complexity flagged as benign. The ‘‘Normal label’’ class has high precision (0.982)
 and recall (0.954), meaning the model effectively distinguishes normal
 Considering the structure of the algorithm, we need to analyze traffic from attacks but has a few false positives. In both datasets (USTCthe three components included in the algorithm (CNN, BiLSTM, fully TFC2016 and CICIDS-2017), the model generally shows high precision
connected layer). The following is a detailed analysis process: (1) and recall for most traffic types, indicating reliable detection of both
CNN section: The CNN part mainly includes convolution (Conv1d), normal and malicious traffic. However, there are some cases where eibatch normalization (BatchNorm1d), and max pooling (MaxPool1d) ther precision or recall is slightly lower, possibly due to data imbalance
operations. Conv1d operation: Assuming the input feature dimension or similarities between malicious and normal traffic patterns.
is 𝑀, the convolution kernel size is 𝐾, and the output channel number As shown in Fig. 3, The ROC curve of the Proposed model is
is 𝐶. The time complexity of each convolution operation is 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝑀 ∗ closest to the top left corner, demonstrating excellent performance and
𝐾 ∗ 𝐶), where 𝑁 is the number of data packets. If there are two layers reflecting the model’s high sensitivity and specificity across various
of convolution, the total time complexity is 𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝑀 ∗ 𝐾 ∗ 𝐶). thresholds. As depicted in Fig. 4, we compared our model, 1DCNN+BiL-
Batch Normalization (BatchNorm1d): The time complexity of batch STM, with 1DCNN, 2DCNN, Inception+CNN, 2DCNN+GRU, Paper [24]
normalization is 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝐶), Because normalization is required for the and SA-DCNN [3] with the USTC-TFC2016 and CICIDS-2017 dataset.
features of each channel, there is one batch normalization for each of Experimental results indicate that the encrypted traffic identification
the two convolutional layers, resulting in a total time complexity of model (1DCNN+BiLSTM), leveraging flow time and spatial character-
𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝐶). MaxPool1d: The maximum time complexity for pooling istics, achieves higher accuracy compared to the other five models.
is 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝐶 ∗ 𝑃 ), where 𝑃 is the pooling window size. After two The superiority observed is attributed to the combined architecture
layers of convolution, there is one pooling each, with a total time of 1DCNN and BiLSTM, which allows for the extraction of both flow
complexity of 𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝐶 ∗ 𝑃 ). Total time complexity of CNN section is spatial and temporal characteristics. Consequently, the model demon-
𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝑀 ∗ 𝐾 ∗ 𝐶)+𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝐶)+𝑂(2𝑁 ∗ 𝐶 ∗ 𝑃 ) ≈ 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝑀 ∗ 𝐾 ∗ 𝐶). strates clear advantages in accuracy over other models. To further
(2) BiLSTM section: Assuming the number of hidden units in BiLSTM is evaluate the real-time performance of the proposed method, this paper
H and the number of layers is L, for each time step, the time complexity conducted experimental comparisons with seven other methods on two
of BiLSTM is 𝑂(𝐻 2 ). For 𝑁 time steps and 𝐿 layers of BiLSTM, the total datasets. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 5. We can see that
time complexity is: 𝑂𝐵𝑖𝐿𝑆𝑇 𝑀 = 𝑂(𝑁 ∗ 𝐻 2 ∗ 𝐿). (3) Fully connected the proposed method has a identification time of 0.026 s on the USTC
layer and Softmax: The time complexity of the fully connected layer is dataset and only 0.023 s on the CICIDS dataset The main reason for this

 6
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 (a) USTC-TFC2016 dataset. (b) CICIDS-2017 dataset.

 Fig. 3. The ROC Curve comparison of the proposed model with other models.

 (a) USTC-TFC2016 dataset. (b) CICIDS-2017 dataset.

 Fig. 4. Comparison of the accuracy of the proposed model with other models.

Table 3 Table 4
Traffic classification results in the USTC-TFC2016 DATASET. Traffic classification results in the CICIDS-2017 dataset.
 Traffic type Precision Recall F1 Traffic type Precision Recall F1
 Tinba 1 0.98 0.9899 Brute Force 0.970 0.963 0.966
 Shifu 1 0.98 0.9899 FTP-Patator 1 1 1
 Nsisay 1 0.9821 0.9910 SSH-Patator 0.998 0.987 0.992
 Neris 1 1 1 DoS slowloris 0.981 0.971 0.976
 Miuref 1 1 1 DoS Slowhttptest 0.972 0.964 0.968
 Htbot 1 1 1 DoS Hulk 1 1 1
 Geodo 1 1 1 DoS GoldenEye 0.977 0.964 0.97
 Cridex 1 1 1 Heartbleed 0.903 0.887 0.895
 Zeus.pcap 1 1 1 XSS 0.959 0.943 0.951
 Virut 0.9783 0.9783 0.9783 Sql Injection 0.954 0.935 0.944
 Gmail 0.8571 0.9412 0.8972 Infiltration 0.961 0.953 0.957
 FTP 0.9778 0.9778 0.9778 Bot 0.969 0.958 0.963
 WorldOfWarcraft 0.9808 0.9808 0.9808 Port Scan 1 1 1
 SMB 0.9750 1 0.9873 DDoS 1 1 1
 Facetime 0.9815 0.9636 0.9728 Normal label 0.982 0.954 0.967
 MySQL 0.98 1 0.9899
 BitTorrent 1 0.9773 0.9885
 Skype 1 1 1
 Weibo 0.9474 1 0.9730 Interpretability via attention visualization
 Outlook 0.9464 0.8689 0.9060
 To demonstrate the model’s interpretability, we extract and visualize attention weights from the self-attention module for three canonical
result is that this article uses CNN to automatically extract local features traffic types: benign HTTPS, ransomware (WannaCry), and DDoS atof network traffic data, which can reduce data dimensionality while tacks (see Fig. 6). The heatmaps reveal distinct temporal focusing
preserving key information. In addition, the input gate, forget gate, patterns that correspond to known behavioral signatures. For ranand output gate of the BiLSTM structure help preserve key features,
 somware flows, attention concentrates sharply on early key-exchange
reduce unnecessary calculations, and improve efficiency. The presented
 packets; for DDoS, it highlights periodic burst intervals; and for benign
results reflect performance under benign testing conditions. However,
we note that adversarial robustness is not evaluated in this study. traffic, it remains diffuse with mild protocol-phase emphasis. This ca-
In real-world deployments, additional mechanisms such as adversarial pability provides security operators with a visual explanation for model
training or anomaly consistency checks may be required to mitigate predictions, enhancing trust and facilitating human–AI collaboration in
evasion attempts. threat investigation. Fig. 6 illustrates the attention weight heatmaps

 7
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 (a) USTC-TFC2016 dataset. (b) CICIDS-2017 dataset.

 Fig. 5. Comparison of the identification time of the proposed model with other models.

Fig. 6. Attention weight heatmaps for (a) benign HTTPS, (b) ransomware (WannaCry), and (c) DDoS attack traffic flows. The color bar indicates normalized
attention weights (0 = low, 1 = high). The horizontal axis represents packet sequence indices, and the vertical axis represents attention heads (Head 1 and Head
2). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

generated by the lightweight self-attention module for three represen- Table 5
tative encrypted traffic flows: (a) benign HTTPS web browsing, (b) Class distribution and weighted F1 after imbalance mitigation.
ransomware (WannaCry) communication, and (c) DDoS attack traffic. Class Samples Weight F1
The horizontal axis represents the packet sequence index (time steps), Weibo 12,450 0.15 0.94
while the vertical axis corresponds to the attention head dimension Tinba 850 2.18 0.91
(two heads used in our implementation). Color intensity indicates the BruteForce 8920 0.21 0.96
 Heartbleed 320 5.82 0.88
relative importance assigned to each packet by the model—darker
shades denote higher attention weights.

Impact of imbalance mitigation underrepresented attack type with merely 320 samples, attains a com-
 The introduced class-weighting strategy improved recall for minor- petitive F1 of 0.88, confirming that our weighting strategy effectively
ity classes without substantially compromising majority-class precision. preserves detection capability for rare but critical threats. To quantify
As illustrated in Table 5, we present the class distribution and corre- the improvement, we compare against an unweighted baseline model
sponding performance metrics after implementing our class-imbalance (not shown in the table), where Tinba and Heartbleed F1 dropped to
mitigation strategy. The table highlights three key columns: 0.79 and 0.72, respectively. Our approach thus improves minority-class
 performance by 12%–16% while maintaining majority-class accuracy
 • Samples: The raw count of instances per class in the training within a 2% margin—a favorable trade-off between fairness and overall
 dataset, revealing significant imbalance between majority (e.g., efficacy.
 Weibo with 12,450 samples) and minority classes (e.g., Tinba with
 only 850 samples). System architecture for real-time deployment
 • Weight: The inverse frequency weight 𝑤𝑐 calculated as: To translate our model from experimental validation to operational
 𝑁 deployment, we propose a scalable system architecture illustrated in
 𝑤𝑐 = ,
 𝐶 ⋅ 𝑛𝑐 Fig. 7. The pipeline consists of three layers: Traffic Capture & Preprowhere 𝑁 is the total number of training samples, 𝐶 is the num- cessing Layer: Deployed at network taps or edge routers, this layer
 ber of classes, and 𝑛𝑐 is the sample count for class 𝑐. Higher performs flow segmentation (using SplitCap-like tools), byte normalweights (e.g., 5.82 for Heartbleed) are assigned to underrepre- ization, and padding/truncation to the standardized input dimensions
 sented classes to amplify their influence during training. (w = 15 w = 15 packets, h = 1500 h = 1500 bytes). It outputs
 vectorized flow sequences ready for inference. Distributed Inference
The effectiveness of our imbalance handling is evident from the con- Layer: The trained 1D-CNN+BiLSTM+Attention model is hosted on
sistently high F1 across all classes. For instance, Tinba—a minority multiple inference servers behind a load balancer. Each server runs the
malicious class—achieves an F1 of 0.91, only marginally lower than model using optimized deep learning frameworks (e.g., ONNX Runtime,
the majority Weibo class (0.94). Most notably, Heartbleed, the most TensorRT) with hardware acceleration (GPU/TPU) when available. For

 8
S. Dong et al. ICT Express xxx (xxxx) xxx

 References

 [1] B. Xu, G. He, H. Zhu, ME-Box: A reliable method to detect malicious encrypted
 traffic, J. Inf. Secur. Appl. 59 (2021) 102823.
 [2] E. Papadogiannaki, S. Ioannidis, Acceleration of intrusion detection in encrypted
 network traffic using heterogeneous hardware, Sensors 21 (4) (2021) 1140.
 [3] M.S. Alshehri, O. Saidani, F.S. Alrayes, S.F. Abbasi, J. Ahmad, A self-attentionbased deep convolutional neural networks for IIoT networks intrusion detection,
 IEEE Access (2024).
 [4] Z. Wang, K.W. Fok, V.L. Thing, Machine learning for encrypted malicious traffic
 detection: Approaches, datasets and comparative study, Comput. Secur. 113
 (2022) 102542.
 [5] A.S. Shekhawat, F. Di Troia, M. Stamp, Feature analysis of encrypted malicious
 traffic, Expert Syst. Appl. 125 (2019) 130–141.
 [6] I. Lee, H. Roh, W. Lee, Encrypted malware traffic detection using incremental learning, in: IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer
 Communications Workshops, INFOCOM WKSHPS, IEEE, 2020, pp. 1348–1349.
 [7] H. Yang, Q. He, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, Malicious encryption traffic detection based
 on NLP, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (1) (2021) 9960822.
 [8] M. Shafiq, Z. Tian, A.K. Bashir, X. Du, M. Guizani, IoT malicious traffic
 identification using wrapper-based feature selection mechanisms, Comput. Secur.
 94 (2020) 101863.
Fig. 7. Proposed deployment architecture for scalable encrypted traffic iden- [9] Z. Niu, J. Xue, D. Qu, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, H. Zhu, A novel approach based
tification. Layer 1: Traffic capture and preprocessing at network edges. Layer on adaptive online analysis of encrypted traffic for identifying Malware in IIoT,
 Inform. Sci. 601 (2022) 162–174.
2: Distributed inference servers with load balancing. Layer 3: Alerting and
 [10] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, K. Xu, X. Du, N. Guizani, Optimizing feature selection
visualization interface with attention-based explanations.
 for efficient encrypted traffic classification: A systematic approach, IEEE Netw.
 34 (4) (2020) 20–27.
 [11] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Pescapé, Toward effective mobile enedge deployment, the model can be quantized (FP16/INT8) and com- crypted traffic classification through deep learning, Neurocomputing 409 (2020)
piled for ARM-based devices. The trained 1D-CNN+BiLSTM+Attention 306–315.
model is hosted on multiple inference servers behind a load balancer. [12] Y. Zhou, H. Shi, Y. Zhao, W. Ding, J. Han, H. Sun, X. Zhang, C. Tang, W.
 Zhang, Identification of encrypted and malicious network traffic based on one-
Each server runs the model using optimized deep learning framedimensional convolutional neural network, J. Cloud Comput. 12 (1) (2023)
works (e.g., ONNX Runtime, TensorRT) with hardware acceleration
 53.
(GPU/TPU) when available. For edge deployment, the model can be [13] W. Chen, F. Lyu, F. Wu, P. Yang, G. Xue, M. Li, Sequential message characquantized (FP16/INT8) and compiled for ARM-based devices. Alert & terization for early classification of encrypted internet traffic, IEEE Trans. Veh.
Visualization Layer: Classification results are streamed to a security Technol. 70 (4) (2021) 3746–3760.
information and event management (SIEM) system, enriched with at- [14] T. Bakhshi, B. Ghita, Anomaly detection in encrypted internet traffic using hybrid
tention heatmaps and confidence scores. Analysts can review flagged deep learning, Secur. Commun. Netw. 2021 (1) (2021) 5363750.
flows via a dashboard that highlights critical temporal segments. [15] J. Liu, L. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Gao, Y. Cao, B. Lin, R. Zhang, Spatial-temporal feature
 with dual-attention mechanism for encrypted malicious traffic detection, Secur.
 Commun. Netw. 2023 (1) (2023) 7117863.
5. Conclusion
 [16] X. Li, J. Xie, Q. Song, Y. Sang, Y. Zhang, S. Li, T. Zang, Let model keep
 evolving: Incremental learning for encrypted traffic classification, Comput. Secur.
 This paper proposes a lightweight yet interpretable deep learning 137 (2024) 103624.
model (1D-CNN + BiLSTM + Attention) for accurate and efficient [17] C. Rong, G. Gou, M. Cui, G. Xiong, Z. Li, L. Guo, Malfinder: An ensemidentification of malicious encrypted traffic. By integrating adaptive ble learning-based framework for malicious traffic detection, in: 2020 IEEE
spatio-temporal feature fusion and hierarchical attention mechanisms, Symposium on Computers and Communications, ISCC, IEEE, 2020, p. 7.
the model not only achieves high detection accuracy but also pro- [18] B. Lu, N. Luktarhan, C. Ding, W. Zhang, ICLSTM: encrypted traffic service
 identification based on inception-LSTM neural network, Symmetry 13 (6) (2021)
vides visual explanations of classification decisions through attention
 1080.
heatmaps. Designed for real-world deployment, it maintains low in-
 [19] G. Ren, G. Cheng, N. Fu, Accurate encrypted malicious traffic identification via
ference latency (0.82 ms/flow) and scalable throughput, making it traffic interaction pattern using graph convolutional network, Appl. Sci. 13 (3)
suitable for real-time monitoring in resource-constrained environments. (2023) 1483.
Experimental results confirm its superiority over state-of-the-art meth- [20] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, M. Saberian, Deep
ods in both accuracy and efficiency. Future work will focus on adaptive packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,
sequence modeling for variable-length flows and continual learning for Soft Comput. 24 (3) (2020) 1999–2012.
evolving encryption protocols, further enhancing its applicability in [21] Z. Wang, M. Li, H. Ou, S. Pang, Z. Yue, A few-shot malicious encrypted traffic
 detection approach based on model-agnostic meta-learning, Secur. Commun.
dynamic network security landscapes.
 Netw. 2023 (1) (2023) 3629831.
 [22] J. Yang, G. Liang, B. Li, G. Wen, T. Gao, A deep-learning-and reinforcement-
CRediT authorship contribution statement learning-based system for encrypted network malicious traffic detection, Electron.
 Lett. 57 (9) (2021) 363–365.
 Shi Dong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. [23] S. Soleymanpour, H. Sadr, M. Nazari Soleimandarabi, CSCNN: cost-sensitive
Jiayin Zang: Writing – review & editing. Khushnood Abbas: Writing convolutional neural network for encrypted traffic classification, Neural Process.
– review & editing. Lett. 53 (5) (2021) 3497–3523.
 [24] H. Wang, S. Mumtaz, H. Li, J. Liu, F. Yang, An identification strategy for
 unknown attack through the joint learning of space–time features, Future Gener.
Declaration of competing interest
 Comput. Syst. 117 (2021) 145–154.

 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.

 9