8318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

 MFAD: A Multimodal Feature Fusion-Enhanced
 Time Series Anomaly Detection Framework in
 Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems
 Silin Peng , Yu Han , Lichen Liu , Jinlong Li , Ruonan Li , Zhaoquan Gu , Jie Liu , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Xiaowen Chu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS) are for real-time detection and lightweight deployment in resourceincreasingly vulnerable to sophisticated attacks and operational constrained industrial edge environments.
disturbances that induce subtle and hard-to-detect anomalies,
particularly in industrial edge environments. Existing anomaly
detection methods often rely on sufficient labeled data and Note to Practitioners—This paper is motivated by the increasinvolve excessive computational overhead, hindering real-time ing need for reliable and efficient anomaly detection in
detection and lightweight deployment. To address these chal- Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems (ICPS), particularly deployed
lenges, we propose a Multimodal Feature fusion-enhanced time in resource-constrained industrial edge environments. Existing
series Anomaly Detection framework (MFAD) in ICPS. MFAD approaches often treat temporal and industrial features sepaenhances the representation of subtle anomalies by jointly mod- rately, rely on sufficient labeled data, and require substantial
eling temporal dynamics and industrial characteristics through a computational resources, which limits their applicability in realunified multimodal feature fusion mechanism. Moreover, MFAD world industrial settings. In contrast, the proposed MFAD
adopts a three-stage detection strategy with adaptive threshold- provides a lightweight and practical solution that integrates
ing, which further improves robustness under varying operating multimodal feature fusion with robust semi-supervised detection
conditions, while its lightweight overall architecture supports mechanisms to effectively capture subtle anomalies in time series
edge deployment. In addition, we provide the Industrial Gas industrial data. The framework is designed with deployment
Cyber-Physical System (IGCPS) dataset collected from real-world feasibility that it offers strong detection accuracy, low latency,
industrial operations. Experiments on ICPS benchmark datasets and efficient resource consumption suitable for industrial edge
of varying scales, including IGCPS, PUMP, WADI, and SWaT, devices. The methods presented here can inform practitioners
demonstrate that MFAD achieves an F1 score exceeding 96.7% seeking to enhance the reliability and real-time performance of
with efficient resource utilization, validating its effectiveness ICPS anomaly detection systems. Future extensions may focus
 on expanding MFAD for broader online industrial applications,
 Received 23 November 2025; revised 20 February 2026; accepted 10 April integrating it with more edge platforms, and enabling large-scale
2026. Date of publication 14 April 2026; date of current version 22 April distributed deployment.
2026. This article was recommended for publication by Associate Editor J.
Xiao and Editor H. Zhang upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This Index Terms—Industrial cyber-physical systems, multimodal
work was supported in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program feature fusion, time series anomaly detection, resourceunder Grant KJZD20240903103811016, in part by the Major Key Project constrained industrial edge environments.
of Pengcheng Laboratory (PCL) under Grant PCL2024A05, and in part by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62350710797.
(Corresponding authors: Zhaoquan Gu; Ruonan Li.)
 Silin Peng is with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering,
Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen 518107, China, and also with the Depart- I. I NTRODUCTION
ment of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518108, China
(e-mail: pengslin6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn).
 Yu Han is with the School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen
University, Shenzhen 518107, China (e-mail: hanyu25@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
 Lichen Liu and Ruonan Li are with the Department of New Networks,
 I NDUSTRIAL Cyber–Physical Systems (ICPS) constitute
 the operational backbone of modern industrial automation,
 critical infrastructure, and edge intelligence systems [1]. ICPS
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518108, China (e-mail: liulch@pcl.ac.cn; tightly couple computational processes with physical dynamics
lirn@pcl.ac.cn). through interconnected sensors, actuators, controllers, and
 Jinlong Li is with the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced
Technology, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: communication interfaces, thereby achieving high levels of
jinlongli@gzhu.edu.cn). automation, efficiency, and resilience [1], [2], [3], [4]. How-
 Zhaoquan Gu is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, ever, this tight cyber–physical integration also significantly
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also with the
Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518108, enlarges the attack surface: sophisticated cyber intrusions,
China (e-mail: guzhaoquan@hit.edu.cn). stealthy signal manipulations, and cross-layer disturbances
 Jie Liu is with the International Research Institute for Artificial Intelli- may propagate across both cyber and physical domains, giving
gence, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China, and also
with the State Key Laboratory of Smart Farm Technologies and Systems, rise to subtle yet safety-critical anomalies [5], [6], [7]. In addi-
Harbin 150030, China (e-mail: jieliu@hit.edu.cn). tion, the migration of ICPS toward edge-assisted architectures
 Xiaowen Chu is with the Department of Computer Science, The Hong Kong for real-time processing further exacerbates the challenge of
University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511458,
China (e-mail: xwchu@ust.hk). deploying effective anomaly detection under stringent resource
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2026.3683936 constraints [8], [9], [10].
 1558-3783 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8319

 Compared with conventional Information Technology (IT) improves robustness against Gaussian noise and disanomaly detection tasks [11], [12], [13], anomaly detection tribution shifts in resource-constrained ICPS edge
in ICPS exhibits several distinctive challenges. First, ICPS environments.
sensor streams exhibit strong temporal dependencies and 3) We contribute the Industrial Gas Cyber-Physical System
multimodal heterogeneity. Anomalies in such systems often (IGCPS) dataset, a real-world benchmark collected from
manifest simultaneously across physical measurements and Shenzhen Gas Corporation operational environments,
control logic [14]. Such multimodal properties hinder the containing both normal operations and cyber-physical
effectiveness of detection methods using single features, while attack scenarios.
multimodal fusion has been extensively explored in the image 4) We conduct extensive experiments on ICPS time series
domain but remains under-investigated for time series anomaly datasets of varying scales (IGCPS, PUMP, SWaT, and
detection [15]. Second, industrial edge devices operate under WADI), demonstrating that MFAD consistently achieves
strict computational, memory, and latency constraints, ren- superior detection performance, with F1-scores exceeddering many deep anomaly detection frameworks impractical ing 96.7% across all benchmarks, while maintaining
for real-world deployment [16]. Third, severe data imbalance, efficient resource utilization and real-time detection perincomplete labeling, and the presence of noise or distribution formance for industrial edge deployment.
drift further complicate training and degrade the robustness The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
of fully supervised models [17], [18]. As a result, designing Section II reviews existing ICPS time series anomaly detection
a lightweight yet robust anomaly detection framework under research. Section III describes the proposed MFAD framework
edge constraints remains an open problem. in detail. Section IV introduces the experimental results. Sec-
 Traditional statistical and machine learning methods [19] tion V presents robustness evaluation and analysis. Section VI
offer interpretability and low computational cost, but their concludes the paper with future directions.
reliance on handcrafted features and large amounts of labeled
data limits their ability to capture complex temporal dynamics II. R ELATED W ORK
in modern ICPS. Deep learning approaches [20], including
 This section provides a comprehensive review of anomaly
autoencoders, recurrent networks, and attention-based models,
 detection research in industrial cyber–physical systems ICPS.
have demonstrated strong capability in modeling temporal
 Existing work can be grouped into three categories: traditional
dependencies and nonlinear patterns. Nevertheless, most existstatistical and machine-learning methods, deep learning moding deep models focus on temporal features, underutilize
 els, and advanced techniques.
rich industrial feature representations, and incur computational
overhead that exceeds the capacity of edge devices. Moreover,
the lack of effective multimodal feature fusion and adaptive A. Traditional Methods
thresholding mechanisms further constrains their robustness Traditional anomaly detection methods mainly consist of
across diverse operational conditions. statistical modeling and classical machine learning tech-
 To address these challenges, this paper proposes propose niques. Breunig et al. [21] introduced the Local Outlier
a Multimodal Feature fusion-enhanced time series Anomaly Factor (LOF), which measures density deviation to detect
Detection framework (MFAD) in resource-constrained ICPS local anomalies. Although LOF effectively detects contexenvironments. MFAD constructs a unified multimodal rep- tual anomalies, its sensitivity to parameter settings limresentation by jointly modeling temporal dynamics and its its stability in heterogeneous ICPS environments. To
industrial statistical features, enabling more accurate detection model nonlinear system behaviors, Martinez-Guerra and
of subtle cyber–physical anomalies. A lightweight architecture Mata-Machuca [22] proposed fault detection schemes based on
and semi-supervised learning paradigm are adopted to reduce the Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF), which exploit recursive
computational overhead and alleviate label scarcity. Further- Bayesian estimation to identify abnormal state deviations.
more, MFAD incorporates a three-stage detection mechanism Although offering strong theoretical guarantees, the computawith an adaptive threshold strategy, achieving strong detec- tional burden of EnKF increases rapidly in high-dimensional
tion performance, robustness against Gaussian noise and industrial processes.
distribution shifts, and consistent performance across varying Furthermore, Wu et al. [23] incorporated Bayesian learning
industrial operating conditions. and Gaussian processing into LSTM models for anomaly
 The main contributions of this work are summarized as detection, enabling interpretable probabilistic reasoning over
follows: multivariate temporal data. However, the introduced Bayesian
 1) We propose MFAD, a lightweight Multimodal Fea- components increase inference latency and restrict real-time
 ture fusion-enhanced time series Anomaly Detection usage in edge devices. In parallel, Qin and Lou [24] employed
 framework that jointly models temporal dependen- Isolation Forest (IF) for hydrological anomaly detection, levercies and industrial domain characteristics, enabling aging random partitioning to efficiently isolate rare events.
 effective cross-domain anomaly representation in ICPS Nevertheless, its lack of temporal awareness limits its applicaenvironments. bility in dynamical ICPS environments. To support industrial
 2) We design a lightweight semi-supervised learning archi- streaming applications, Rosenberger et al. [25] extended
 tecture incorporating a progressive three-stage detection Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) for real-time anomaly
 mechanism with adaptive threshold calibration, which scoring. Despite its lightweight nature, KDE struggles with
8320 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

non-stationary distributions and concept drift. Similarly, high computational overhead, limiting their feasibility for real-
Razzak et al. [26] enhanced One-Class SVM (OCSVM) using time and resource-constrained industrial deployment.
bounded loss functions and randomized nonlinear kernels to
handle large-scale IoT data. While improving robustness, the C. Advanced Techniques
kernel operations introduce scalability issues for continuous Beyond traditional and deep learning approaches,
ICPS monitoring. researchers have introduced advanced generative and
 Overall, traditional methods provide interpretability and graph-based models to capture spatiotemporal dependencies.
computational efficiency. However, their limited capabil- Han and Woo [35] introduced FuSAGNet, which integrates
ity in modeling multimodal features and complex tem- sparse autoencoders with graph structures, effectively
poral dependencies poses challenges in modern ICPS modeling sensor dependencies. However, its static graph
scenarios, motivating the need for data-driven sequence assumption limits adaptability to dynamically changing
modeling. industrial relations. Similarly, Chen et al. [36] introduced
 DVGCRN, a deep variational graph convolutional recurrent
 network capable of learning spatial and temporal correlations
B. Deep Learning Approaches jointly. Although effective on server and satellite data,
 With the success of representation learning, deep its computational complexity restricts its applicability
learning–based anomaly detectors have become mainstream. to edge devices. Building on graph relational learning,
Park et al. [27] developed the LSTM-VAE architecture, Zhang et al. [37] designed GRELeN, integrating GNN-based
combining recurrent networks with variational inference relational modeling with VAE structures. While maintaining
to model nonlinear temporal dynamics. Although effective strong anomaly discrimination, its generalization to diverse
for reconstructing multivariate sequences, this approach industrial scenarios remains limited. More recently, Dai and
requires significant computation and memory. To further Chen [38] proposed GANF, a graph-augmented normalizing
improve robustness, Gao et al. [28] proposed RobustTAD, flow framework that embeds causal structure learning
integrating time–frequency decomposition with convolutional into invertible flows. This method provides interpretable
learning. Despite improved noise resilience, the heavy dependency learning but suffers from high computational
decomposition pipeline hinders real-time deployment. cost due to the invertibility constraints of flow-based models.
Advancing toward attention mechanisms, Yang et al. [29] Additionally, Lin et al. [39] introduced PddBLS-AE, an
introduced DCdetector, which applies dual-attention ensemble denoising autoencoder framework based on Broad
contrastive learning to enhance discriminative representations. Learning System (BLS) for time series anomaly detection.
While achieving strong performance, the dual-branch PddBLS-AE leverages the incremental learning capability of
architecture incurs quadratic memory usage. Meanwhile, BLS combined with ensemble denoising strategies to achieve
Su et al. [30] proposed OmniAnomaly, which incorporates strong reconstruction-based anomaly detection. However,
planar normalizing flows into a GRU-VAE architecture to its reliance on ensemble mechanisms leads to substantial
represent the stochastic characteristics of multivariate time floating-point operations (FLOPs) and moderate computational
series. Despite its robustness, the model faces challenges in overhead, limiting its applicability in resource-constrained
handling extremely high-dimensional ICPS data. industrial edge environments.
 On the one hand, Audibert et al. [31] presented USAD, As systematically compared in Table I, traditional methods
a lightweight adversarial autoencoder that amplifies offer valuable interpretability and computational efficiency
reconstruction discrepancies. Though training-efficient, yet lack sophisticated multimodal fusion capabilities essen-
USAD often becomes sensitive to unstable ICPS signals. On tial for heterogeneous ICPS data. Deep learning approaches
the other hand, Wang et al. [32] proposed CutAddPaste, a provide superior temporal modeling and detection perfordata augmentation strategy that creates pseudo anomalies by mance but demand significant computational resources that
injecting synthetic patterns into normal sequences. Although challenge real-time edge deployment in industrial settings.
alleviating data scarcity, these artificial patterns cannot fully Graph-based and other emerging models capture complex
capture the diversity of real industrial anomalies. To address relational structures and data distributions effectively but suffer
system identification, Feng and Tian [18] developed NSIBF, from limited adaptability to dynamic conditions and substana neural system identification model equipped with Bayesian tial computational overhead. As a result, the fundamental
filtering. Its robustness is strong, but parameter tuning is non- limitation across all methodological categories is the inabiltrivial. In addition, Kim et al. [33] proposed CTAD, which ity to simultaneously support efficient and robust anomaly
utilizes contrastive learning with multiscale augmentations detection capabilities, lightweight computational footprint, and
to enhance noise robustness; yet, handling cross-component real-time performance under the noisy, evolving conditions
interactions in ICPS remains challenging. Recently, characteristic of industrial environments. These identified
Tian et al. [34] designed SSDCL, a denoising-aware semi- research gaps directly motivate our proposed MFAD framesupervised contrastive learning framework achieving strong work, which strategically unifies industrial feature extraction,
anomaly tolerance, but it requires delicate hyperparameter lightweight bidirectional temporal representation learning,
balancing. adaptive semi-supervised anomaly detection with dynamic
 In summary, deep learning methods significantly improve thresholds to comprehensively address the stringent requiredetection accuracy and feature learning, but often introduce ments of resource-constrained ICPS deployment.
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8321

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF T IME S ERIES A NOMALY D ETECTION M ETHODS IN ICPS

Fig. 1. Overall framework of MFAD for industrial anomaly detection.

 III. M ETHODOLOGY Detection (TSAD) module, adaptive anomaly scoring on the
 output of SSL module with dynamic threshold.
 This section provides a comprehensive description of the Let the multivariate time series input be X ∈ RB×T ×F ,
MFAD framework for anomaly detection in ICPS. where B, T , and F denote the batch size, sequence length, and
 feature dimension respectively. The MFAD model outputs an
 anomaly score S ∈ [0, 1] for each sample, which indicates the
A. Overall Architecture probability that the input sequence exhibits abnormal behavior.
 The MFAD model is specifically designed to extract The overall pipeline is formulated as:
multimodal features from the physical layer through cap-
  
 S = Fdetect Ffusion Ftemp (X), Find (X) (1)
turing industrial characteristics and temporal dependencies
of industrial processes. It also supports semi-supervised where Find represents the industrial feature extractor,
learning under limited labeled data. As shown in Fig. 1, Ftemp denotes the temporal feature encoder consisting of
the architecture of MFAD consists of three primary BiGRU–Attention–TCN architecture, Ffusion refers to the
modules: (i) Multimodal Feature Fusion (MF) module, multimodal feature fusion, and Fdetect represents the final
including industrial feature extraction and temporal rep- time series anomaly detection after semi-supervised learning
resentation learning through Bidirectional Gated Recur- through reconstructor and classifiers. This hierarchical design
rent Unit–Multi-Head Self-Attention–Temporal Convolutional implements a three-stage information-refinement pipeline:
Network (BiGRU–Attention–TCN) architecture, (ii) Semi- (i) the MF module that jointly encodes industrial domain
Supervised Learning (SSL) module, including reconstructor characteristics and temporal dependencies into a unified latent
and three-stage classifier, and (iii) Time Series Anomaly representation; (ii) the SSL module that performs cascaded
8322 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

classification (the three-stage classifier) and reconstruction 2) Temporal Feature Encoder: Temporal modeling is cruregularization to learn discriminative and robust representa- cial for identifying evolving abnormal behaviors. The MFAD
tions; and (iii) the TSAD module that integrates MC-Dropout temporal feature encoder Ftemp integrates both bidirectional
uncertainty estimation, weighted fusion with temporal smooth- and hierarchical representations through a combination of
ing and adaptive thresholding to produce calibrated anomaly BiGRU, Multi-Head Self-Attention, and Temporal Convoluscores. We will describe the detailed process of each module tion Network (TCN).
in the following sections. a) BiGRU: Given the input sequence X ∈ RB×T ×F , an
 input projection layer first maps it to Xproj ∈ RB×T ×H where
B. MF Module H = 96 is the hidden dimension. The two-layer bidirectional
 MF module contains industrial feature extractor and tem- GRU captures both forward and backward temporal dependenporal feature encoder, and fuses their representation as the cies:
 −−−−→ ←−−−−
foundation for the subsequent SSL module. ht = [GRU(x1:t ), GRU(xt:T )] ∈ RH (6)
 1) Industrial Feature Extractor: To capture the inherent
 producing contextualized embeddings H ∈ RB×T ×H , where
characteristics of industrial processes, the industrial feature
 H is is the hidden dimension of the model (number of
extractor Find integrates three complementary perspectives:
 output channels for BiGRU–Attention–TCN architecture). The
statistical features that capture distributional behaviors, fre-
 BiGRU uses 2 layers with H/2 = 48 hidden units per direction,
quency features that reflect spectral energy changes, and
 and the bidirectional outputs are concatenated to maintain
trend features that reveal variation dynamics. Specific feature
 dimension H = 96.
descriptions are as follows:
 b) Multi-head self-attention: Self-attention is employed
 a) Statistical features: Given the input sequence X ∈
 to dynamically emphasize temporally salient events:
RB×T ×F , where B denotes batch size, T denotes sequence
 QK>
  
length, and F denotes feature dimension, for each input signal,
 Attention(Q, K, V) = Softmax √ V (7)
six statistics are extracted, including mean, standard deviation, dk
minimum, maximum, median, and range: where Q, K, and V are linear projections of H, and dk
 fstat = [µ, σ, min, max, median, range] (2) denotes the attention head dimension. This mechanism allows
 the model to adaptively focus on timestamps that exhibit
which describe the operational envelope and stability of each
 higher anomaly potential. With 4 attention heads and persensor. These statistics are computed along the temporal
 head dimension dk = H/4 = 24, the multi-head attention
dimension, resulting in fstat ∈ RB×6F , which is then projected
 output maintains the shape Hattn ∈ RB×T ×H through output
to RB×96 through a linear layer with LayerNorm and GELU
 projection, preserving the temporal resolution for subsequent
activation.
 TCN processing.
 b) Frequency features: To identify periodic patterns
 c) TCN: The Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN)
or oscillations, a lightweight Short-Time Fourier Transform
 module receives the attention-enhanced sequence Hattn ∈
(STFT) with window size nfft = 8 and hop length = 4 is
 RB×T ×H and is designed to capture short-range patterns and
applied. The corresponding spectral power density is expressed
 multi-scale temporal dependencies through dilated convoluas:
 tions and residual connections. Formally, for the l-th TCN
 ffreq = E |F{x}|2
  
 (3)
 layer, the output is computed as:
which emphasizes the dominant frequencies in the signal  
evolution. The STFT produces nfreq = nfft /2 + 1 = 5 frequency y(l) = GELU BN Conv1D(y(l−1) ) + y(l−1) , (8)
bins per feature, yielding ffreq ∈ RB×5F , which is projected to
 where Conv1D(·) is a one-dimensional dilated convolution,
RB×96 through a dedicated frequency projection layer.
 BN(·) denotes batch normalization, and the non-linear actic) Trend features: Temporal variation is characterized by
 vation function GELU(·) is defined as:
first- and second-order derivatives:
 ftrend = [∆x, ∆2 x] (4) GELU(x) = x Φ(x) (9)

reflecting both the instantaneous change rate and acceleration with Φ(·) being the standard Gaussian cumulative distribution
trend of process variables. The trend features ftrend ∈ RB×2F function (CDF). The residual connection guarantees stable
are projected to RB×48 (half the hidden dimension) to balance gradient propagation in deep stacks of dilated convolutions.
representation capacity. The TCN comprises 3 layers with dilation factors {1, 2, 4}
 All three components are concatenated and form the com- and kernel size 3, maintaining the hidden dimension H =
plete industrial feature representation: 96 throughout via channel-preserving convolutions, yielding
  proj proj proj  HTCN ∈ RB×T ×H .
 zind = Concat fstat , ffreq , ftrend (5) After the final layer, temporal aggregation is performed
resulting in zind ∈ RB×240 (i.e., 96 + 96 + 48 = 240), as illus- using global average pooling:
trated in the Feature Concat block of Fig. 1. This dimension
 ytcn = AvgPool(y(L) ) (10)
is designed to match the subsequent fusion layer requirements
while preserving sufficient representational capacity for indus- where AvgPool(·) denotes average pooling along the temporal
trial domain characteristics. dimension. This pooling operation compresses the temporal
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8323

dimension, producing ytcn ∈ RB×H (i.e., RB×96 ), which is enables later stages to: (1) correct potential errors from earlier
subsequently concatenated with the industrial features zind ∈ stages by observing their confidence distributions, (2) focus
RB×240 to form the input to the fusion layer. computational capacity on samples where earlier predictions
 3) Multimodal Feature Fusion: To ensure proper temporal exhibit uncertainty, and (3) leverage inter-stage information
alignment, both the industrial feature extractor and temporal flow without requiring separate feature re-extraction. The
encoder operate on the same input window X ∈ RB×T ×F . 2-dimensional increments correspond to binary classification
Statistical features aggregate distributional properties over the logits (normal vs. anomaly) passed between stages. Each
complete sequence, STFT features capture frequency content stage outputs binary logits o(s) = [o(s) (s)
 0 , o1 ] with classification
through overlapping windows spanning the temporal range, probabilities:
and trend features compute derivatives across consecutive exp(o(s)
 k )
time steps. The temporal encoder produces sequence-level P(s)
 k = P 1 (s)
 , k ∈ {0, 1} (16)
representations through average pooling after TCN process- j=0 exp(o j )
ing. This synchronized computation ensures that both feature This cascaded architecture enables later stages to refine decimodalities represent the same temporal context before fusion. sions by leveraging predictions from earlier stages. To reduce
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the Feature Fusion block receives computational cost, samples are routed through stages based
the concatenated input [ytcn ; zind ] ∈ RB×336 (ytcn ∈ RB×96 and on confidence thresholds τ1 = 0.85 and τ2 = 0.90. Let
zind ∈ RB×240 ) and projects it to the target hidden dimension c(s) = maxk P(s)
 k denote the confidence at stage s. The routing
H = 96 through a linear transformation: logic is:
 8
 hfusion = GELU LayerNorm W[ytcn ; zind ] <i = 1 if c ≥ τ1
  (1)
 (11) ˆ
where LayerNorm(·) is layer normalization, [·; ·] denotes vec- Stage(i) = i = 2 if c(1) < τ1 and c(2) ≥ τ2 (17)
 i = 3 if c < τ1 and c < τ2
 ˆ (1) (2)
tor concatenation, and W ∈ R96×336 is a trainable projection
 :
matrix. This projection compresses the high-dimensional con- The final prediction uses the output from the deepest stage
catenated features while preserving discriminative information reached:
from both modalities, producing the unified latent represen- ŷ = arg max P(s final )
 (18)
 k
tation hfusion ∈ RB×96 , which serves as the shared input k∈{0,1}

to both the three-stage classifier and reconstruction module. where sfinal ∈ {1, 2, 3} is determined by Eq. (17). This adap-
The dimensional reduction from 336 to 96 is intentionally tive mechanism processes approximately 70% of samples at
designed to prevent overfitting while maintaining sufficient Stage 1, 20% at Stage 2, and 10% at Stage 3, reducing average
representational capacity for anomaly discrimination. inference cost while maintaining detection accuracy. Stage 1
 (Coarse) prioritizes recall, minimizing false negatives with low
C. SSL Module dropout of 0.3, Stage 2 (Fine) balances precision and recall
 with moderate dropout of 0.4, and Stage 3 (Expert) enhances
 1) Three-Stage Cascaded Detection Strategy: To achieve
 precision for hard samples with high dropout of 0.5. The proa balance among recall, discrimination robustness, and precigressive increase in input dimensionality (H → H+2 → H+4)
sion, the proposed framework employs a cascaded three-stage
 and regularization strength ensures each stage specializes in
classifier with progressive refinement and adaptive early-exit.
 increasingly difficult discrimination tasks without deepening
 Let hfusion ∈ RH denote the fused multimodal representation.
 the network.
The three-stage classifier is defined as:
 2) Reconstruction Regularization: The Reconstructor mod-
 Fclf = {Fcoarse , Ffine , Fexpert } (12) ule, as shown in Fig. 1, operates on the TCN output HTCN ∈
 RB×T ×96 and maps it back to the original feature space
where each stage is a two-layer MLP with progressively higher
 through a point-wise MLP: Frec : R96 → RF , producing
regularization (Dropout: 0.3 → 0.4 → 0.5) to transition
 the reconstructed sequence X̂ ∈ RB×T ×F . This dimensional
from high recall to high precision. All stages are jointly
 transformation (B, T , 96) → (B, T , F) enables point-wise
optimized with information flowing from coarse to expert
 reconstruction across all timestamps for accurate anomaly
through concatenation:
 localization. To preserve the smoothness and geometry of
 o(1) = Fcoarse (hfusion ) ∈ R2 (13) the latent normal manifold, a reconstruction branch is jointly
 o (2)
 = Ffine ([hfusion ; o ]) ∈ R
 (1) 2
 (14) optimized with the classifier. The reconstructor estimates an
 approximation of the original input sequence:
 o(3) = Fexpert ([hfusion ; o(1) ; o(2) ]) ∈ R2 (15)
 X̂ = Frec (HTCN ) (19)
where [·; ·] denotes concatenation. As shown in Fig. 1, the
input dimensions progress as: Coarse stage receives (B, 96) → The reconstruction error is measured using the normalized
(B, 2), Fine stage receives (B, 98) → (B, 2), and Expert squared Frobenius norm:
stage receives (B, 100) → (B, 2). The input dimensionality 1 2
 Erec = X̂ − X F (20)
progressively increases from H to H + 2 to H + 4 imple- TF
menting a cascaded refinement mechanism. Each subsequent which serves as a self-supervised constraint encouraging norstage receives both the original fused representation and mal operational patterns to stay consistent across temporal
the prediction logits from all preceding stages. This design evolutions.
8324 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

 3) Joint Optimization Objective: The total loss function Label smoothing with  = 0.05 improves calibration [43]
integrates three-stage classification, hard sample mining, label using fine-stage predictions:
smoothing, and reconstruction regularization: (
 X (2) 0.95 if k = y
 3 Lsmooth = − ỹk log pk (x), ỹk = (27)
 X 0.05 otherwise
 Ltotal = wi LCE
 i + w f Lfocal + w s Lsmooth k
 i=1
 where k ∈ {0, 1} and p(2)k denotes fine-stage probability.
 + wr Lrec + wa Lanom (21)
 Two reconstruction objectives enforce normal pattern learnwhere LCE is the cross-entropy loss for stage i ∈ ing. Given TCN output HTCN ∈ RB×T ×H and reconstructor
 i
{1, 2, 3} (coarse/fine/expert), Lfocal is the hard example Frec : RH → RF :
mining loss, Lsmooth is label smoothing regularization, 1 2
Lrec is normal reconstruction loss, Lanom is anomaly Lrec = Frec (HTCN ) − X F
 BT F
reconstruction penalty, and (w1 , w2 , w3 , w f , w s , wr , wa ) =
 8
 1 X 2
(0.15, 0.25, 0.25, 0.20, 0.05, 0.05, 0.05) balance the competing
 ˆ
 < X̂ j − X j F if N1 > 0
 Lanom = N 1 T F (28)
 j∈I1
objectives. To handle class imbalance [40], we use dynamic ˆ
 :0
class weighting. The weighted cross-entropy loss for stage i otherwise
is defined as: where I1 = { j : y j = 1}, T is sequence length, F is feature
 B
 1X dimension, and k · kF denotes Frobenius norm.
 i =−
 LCE ωy j log pi (y j |x j ) (22) For unlabeled data DU = {xuj }Nj=1
 U
 (assumed predominantly
 B
 j=1 normal), we minimize reconstruction loss with weight wu =
where B is batch size, y j ∈ {0, 1} is the ground-truth label 0.3:
(0 = normal, 1 = anomaly), and pi (y j |x j ) is the predicted 1 X
 NU
 2
probability from stage i. The class weight ωy j is determined Lunsup = 0.3 · Frec (Hu,TCN
 j ) − Xuj (29)
 NU T F F
by the sample’s label according to: j=1
 ( Gradient clipping (k∇k2 ≤ 1.0) and NaN handling ensure
 ω0 = 1.0 if y j = 0 (normal)
 ωy j = (23) robust training:
 ω1 if y j = 1 (anomaly) (
 Ltotal if finite
where the anomaly class weight ω1 adapts dynamically with Lfinal = (30)
training progress: LCE
 2 otherwise

 where LCE
   
 N0 e 2 is the fine-stage cross-entropy as a fallback.
 ω1 = clip , 5.0, 20.0 · 1.5 + 0.5 · (24)
 N1 E
where N0 and N1 respectively denote the sample counts normal D. TSAD Module
and anomaly, e is the current epoch, E is total epochs, To improve detection robustness under noise and drift, the
and clip(·, a, b) constrains values to [a, b]. The base weight proposed framework employs a comprehensive TSAD module,
N0
N1 follows the inverse frequency weighting principle [41]. as illustrated in Fig. 1. The TSAD module receives five
The clipping bounds [5.0, 20.0] prevent numerical instability input signals from upstream components and processes them
  class rebalancing. The progressive
while maintaining effective through MC Dropout uncertainty estimation, normalization,
multiplier 1.5 + 0.5 · Ee implements a curriculum learning weighted score fusion, temporal smoothing, and adaptive
schedule [42] that gradually increases emphasis on anomaly thresholding to produce the final anomaly detection results.
samples from 1.5× to 2.0× throughout training, allowing the 1) Input Components: The TSAD module integrates five
model to first establish stable representations before focusing complementary signals from the SSL module:
on harder anomaly discrimination tasks. To emphasize hard • Classification probabilities Pcoarse , Pfine , Pexpert ∈ RB×2 :
examples, we apply adaptive Focal Loss [41] on the expert The anomaly probabilities from the three-stage classifier,
stage: where the second dimension represents the softmax out-
 B
 1X γ(e) put for the anomaly class.
 Lfocal = − 1 − pj log(p j + ) (25)
 B • Reconstruction error Erec ∈ RB : Computed from the
 j=1
 Reconstructor as Erec = T1F kX̂ − Xk2F , measuring the deviwhere p j = pexpert (y j |x j ) is clamped to [10−7 , 1 − 10−7 ] for ation between the input sequence and its reconstruction.
numerical stability,  = 10−8 , and γ(e) = 2.0 + e/E increases • Embedding distance Demb ∈ RB : Derived from the fused
from 2.0 to 3.0. Class-aware aggregation prevents imbalanced representation hfusion ∈ RB×H , quantifying the deviation
training: from the normal manifold. The embedding distance is
 8 computed as:
 ˆ
 ˆ
 anom
 <0.7Lfocal + 0.3Lfocal
 normal
 if N1 > 0 v
 B u H 
 Lfocal = 1 uX h j − µ j 2
 
 X (26)
 Lfocal (p j ) otherwise Demb = t (31)
 σj + 
 ˆ
 :B
 ˆ
 j=1 j=1
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8325

 where h j is the j-th dimension of the fused embedding 5) Temporal Smoothing: Considering that cyber-physical
 hfusion , µ j and σ j are the mean and standard deviation attacks typically persist across multiple consecutive time steps,
 of the j-th dimension estimated from normal training the fused scores undergo temporal smoothing with window
 samples, and  = 10−6 ensures numerical stability. This size W:
 bW/2c
 standardized Euclidean distance effectively measures how 1 X
 far each sample deviates from the learned normal mani- S̃ t = S t+k (36)
 W
 k=−bW/2c
 fold in the latent space.
 2) MC Dropout Uncertainty Estimation: To quantify pre- The final score combines smoothed and raw components:
diction uncertainty, the classification probabilities undergo MC S final = λS̃ + (1 − λ)S̄ (37)
Dropout sampling during inference. Dropout layers remain
active at test time, and M = 5 stochastic forward passes where λ ∈ (0, 1) controls the balance between temporal consisare performed. Let {S (m) }m=1
 M
 denote the anomaly scores from tency and instantaneous sensitivity. This formulation captures
these passes, the ensemble score and epistemic uncertainty are sustained attack patterns while preserving responsiveness to
computed as: sudden anomalies.
 !1/2 6) Adaptive Dynamic Threshold: The detection threshold
 M M
 1 X (m) 1 X (m) 2 is determined through a hierarchical search strategy that
 S̄ = S , U= S −S (32) prioritizes high precision while maximizing overall detection
 M M
 m=1 m=1
 performance. The optimal threshold τ∗ is obtained by solving:
 The uncertainty U ∈ RB serves three critical purposes τ∗ = arg max F1 (τ) s.t. Precision(τ) ≥ γ (38)
in industrial deployment: (1) identifying fuzzy samples near τ

decision boundaries; (2) detecting distribution shift, where sys- where F1 (τ) is the harmonic mean of precision and recall:
tematic uncertainty increases may indicate operational regime
 Precision(τ) · Recall(τ)
changes or sensor drift; and (3) supporting risk-aware decision- F1 (τ) = 2 · (39)
making by enabling operators to adjust detection sensitivity Precision(τ) + Recall(τ)
based on uncertainty levels. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the with:
uncertainty is directly output alongside the anomaly score for TP TP
downstream applications. Precision(τ) = , Recall(τ) = (40)
 TP + FP TP + FN
 3) Normalization: The reconstruction error and embedding
 Here, TP, FP, and FN denote true positives, false positives,
distance are normalized to [0, 1] range using min-max normaland false negatives at threshold τ, respectively. The constraint
ization for consistent fusion with probability-based scores:
 parameter γ starts at 0.95 and relaxes to 0.90 if no feasible
 Erec − Emin Demb − Dmin solution exists. The search range is [µ0 + 0.2(µ1 − µ0 ), µ1 ],
 Êrec = , D̂emb = (33) where µ0 and µ1 are the mean scores of normal and anomalous
 Emax − Emin Dmax − Dmin
 samples. This strategy ensures Precision ≥ 95% when achievwhere the normalization bounds are estimated from the train- able, minimizing false alarms in safety-critical applications.
ing set statistics. Unlike methods that only minimize |Precision(τ) − 0.95|, our
 4) Weighted Score Fusion: The score fusion adapts to the approach explicitly balances precision and recall through the
stage reached by each sample during cascaded inference. F1 objective. This balance is essential for ICPS, where both
Let sfinal ∈ {1, 2, 3} denote the terminal stage determined false alarms and missed detections have serious operational
by Eq. (17). The anomaly score is computed as: consequences.
 sfinal 7) Anomaly Detection: The TSAD module produces two
 X
 S = anom + α4 Ê rec + α5 D̂emb
 αi P(i) (34) outputs with dimensions (B, ): (1) the anomaly score S final ∈
 i=1 RB computed by comparing with threshold τ∗ , yielding a
 binary decision per sample, and (2) the uncertainty score
where P(i)
 anom denotes the anomaly probability from stage i, and U ∈ RB quantifying prediction confidence for each sample, as
the stage-adaptive weights are defined as: illustrated in Fig. 1. The final Score and Uncertainty both have
 8 shape (B, ), representing per-sample scalar values. High uncer-
 <(0.85, 0, 0)
 ˆ if sfinal = 1 tainty samples can be flagged for manual review, enhancing
 (α1 , α2 , α3 ) = (0.30, 0.55, 0) if sfinal = 2 (35) the practical utility of MFAD in industrial operations. Algo-
 (0.20, 0.35, 0.30) if sfinal = 3 rithm 1 summarizes the complete anomaly detection workflow.
 ˆ
 :
 The procedure alternates between multimodal feature extracwith (α4 , α5 ) = (0.10, 0.05) for reconstruction and embedding tion, temporal encoding, fusion, hierarchical classification,
components. This formulation ensures that samples exiting and reconstruction. Both labeled and unlabeled samples are
at Stage 1 (approximately 70% of test samples) utilize incorporated through a semi-supervised optimization loop.
only coarse-stage predictions, while harder samples benefit Algorithm 1 summarizes the MFAD for time series anomaly
from refined multi-stage fusion. The stage-adaptive design detection procedure in ICPS. For each epoch, the model
reduces unnecessary computation while maintaining detection processes labeled mini-batches by extracting industrial features
accuracy. zind via Find , encoding temporal patterns HTCN via Ftemp ,
8326 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 MFAD for Time Series Anomaly Detection in TABLE II
ICPS H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION
Require: Labeled dataset DL = {(Xi , yi )}i=1 NL
 , unlabeled dataset
 DU = {X j } j=1 , learning rate η, total epochs E, confidence
 NU

 thresholds τ1 , τ2
Ensure: Trained model parameters θ, calibrated temperature
 T
 1: for e = 1 to E do
 2: for each mini-batch (Xb , yb ) ∈ DL do
 3: zind ← Find (Xb ) {Industrial features}
 4: HTCN ← Ftemp (Xb ) {Temporal encoding}
 5: h ← Ffusion (HTCN , zind ) {Feature fusion}
 6: {o(s) }3s=1 ← Fclf (h) {Three-stage classification}
 7: X̂ ← Frec (HTCN ) {Reconstruction} IV. E XPERIMENTS
 8: Compute Ltotal via Eq. (21)
 9: θ ← θ − η∇θ Ltotal This section introduce the evaluation metrics, the Industrial
10: end for Gas Cyber-Physical System (IGCPS) dataset and experimental
11: for each mini-batch Xu ∈ DU do results for the ICPS datasets, respectively.
12: Compute Lunsup and update θ
13: end for
14: end for A. Experimental Environments and Hyperparameter Settings
15: Calibrate temperature T on validation set To better approximate practical industrial edge-device con-
16: Compute adaptive threshold τ∗ via precision-constrained ditions, all experimental simulations were conducted on
 search an NVIDIA Jetson Nano B01 platform equipped with an
 ARMv8-based processor and 4 GB RAM. The trained MFAD
 model was exported to ONNX format and deployed using
and fusing both modalities through Ffusion to obtain the uni- NVIDIA TensorRT with FP16 precision optimization, enabling
fied representation h. The three-stage classifier Fclf produces hardware-aware inference acceleration on the embedded GPU.
hierarchical predictions, while the reconstruction module Frec This setup provides a resource-constrained yet realistic compugenerates X̂ for auxiliary supervision. The total loss Ltotal tational environment for evaluating the deployment feasibility,
(Eq. (21)) is computed and model parameters θ are updated runtime performance, and hardware-adaptive efficiency of
via gradient descent: edge-oriented anomaly detection models.
 To ensure robust performance and fair comparison, all
 θ(t+1) = θ(t) − η∇θ Ltotal (41) hyperparameters are selected via empirical validation and gridbased exploration on a held-out validation set, as summarized
where η denotes the learning rate controlling optimization step in Table II. The hidden dimension is fixed to H = 96,
size. For unlabeled data, the model computes unsupervised providing a favorable trade-off between representation capacity
losses Lunsup to leverage unlabeled samples in semi-supervised and computational efficiency under edge deployment conlearning. After training, temperature calibration adjusts prob- straints, while the learning rate is set to η = 8e−4 , chosen
abilistic confidence on a validation set, and the adaptive from {e−4 , 5e−4 , 8e−4 , e−3 } based on convergence stability and
threshold τ∗ is determined via precision-constrained search to validation performance. To mitigate overfitting under class
optimize anomaly detection decisions. imbalance and semi-supervised learning, a progressive dropout
 strategy is adopted in the three-stage classifier, with dropout
 rates of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5 for the Coarse, Fine, and Expert
E. Computational Complexity and Deployment Analysis stages, respectively. During inference, confidence thresholds
 τ1 = 0.85 and τ2 = 0.90 are used to enable early-exit decisions
 To evaluate the practicality of MFAD for real-world indus- based on prediction confidence, allowing a large proportion
trial scenarios, we analyze both computational efficiency and of easy samples to terminate at earlier stages in practice and
edge deployment feasibility. thus reducing average inference latency. The batch size is
 Let T denote the sequence length, F the feature dimension, set to 64, weight decay to 5e−4 , and Monte Carlo dropout
H the hidden dimension, and K the number of attention heads. is performed with 5 stochastic forward passes to balance
The total computational cost of MFAD can be expressed as: uncertainty estimation quality and efficiency. For temporal
 smoothing, the window size W = 7 is selected based on
 OMFAD = O(T FH) + O(T H 2 ) + O(HKd) (42) two considerations: (1) odd-sized windows enable symmetric
 centered smoothing, and (2) empirical analysis indicates that
where the first term corresponds to the BiGRU encoder, the most ICPS attacks persist for 5-10 consecutive time steps. The
second to the multi-head self-attention with head dimension smoothing weight λ = 0.6 is determined via grid search to
d = H/K, and the last term to the TCN convolutional layers. balance temporal consistency with instantaneous sensitivity.
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8327

The final configuration is selected according to the highest
validation F1-score.

B. Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
 To provide a fair comparison, we benchmark our method
against recent representative anomaly detection algorithms
in ICPS, including LSTM-VAE (2018) [27], USAD (2020)
[31], NSIBF (2021) [18], FuSAGNet (2022) [35], CTAD
(2023) [14], DCdetector (2023) [15], and SSDCL (2025)
[16], PddBLS-AE (2025) [39], and we reproduced their work
based on relevant papers. The evaluation follows a standard
binary classification protocol in which each test sample is
assigned to one of four outcome categories: TP — the
model correctly labels an anomalous sequence as abnormal;
FN — an abnormal sequence is mistakenly classified as
normal; TN — a normal sequence is correctly recognized
as normal; FP — a normal sequence is incorrectly flagged
as anomalous. Fig. 2. Experimental edge-computing platform: NVIDIA Jetson Nano B01
 To quantify detection performance, we employ three widely with TensorRT-accelerated deployment.
used metrics: Precision (Pre) (Eq.(40)), Recall (Rec) (Eq.(40)),
and F1-Score (F1) (Eq.(39)). Precision measures how many TABLE III
of the predicted anomalies are truly abnormal, while Recall D ESCRIPTIONS OF P HYSICAL -L AYER F EATURES IN THE IGCPS DATASET
reflects the proportion of actual anomalies successfully
detected. The F1-Score represents their harmonic mean, balancing both detection accuracy and coverage.
 Beyond detection quality, we also assess the computational
efficiency of the proposed framework using three additional
indicators: inference latency per sample (Infer), CPU usage
(CPU), and FLOPs, which collectively capture the suitability
of our method for deployment in resource-constrained industrial edge environments.

C. ICPS Time Series Datasets
 To thoroughly assess the performance of the MFAD framework, we carried out an extensive experimental study on
multiple ICPS time series datasets. The evaluation covered our
internally collected IGCPS dataset in addition to three widely Two representative adversarial behaviors were introduced to
used public benchmarks: PUMP, WADI, and SWaT. assess anomaly detection performance:
 We split all datasets into a training set, a validation set,
and a test set following a semi-supervised learning paradigm. • Shutdown-type attacks: Malicious control commands or
The training set contains both labeled and unlabeled data: forged packets are injected to interrupt key gas supply
5% labeled samples are used for supervised classification procedures, forcing the closure of valves or disabling
training, while the remaining 95% unlabeled samples (assumed compressors. These actions directly compromise system
predominantly normal operational data) are leveraged for availability and cause abrupt operational stops.
self-supervised reconstruction learning to capture normal • Parameter manipulation attacks: Attacks of this catebehavioral patterns. The validation set is used for hyperparam- gory subtly alter regulatory parameters, such as pressure
eter tuning, temperature calibration, and early stopping. The limits or flow rate setpoints, with the intention of mistest set is used for final model evaluation and performance leading the control logic. Unlike shutdown attacks, the
validation. resulting anomalies evolve gradually, making them con-
 1) IGCPS Dataset: The IGCPS dataset was obtained from siderably more challenging to detect in real time.
the real operational environment of Shenzhen Gas Corpo- All experiments were conducted under controlled conditions
ration (Guangdong, China), where both cyber-layer network on April 24, 2025, between 15:17:08 and 15:31:59. During
traffic and physical-layer process variables were continuously this time window, physical-layer signals exhibiting deviations
recorded. The data capture includes normal operating con- in pressure, temperature, and flow rate were collected. The
ditions as well as intentionally induced malfunction states resulting dataset contains 895 time stamped samples with
triggered by cyber–physical attack simulations. 14 monitored sensor attributes. Fig. 3 illustrates the statistical
8328 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 3. Physical layer characteristics distribution and simulation scenarios in IGCPS.

distribution of these physical-layer variables, and the meaning inference at 0.23 ms with minimal CPU usage of 1.32%,
of each feature is summarized in Table III. while DCdetector incurs the highest overhead at 48.36 ms
 In addition to the above physical indicators, the dataset inference time and 235.43 M FLOPs. MFAD maintains modalso includes controller status, controller command values, and erate resource consumption with 0.46 ms latency and 0.99 M
overall operational state variables. The final dataset contains FLOPs.
542 normal instances and 353 anomalous instances. On the PUMP dataset, MFAD attains 99.95% precision,
 2) Public Benchmarks: Our experimental evaluation 99.11% recall, and 99.93% F1-score. SSDCL follows with
encompasses three real-world industrial Cyber-Physical Sys- 97.55% F1, while DCdetector achieves perfect 100% recall but
tem datasets: PUMP, WADI, and SWaT, representing diverse lower precision at 91.12%, yielding 95.31% F1. USAD shows
operational scenarios and scale characteristics. The funda- the largest precision-recall imbalance with 96.72% precision
mental attributes and distinctive features of these benchmark but only 60.61% recall, resulting in 74.52% F1. NSIBF
datasets are elaborated as follows: achieves the lowest FLOPs at 0.22 M but with 95.61% F1.
 The PUMP dataset originates from a municipal water treat- MFAD requires 0.58 ms inference time and 1.19 M FLOPs,
ment and distribution facility, where 52 sensing devices were representing 5.4 times lower computational cost than NSIBF
installed. Data were recorded at one-minute intervals across a while achieving 4.32% higher F1-score.
five-month period. Each instance is labeled according to the On the SWaT dataset, MFAD records 99.53% precision,
operational condition of the pump, namely normal, recovering, 99.28% recall, and 99.40% F1-score. SSDCL ranks secor broken. ond with 93.02% F1, exhibiting 6.38% lower performance.
 The SWaT dataset was collected from an industrial- FuSAGNet and CTAD achieve high precision of 98.01% and
scale water purification testbed containing 25 sensors and 97.56% respectively, but their recall values of 73.70% and
26 actuators. The full trace spans 11 days, consisting of seven 73.15% limit F1-scores to 84.11% and 83.65%. PddBLS-AE
consecutive days of normal plant operation followed by four attains 88.72% F1 with 60.37 M FLOPs, which is 50.7 times
days during which a variety of cyber–physical attacks were higher than MFAD. DCdetector requires 264.52 M FLOPs, the
executed. largest among all methods, while achieving only 89.44% F1.
 The WADI dataset extends the SWaT architecture into On the challenging WADI dataset with 5.8% anomaly ratio
a water distribution scenario. It includes 67 sensors and and 67 sensors, performance degradation is observed across all
26 actuators, with data gathered over 16 days in total: 14 days baselines. MFAD achieves 98.58% precision, 94.89% recall,
reflecting nominal behavior and 2 days incorporating attack and 96.70% F1-score. PddBLS-AE follows with 87.25%
events. F1, representing a 9.45% gap. DCdetector exhibits extreme
 imbalance with 54.49% precision and 98.48% recall, yielding
 70.17% F1. SSDCL shows similar patterns with 64.02% preci-
D. Analysis of Anomaly Detection Results sion and 88.82% recall. LSTM-VAE and USAD demonstrate
 Table IV presents the comprehensive experimental results severe recall deficiency at 19.06% and 15.72% respectively,
across four ICPS datasets of varying scales, comparing MFAD resulting in F1-scores below 32%. NSIBF achieves the lowest
against eight state-of-the-art baselines. On the IGCPS dataset, FLOPs at 0.29 M but with only 33.52% F1. DCdetector
MFAD achieves 98.98% precision, 95.10% recall, and 97.00% requires 624.22 M FLOPs, while MFAD maintains 1.64 M
F1-score. Among baselines, PddBLS-AE attains the closest FLOPs with 26.53% higher F1-score.
performance with 95.05% F1, followed by SSDCL at 89.64%. Fig. 4 provides a unified radar-based comparison of detec-
NSIBF and CTAD exhibit lower F1-scores of 32.14% and tion accuracy and computational efficiency across ICPS
66.96% respectively, primarily due to limited recall. Regard- datasets of varying scales, namely IGCPS, PUMP, SWaT,
ing computational efficiency, USAD demonstrates the fastest and WADI. Each subfigure jointly visualizes precision, recall,
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8329

 TABLE IV
 E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS OF A NOMALY D ETECTION ON D IFFERENT S CALES OF ICPS DATASETS

F1-score, inference latency, CPU usage, and FLOPs, where TABLE V
efficiency-related metrics (inference latency, CPU usage, and A BLATION S TUDY OF MFAD C OMPONENTS
FLOPs) are reversely normalized using min–max scaling so
that larger values indicate lower latency and reduced resource
consumption. For the IGCPS dataset shown in Fig. 4 (a),
MFAD exhibits the largest radar coverage, indicating the most
balanced performance across both detection and efficiency
dimensions, which is consistent with its superior precision,
recall, and F1-score reported in Table Table IV. On the PUMP
dataset in Fig. 4 (b), MFAD forms an almost regular and
saturated radar profile, whereas methods such as DCdetector
present distorted shapes due to imbalanced precision–recall
behavior and high computational cost. Similar trends are
observed on SWaT dataset in Fig. 4 (c), where MFAD is the
only method maintaining consistently high values across all
six dimensions. The advantage of MFAD is most pronounced
on the WADI dataset in Fig. 4 (d), where severe class
imbalance leads to highly skewed radar profiles for baseline
methods, while MFAD preserves a well-proportioned shape
 E. Ablation Study
with strong detection accuracy and computational efficiency.
Overall, Fig. 4 visually demonstrates that MFAD achieves the To validate the contribution of each core component, we
most favorable trade-off between detection performance and perform ablation studies by removing a key module. As shown
efficiency across diverse ICPS scenarios. in Table V, three primary variants are evaluated against the
8330 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

 Fig. 5. Comparison of ablation study results on the ICPS datasets.

 3) Impact of the Three-Stage Classifier: Replacing the
 cascaded classifier with a single MLP layer in MFAD (MFAD
Fig. 4. Comparison of detection performance of different models on the ICPS w/o Thr. in Table V) also results in performance degradation,
datasets.
 highlighting the value of progressive refinement. For IGCPS,
 F1 decreases by 0.45% from 97.00% to 96.55%. On PUMP
 dataset, F1 drops by 1.69% from 99.93% to 98.24%. The
“Full” model (MFAD). The variant “MFAD w/o Ind.” is
 decline is more substantial on SWaT dataset, with a 3.42%
that MFAD removes the industrial feature extractor, relying
 reduction in F1 from 99.40% to 95.98%. The WADI dataset
solely on the temporal encoder. The variant “MFAD w/o
 exhibits the largest impact, where F1 falls by 7.26% from
Temp.” is that MFAD removes the entire BiGRU-Attention-
 96.70% to 89.44%. These results confirm the efficacy of the
TCN temporal encoder, leaving only the industrial features
 three-stage architecture, where successive stages with adaptive
for anomaly detection. The variant “MFAD w/o Thr.” is
 thresholds specialize in high-recall screening, balanced judgthat MFAD replaces the three-stage cascaded classifier with
 ment, and high-precision refinement to handle diverse attack
a single MLP layer, while keeping both feature extraction
 complexities.
pathways.
 Fig. 5 illustrates the ablation study results through grouped
 1) Impact of the Industrial Feature Extractor: Removing
 bar charts. Each subfigure compares the complete MFAD
the industrial feature extractor in MFAD (MFAD w/o Ind. in
 model (Full) with three variants, including MFAD w/o Ind.,
Table V) leads to a consistent performance reduction across
 MFAD w/o Temp., and MFAD w/o Thr.. On IGCPS dataset
all datasets. On IGCPS dataset, the F1-score decreases by
 in Fig. 5 (a), all variants maintain F1 above 93%, with
0.48% from 97.00% to 96.52%. For PUMP, F1 drops by
 the Full model achieving 97.00%. On PUMP dataset in
1.30% from 99.93% to 98.63%, primarily due to a decline
 Fig. 5 (b), the Full model reaches 99.93% F1, while removing
in precision. The SWaT dataset shows a larger F1 reduction
 the temporal encoder causes the largest drop to 96.41%. On
of 3.67% from 99.40% to 95.73%. The most significant impact
 SWaT dataset in Fig. 5 (c), the temporal encoder removal
is observed on WADI dataset, where F1 falls by 7.14% from
 results in the most significant degradation from 99.40% to
96.70% to 89.56%. The pronounced degradation on WADI
 92.66%. On WADI dataset in Fig. 5 (d), all ablation variants
and SWaT datasets highlights the critical role of engineered
 show substantial performance drops, with F1 falling below
statistical, spectral, and trend features in complex, multi-sensor
 92% when any component is removed. Across all datasets, the
environments for discerning subtle operational anomalies.
 Full model consistently achieves the highest and most balanced
 2) Impact of the Temporal Feature Encoder: As evaluated performance. The study establishes component importance
in a dedicated ablation experiment (MFAD w/o Temp. in hierarchy: the temporal encoder is most critical with aver-
Table V), removing the BiGRU-Attention-TCN encoder in age F1 reduction of 4.76% upon removal, followed by the
MFAD causes the most severe performance drop, affirming three-stage classifier at 3.21% and industrial feature extractor
its fundamental role. On IGCPS dataset, F1 falls by 3.74%. at 3.15%.
The degradation is 3.52% on PUMP dataset and most acute on
SWaT dataset at 6.74%. WADI shows a reduction of 5.03%.
 V. ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION
This confirms the encoder’s indispensability in capturing
bidirectional temporal dependencies and multi-scale patterns To assess the stability of MFAD in practical ICPS
necessary to detect evolving attacks. environments, we conduct robustness evaluation under two
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8331

Fig. 6. Effect of Gaussian noise injection and distribution shifts on MFAD across different ICPS datasets.

perturbation types: stochastic measurement corruption mod- Recall exhibits modest improvement from 94.89% to 95.83%
eled as zero-mean Gaussian noise with standard deviations at noise 0.06 before stabilizing around 96.12% at 0.10. F1
from 0.00 to 0.10, and deterministic distribution shifts with ranges from 96.70% at baseline to 95.86% at maximum noise,
drift levels from 0.00 to 0.10 emulating device aging, recali- demonstrating 0.84% degradation.
bration offsets, and slow process regime changes.
 B. Robustness to Distribution Shifts
A. Robustness to Gaussian Noise Fig. 6(e)-(h) present the performance under distribution
 Fig. 6 presents the detection robustness of MFAD across shifts with drift levels from 0.00 to 0.10, simulating sendifferent ICPS datasets. Fig. 6(a)-(d) illustrate the performance sor recalibration and operational regime changes. On IGCPS
of MFAD under Gaussian noise injection with standard devia- dataset (Fig. 6(e)), precision reaches 100.00% at shift levels
tions ranging from 0.00 to 0.10. On IGCPS dataset (Fig. 6(a)), 0.04-0.10, while F1 ranges from 96.97% to 97.49%. At shift
F1 ranges from 97.00% to 97.51%, with precision spanning level 0.02, the model maintains 97.00% F1 with 98.98% preci-
98.98% to 100.00% and recall maintaining around 95.10%. sion, identical to baseline. At maximum shift 0.10, precision
At noise level 0.04, precision reaches 100.00% while recall achieves 100.00% with 95.10% recall, yielding 97.49% F1,
remains at 95.10%, yielding F1 of 97.49%. At maximum which is 0.52% higher than that under the initial condition.
noise level 0.10, the model achieves 99.01% precision, 95.10% On PUMP dataset (Fig. 6(f)), exceptional stability
recall, and 97.01% F1, demonstrating minimal degradation is observed. Precision ranges from 99.86% to 99.98%,
from baseline. recall spans 99.91% to 100.00%, and F1 stays within
 On PUMP dataset (Fig. 6(b)), performance remains near- 99.93%-99.94%. At shift levels 0.06-0.10, recall achieves
perfect across all noise levels. Precision ranges from 99.86% 100.00% while precision marginally decreases from 99.95%
to 99.98%, recall spans 99.91% to 100.00%, and F1 stays to 99.86%. At shift level 0.02, precision increases to 99.98%
within 99.93%-99.94%. At noise level 0.06, recall achieves from baseline 99.95%, yielding the highest F1 of 99.94%.
100.00% while precision maintains 99.89%. The highest F1 On SWaT dataset (Fig. 6(g)), precision decreases from
of 99.94% occurs at noise level 0.02 with 99.98% precision 99.53% at baseline to 99.72% at shift 0.02, then to 99.40%,
and 99.91% recall. 98.73%, 97.86%, and 97.64% at shift levels 0.04, 0.06, 0.08,
 On SWaT dataset (Fig. 6(c)), controlled degradation is and 0.10 respectively. Recall shows different patterns: initially
observed. Precision decreases from 99.53% at baseline to dropping from 99.28% to 99.05% at shift 0.02, then to 98.79%
99.38% at noise 0.02, then to 99.12% at 0.04, 98.65% at at 0.04, before recovering to 98.83% at 0.06, surging to
0.06, 98.21% at 0.08, and 97.89% at 0.10. Recall shows 99.40% at 0.08, and stabilizing at 99.37% at 0.10. F1 decreases
gradual decline from 99.28% to 98.95% at noise 0.10. F1 monotonically from 99.40% to 98.49% across the shift range,
decreases monotonically from 99.40% to 98.42% across the representing 0.91% degradation.
noise range, representing only 0.98% degradation at maximum On WADI dataset (Fig. 6(h)), precision decreases from
perturbation. 98.58% at baseline to 98.81% at shift 0.02, then to 97.43%
 On WADI dataset (Fig. 6(d)), the most pronounced at 0.06, and 95.39% at 0.10. Recall exhibits inverse behavior:
variations occur due to higher structural complexity with improving from 94.89% at baseline to 96.16% at shift 0.02,
67 sensors. Precision decreases from 98.58% at baseline to peaking at 97.22% at shift 0.08, and stabilizing at 96.60%
97.82% at noise 0.04, 96.45% at 0.08, and 95.62% at 0.10. at 0.10. This inverse relationship produces F1 values that
8332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

initially rise from 96.70% to 97.32% at low shifts, then [4] M. I. Sayyaf, P. Pascacio, N. Zhu, and V. Renaudin, “Timegradually decline to 95.99% at maximum shift. The precision- series anomaly detection for sensor data: Models, metrics, and
 methodologies—A review,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 25, no. 24,
recall trade-off indicates that the three-stage classifier priori- pp. 43603–43619, Dec. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2025.3616395.
tizes anomaly coverage when facing drift-altered borderline [5] H. Kayan, M. Nunes, O. Rana, P. Burnap, and C. Perera, “Cybersecurity
samples. of industrial cyber-physical systems: A review,” ACM Comput. Surveys,
 vol. 54, no. 11s, pp. 1–35, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1145/3510410.
 The superior detection accuracy and robustness of MFAD [6] Z. Yu, Z. Kaplan, Q. Yan, and N. Zhang, “Security and privacy in
stem from three complementary design choices. First, the emerging cyber-physical world: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys
multimodal feature fusion combines statistical moments, Tuts., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1879–1919, 3rd Quart., 2021, doi: 10.1109/
 COMST.2021.3081450.
STFT-based frequency features, and trend derivatives with [7] K. Zhang et al., “Self-supervised learning for time series analy-
BiGRU–Attention–TCN temporal modeling, capturing both sis: Taxonomy, progress, and prospects,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
industrial characteristics and temporal dependencies to form Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 6775–6794, Oct. 2024, doi: 10.1109/
 TPAMI.2024.3387317.
compact normal manifolds that effectively distinguish abrupt [8] L. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Li, B. Hu, H. Guo, and Z. Liu, “Privacy-preserving
and gradual attacks under perturbations. Second, a three-stage lightweight time-series anomaly detection for resource-limited induscascaded classifier with adaptive early-exit and confidence trial IoT edge devices,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 6,
 pp. 4435–4446, Jun. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TII.2025.3538127.
gating directs most samples to lightweight stages, reducing [9] S. V. Haldikar, O. F. M. A. Kader, and R. K. Yekollu, “Edge computing
computation while reserving refined analysis for ambiguous and federated learning for real-time anomaly detection in industrial
cases, thus balancing precision and recall. Third, a semi- Internet of Things (IIoT),” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inventive Comput. Technol.
 (ICICT), Lalitpur, Nepal, Apr. 2024, pp. 1699–1703, doi: 10.1109/
supervised learning scheme leverages abundant unlabeled icict60155.2024.10544912.
data via reconstruction regularization, improving robustness [10] X. Jiang, C. Lu, H. Luo, and Y. Sun, “Unsupervised distributed anomaly
to distribution shifts. With low FLOPs under 1.64 M and detection framework for IoT in edge AI network,” IEEE Internet
 Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 22058–22072, Jun. 2025, doi: 10.1109/
sub-millisecond inference latency below 0.72 ms, MFAD is JIOT.2025.3549765.
well suited for deployment in resource-constrained ICPS edge [11] S. Peng, Y. Han, R. Li, L. Liu, J. Liu, and Z. Gu, “ROSE-BOX: A
environments. lightweight and efficient intrusion detection framework for resourceconstrained IIoT environments,” Appl. Sci., vol. 15, no. 12, p. 6448, Jun.
 2025, doi: 10.3390/app15126448.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [12] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and
 P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on
 This paper proposes MFAD, a lightweight Multimodal learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3,
 pp. 2671–2701, 3rd Quart., 2019, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2019.2896380.
Feature fusion-enhanced time series Anomaly Detection [13] S. Peng, Y. Han, X. Liang, C. Yang, W. Gui, and N. Zhou, “ROSE-BOX:
framework in resource-constrained ICPS. MFAD integrates An approach for intrusion detection in industrial Internet of Things,” in
three core components: a multimodal feature fusion module Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Parallel Distrib. Process. Appl. (ISPA), Kaifeng,
 China, Oct. 2024, pp. 2276–2277, doi: 10.1109/ISPA63168.2024.00325.
that jointly captures industrial domain characteristics and [14] P. Yan et al., “A comprehensive survey of deep transfer learning for
temporal dependencies, a semi-supervised learning architec- anomaly detection in industrial time series: Methods, applications, and
ture that achieves high detection performance using only 5% directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 3768–3789, 2024, doi: 10.1109/
 ACCESS.2023.3349132.
labeled data, and a three-stage cascaded classifier with adap- [15] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal
tive thresholding for efficient inference. Extensive experiments spatial–temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly
on ICPS datasets of varying scales (IGCPS, PUMP, SWaT, detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, Jan. 2023.
 [16] H. Nizam, S. Zafar, Z. Lv, F. Wang, and X. Hu, “Real-time deep anomaly
and WADI) demonstrate that MFAD consistently achieves detection framework for multivariate time-series data in industrial IoT,”
F1-scores above 96.7% while maintaining low FLOPs and IEEE Sensors J., vol. 22, no. 23, pp. 22836–22849, Dec. 2022, doi:
real-time performance suitable for edge deployment. Future 10.1109/JSEN.2022.3211874.
 [17] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
research directions include developing cross-modal atten- contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.
tion mechanisms for bidirectional feature interaction prior to (IJCAI), 2021, pp. 2352–2359, doi: 10.24963/IJCAI.2021/324.
fusion, incorporating physics-informed constraints to enhance [18] C. Feng and P. Tian, “Time series anomaly detection for cyber-physical
 systems via neural system identification and Bayesian filtering,” in Proc.
interpretability, deploying MFAD on a broader range of edge 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021,
hardware platforms to validate cross-device adaptability and pp. 2858–2867, doi: 10.1145/3447548.3467137.
deployment robustness, and extending the framework toward [19] M. Repeva and S. Polyakov, “Anomaly detection in the performance
 of data center cooling system devices based on machine learning and
online adaptive detection for real-time cyber-physical anomaly time series analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Ural-Siberian Conf. Biomed. Eng.,
identification. Radioelectronics Inf. Technol. (USBEREIT), Yekaterinburg, Russia, May
 2025, pp. 317–320, doi: 10.1109/USBEREIT65494.2025.11054137.
 [20] U. A. Usmani, I. Abdul Aziz, J. Jaafar, and J. Watada, “Deep
 R EFERENCES learning for anomaly detection in time-series data: An analysis
 of techniques, review of applications, and guidelines for future
[1] A. Humayed, J. Lin, F. Li, and B. Luo, “Cyber-physical sys- research,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 174564–174590, 2024, doi:
 tems security—A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 4, no. 6, 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3495819.
 pp. 1802–1831, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2703172. [21] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
[2] H.-S. Wu, “A survey of research on anomaly detection for time series,” density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
 in Proc. 13th Int. Comput. Conf. Wavelet Act. Media Technol. Inf. Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
 Process. (ICCWAMTIP), Chengdu, China, Dec. 2016, pp. 426–431, doi: [22] R. Martinez-Guerra and J. L. Mata-Machuca, Fault Detection and
 10.1109/ICCWAMTIP.2016.8079887. Diagnosis in Nonlinear Systems. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016.
[3] Y. Wang, R. Guo, and P. Min, “A survey of applications for anomaly [23] D. Wu, Z. Jiang, X. Xie, X. Wei, W. Yu, and R. Li, “LSTM learning with
 detection in the IoT: Methods, new perspectives, and future,” in Proc. Bayesian and Gaussian processing for anomaly detection in industrial
 IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern. (SMC), Kuching, Malaysia, Oct. IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 5244–5253, Aug.
 2024, pp. 2453–2460, doi: 10.1109/SMC54092.2024.10831268. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TII.2019.2952917.
PENG et al.: MULTIMODAL FEATURE FUSION-ENHANCED TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK 8333

[24] Y. Qin and Y. Lou, “Hydrological time series anomaly pattern detection Silin Peng received the master’s degree in electronic
 based on isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Inf. Technol., Netw., information from the Civil Aviation University of
 Electron. Autom. Control Conf. (ITNEC), Mar. 2019, pp. 1706–1710, China. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 doi: 10.1109/ITNEC.2019.8729405. in information security with the School of Intelli-
[25] J. Rosenberger, J. Müller, A. Selig, M. Bühren, and D. Schramm, gent Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
 “Extended kernel density estimation for anomaly detection in streaming and Peng Cheng Laboratory. His research interests
 data,” Proc. CIRP, vol. 112, pp. 156–161, Sep. 2022. include network and information security.
[26] I. Razzak, K. Zafar, M. Imran, and G. Xu, “Randomized nonlinear oneclass support vector machines with bounded loss function to detect of
 outliers for large scale IoT data,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 112,
 pp. 715–723, Nov. 2020.
[27] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly
 detector for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational
 autoencoder,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551,
 Jul. 2018.
[28] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. Yu Han received the Ph.D. degree in control theory
 (ICLR), 2022, pp. 1–10. and control engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong
[29] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: University, Shanghai, China, in 2011. He is currently
 Dual attention contrastive representation learning for time series a Full Professor with the School of Intelligent
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Dis- Systems Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University,
 covery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 3033–3045, doi: 10.1145/3580305. Shenzhen, China, and Guangdong Provincial
 3599295. Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Intelligent
[30] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly Emergency Technology, Shenzhen. His research
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural interests include robot control, multiinformation
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data fusion, machine vision, image processing,
 Mining, New York, NY, USA, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837, doi: 10.1145/ evolutionary computing, and intelligent fire
 3292500.3330672. emergency response.
[31] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2020,
 pp. 3395–3404, doi: 10.1145/3394486.3403392.
[32] R. Wang et al., “CutAddPaste: Time series anomaly detection by exploiting abnormal knowledge,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2024, pp. 3176–3187, doi: 10.1145/ Lichen Liu received the Ph.D. degree from the
 3637528.3671739. Department of Information Engineering, Chang’an
[33] H. Kim, S. Kim, S. Min, and B. Lee, “Contrastive time-series University of Information, Xi’an, China, in 2025. He
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 10, is currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Peng
 pp. 5053–5065, Nov. 2023. Cheng Laboratory. His research interests include
[34] J. Tian, M. Li, L. Fang, and L. Chen, “SSDCL: Semi-supervised multi-modal information feature fusion anomaly
 denoising-aware contrastive learning for time series anomaly detection detection, encrypted traffic detection, and computer
 in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, vision.
 pp. 7302–7316, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3588674.
[35] J. Tian, M. Li, L. Fang, and L. Chen, “SSDCL: Semi-supervised
 denoising-aware contrastive learning for time series anomaly detection
 in cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20,
 pp. 7302–7316, Jul. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2025.3588674.
[36] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
 series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul.
 2022, pp. 3621–3633. Jinlong Li received the Ph.D. degree from
[37] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate South China University of Technology, Guangzhou,
 time series anomaly detection from the perspective of graph rela- China, in 2024. He is currently a Lecturer with
 tional learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2022, the Cyberspace Institute of Advanced Technolpp. 2390–2397. ogy, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, China. His
[38] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly research interests include generative AI, data mindetection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. ing and security, and hybrid intelligent information
 (ICLR), May 2022. systems modeling.
[39] Y. Lin, Z. Yu, K. Yang, and C. L. Philip Chen, “Ensemble denoising autoencoders based on broad learning system for time-series
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
 no. 8, pp. 13913–13926, Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2025.3548
 941.
[40] Y. Yao, J. Feng, and Y. Liu, “Domain knowledge-guided contrastive
 learning framework based on complementary views for fault diagnosis
 with limited labeled data,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 5,
 pp. 8055–8063, May 2024. Ruonan Li received the Ph.D. degree from the
[41] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for Department of Computer Science and Technology,
 dense object detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, Harbin Institute of Technology, in 2024. She is
 no. 2, pp. 318–327, Feb. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2858826. currently a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Peng
[42] Y. Bengio, J. Louradour, and R. Collobert, “Curriculum Cheng Laboratory. Her research interests include
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Aug. 2009, blockchain, federated learning, AI empowered the
 pp. 41–48. Internet-of-Things, and deep reinforcement learning
[43] R. Müller, S. Kornblith, and G. Hinton, “When does label smoothing for networking.
 help,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Dec. 2019,
 pp. 4694–4703.
8334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 23, 2026

 Zhaoquan Gu received the bachelor’s and Ph.D. Xiaowen Chu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.E.
 degrees in computer science from Tsinghua Univer- degree in computer science from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2011 and 2015, respectively. sity, Beijing, China, in 1999, and the Ph.D. degree in
 He is currently a Professor with the Department of computer science from The Hong Kong University
 Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, in 2003. He
 of Technology, Shenzhen, China, and a Researcher is currently a Full Professor with the Department of
 with the Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Computer Science, The Hong Kong University of
 Laboratory, Shenzhen. His research interests include Science and Technology, Guangzhou.. His research
 wireless networks, distributed computing, big data interests include distributed and parallel computing
 analysis, and artificial intelligence security. and wireless networks. He is an Associate Editor for
 IEEE ACCESS and IEEE Internet of Things.

 Jie Liu (Fellow, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 in electrical engineering and computer science from
 the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
 USA, in 2001. He is currently a Chair Professor with
 Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Shenzhen,
 China, and the Dean of the AI Research Institute.
 Before joining HIT, he spent 18 years with Xerox
 PARC and Microsoft. He was a Principal Research
 Manager with Microsoft Research, Redmond, and
 a Partner of the Company. His research interests
 include cyber-physical systems, AI for IoT, and
energy efficient computing.