This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 1

 Mitigating Membership Inference and Model
 Inversion in 6G Federated Anomaly Detection
 M. Junaid Gul, Member, IEEE, Anal Paul, Member, IEEE, and Keshav Singh, Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In sixth-generation (6G) networks, federated learn- through model inversion attacks (MInvA) [1], [2]. Simultaing (FL) enables collaborative anomaly detection across dis- neously, the stringent quality-of-service (QoS) requirements
tributed edge devices without exposing raw data; however, across ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC)
exchanged gradients can leak privacy via membership inference
attacks (MIA) and model inversion attacks (MInvA). Meanwhile, requiring sub-millisecond latency, enhanced mobile broadband
6G network slicing imposes heterogeneous quality-of-service (eMBB) demanding high throughput, and massive machine-
(QoS) requirements across ultra-reliable low-latency commu- type communications (mMTC) serving billions of internet-ofnications (URLLC), enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), and things (IoT) devices demand slice-aware defense strategies that
massive machine-type communications (mMTC), where uniform balance privacy, robustness, and communication efficiency [3],
defenses often incur 30–60% accuracy loss. We propose a
slice-aware, defense-in-depth framework that calibrates three [4]. These slices have fundamentally conflicting operational
coordinated layers: Layer 1 statistical screening with thresh- constraints that a single privacy defense parameter cannot
olds τURLLC =4.5, τeMBB =5.0, and τmMTC =6.0; Layer 2 slice- satisfy.
aware differential privacy with Gaussian noise σURLLC =0.001, Existing defense mechanisms for FL primarily focus on
σeMBB =0.05, and σmMTC =0.10, where URLLC uses lightweight individual techniques, such as statistical screening for maperturbation to preserve stringent latency while stronger formal
differential privacy is concentrated in eMBB/mMTC; and Layer licious updates, differential privacy (DP) to mask sensitive
3 adversarial retraining using the fast gradient sign method information, or adversarial retraining to harden models against
(FGSM). Coordinating these layers yields complementary bene- inversion attacks, but often neglect the interplay among these
fits: screening reduces attack surface, differential privacy masks layers within a multi-slice environment [5], [6]. Statistical
leakage, and adversarial retraining hardens models. Experiments screening filters anomalous updates but provides no formal prion CICIDS2017 and N-BaIoT show 95.2% utility retention with
82.15% accuracy, a +16.7% macro-F1 improvement, 91–94% vacy guarantees, leaving membership inference attacks viable.
communication reduction, MIA success reduced from 78.3% to Differential privacy provides formal privacy bounds but causes
52.1%, model inversion error increased by 34.7%, and an overall 30–60% accuracy degradation when applied uniformly across
privacy accounting budget ϵtotal ≤ 2.1. all slices, with mMTC slices achieving only 47.98% accuracy
 Index Terms—6G, Network Slicing, FL, Anomaly Detection, on CICIDS2017 (baseline 83.84%), a 35.86 percentage-point
Membership Inference, Model Inversion, Differential Privacy, loss that creates security blind spots for detecting distributed
Defense-in-Depth. IoT botnets. Adversarial retraining using fast gradient sign
 method (FGSM) improves robustness to gradient inference but
 I. I NTRODUCTION does not prevent membership inference attacks, with success

F EDERATED learning (FL) has emerged as a transformative paradigm for enabling collaborative model training
across distributed devices without exposing raw data, making
 rates remaining at 63.5% compared to 52.1% when all three
 layers are coordinated. Most critically, existing approaches
 do not adapt defense parameters to slice-specific requireit particularly suited for privacy-sensitive applications in next- ments: URLLC slices requiring sub-millisecond latency cannot
generation wireless networks. However, in Sixth-Generation tolerate heavy privacy perturbation, yet without multi-layer
(6G) networks, federated anomaly detection faces a critical coordination they become high-value attack targets, while
challenge: attackers observing gradient exchanges can infer mMTC slices can benefit from stronger privacy but may
membership in training datasets through membership infer- suffer utility collapse under uniform defenses. This creates
ence attacks (MIA) or reconstruct private training samples a false dichotomy where practitioners must choose between
 accepting privacy risks or sacrificing utility in latency-critical
 The work of A. Paul was supported by the National Science and Technology
Council of Taiwan under Grant NSTC 114-2222-E-155-005. The work of K. services [7]–[9].
Singh was supported by the National Science and Technology Council of To address this gap, we propose a framework that coordi-
Taiwan under Grants NSTC 114-2218-E-110-005 and NSTC 115-2923-E-110- nates defense layers and adapts to slice-specific requirements.
003-MY3, and the Sixth Generation Communication and Sensing Research
Center funded by the Higher Education SPROUT Project, the Ministry of This paper proposes a defense-in-depth hybrid framework tai-
Education of Taiwan. (Corresponding authors: Keshav Singh; Anal Paul) lored for federated anomaly detection in 6G network slices by
 M. J. Gul is with the Department of Information and Communication coordinating three defense layers and calibrating parameters
Engineering, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, Gyeongbuk 38541, Republic
of Korea (e-mail: drmalik@yu.ac.kr). to slice-specific QoS requirements. The framework comprises
 A. Paul is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Yuan (i) slice-calibrated statistical update screening using per-slice
Ze University, Taoyuan 320315, Taiwan (e-mail: apaul@saturn.yzu.edu.tw). thresholds to filter anomalous contributions while preserving
 K. Singh is with the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 804201, Taiwan (e-mail: ke- signal in latency-critical slices, (ii) selective Gaussian pershav.singh@mail.nsysu.edu.tw). turbation with advanced composition accounting for formal

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 2

(ϵ, δ)-DP guarantees while respecting latency constraints, and and global patterns in system logs through multi-head atten-
(iii) adversarial retraining using FGSM-generated adversarial tion mechanisms, achieving state-of-the-art performance on
examples to smooth loss landscapes and reduce gradient leak- benchmark datasets including HDFS, BGL, and Thunderbird
age vulnerability. Because DP strength scales with the noise [13]. While the hierarchical design aligns conceptually with
magnitude, URLLC employs intentionally lightweight pertur- defense-in-depth approaches, the framework focuses on cenbation to preserve strict latency, while the strongest formal tralized settings without considering FL constraints or privacy
DP contribution is concentrated in the less latency-constrained attack scenarios. Pre-trained transformer models have been
eMBB/mMTC slices and reinforced by the overall defense-in- leveraged in the Loader framework [14] for enhanced sequence
depth coordination. By coordinating these layers rather than understanding in log anomaly detection, demonstrating supeapplying them independently, the framework creates emergent rior performance with F1-scores exceeding 95% on multiple
benefits: screening reduces attack surface dimensionality, dif- datasets. The framework emphasizes contextual understanding
ferential privacy masks remaining information leakage, and in log analysis, which proves crucial for accurate anomaly
adversarial training hardens models against inference attacks. detection in complex network environments. However, the cen-
Our approach dynamically adapts to slice-specific privacy– tralized approach fails to address the distributed nature of 6G
utility trade-offs and stringent service-level objectives. Ex- networks or associated privacy concerns. Hybrid architectures
perimental results on CICIDS2017 and N-BaIoT demonstrate combining transformers with complementary deep learning
95.2% utility retention, a +16.7% macro-F1 improvement, 91– techniques have emerged as promising solutions. Integration of
94% communication reduction, reduced MIA success (from transformer attention mechanisms with temporal convolutional
78.3% to 52.1%), increased model inversion error (+34.7%), networks [15] enables capture of both long-term dependencies
and an overall DP accounting budget of ϵtotal ≤ 2.1 under and local temporal patterns in log sequences, achieving notable
slice-calibrated noise. improvements in detection accuracy while reducing computational complexity compared to pure transformer models. The
 hybrid approach demonstrates the effectiveness of combining
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 multiple architectural components, analogous to multi-layered
 FL represents a promising approach for distributed anomaly defense strategies.
detection while preserving data privacy. The FedLog framework [10] addresses communication and computation over- A. Multi-Feature Extraction and Robustness
heads in IoT systems through customizable federated anomaly Comprehensive feature extraction represents a fundamendetection, achieving 98.7% accuracy with 60% reduction in tal requirement for robust anomaly detection systems. The
communication overhead compared to centralized approaches. AllInfoLog framework [16] extracts and utilizes all available
However, the approach focuses primarily on IoT environments log features, including semantic content, parameter values,
without addressing the specific challenges of 6G network and temporal information, demonstrating that comprehensive
slicing or sophisticated privacy attacks such as membership feature utilization significantly improves detection robustness
inference and model inversion. Cloud threat forensics has with over 97% accuracy across diverse anomaly types. The
been enhanced through interpretable federated transformer multi-feature approach parallels defense-in-depth frameworks
architectures [11] that leverage attention mechanisms to iden- that integrate multiple protection layers for comprehensive
tify malicious log patterns across distributed environments. security. Hierarchical contrastive learning has been applied
The framework combines FL with transformer-based sequence to enhance the robustness of anomaly detection [17] through
modeling to enable privacy-preserving threat detection while discriminative representations that remain resilient to noise and
maintaining model interpretability, achieving 94.3% precision adversarial perturbations. The hierarchical structure enables
and 92.1% recall on real-world cloud security datasets. While feature capture at multiple abstraction levels, improving gendemonstrating the effectiveness of transformer-based FL, the eralization across different log types and attack scenarios. The
approach lacks comprehensive defense mechanisms against approach demonstrates the importance of multi-level defense
gradient-based privacy attacks. It does not consider the het- mechanisms for achieving robustness in adversarial environerogeneous QoS requirements inherent to network slicing. ments. Contrastive learning combined with dual objective opti-
Recent comprehensive analysis of FL deep learning for log- mization [18] addresses the challenge of limited labeled data in
event sequence anomaly detection [12] highlights several criti- log analysis through self-supervised learning techniques. The
cal challenges, including privacy preservation, communication CLDTLog framework enables simultaneous optimization for
efficiency, and model robustness. The survey identifies the ne- both anomaly detection and representation learning, resulting
cessity for multi-layered defense mechanisms in federated set- in improved model generalization. While demonstrating multitings while emphasizing the importance of addressing sophisti- objective optimization effectiveness, the approach does not
cated adversarial attacks. Contemporary FL anomaly detection address the FL context or privacy-preserving requirements
approaches typically employ single-layer defense strategies, essential for 6G network applications.
failing to address the complex threat landscape characteristic
of next-generation networks. Transformer-based architectures B. Security Privacy Threats and Present Limitations
have demonstrated significant potential for log anomaly detec- Adversarial attacks against anomaly detection systems have
tion applications. The HitAnomaly framework [13] employs received increasing research attention. Black-box attack inveshierarchical transformer architectures to capture both local tigations [19] demonstrate that adversaries can craft malicious

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 3

log entries that evade detection while maintaining seman- against membership inference, model inversion, or gradienttic coherence, revealing significant vulnerabilities in existing based privacy attacks. There exists a notable gap in soluanomaly detection approaches and highlighting the neces- tions that simultaneously address communication efficiency,
sity for robust defense mechanisms. Such research directly adaptive privacy, and attack resilience for heterogeneous slice
supports threat models considering sophisticated adversaries types. In this work, we propose a slice-aware, defense-in-depth
capable of launching privacy attacks against FL systems. framework for federated anomaly detection that coordinates
Contrastive adversarial training combined with dual feature three established defense layers.
extraction [20] enhances model robustness through explicit • Multi-layer defense architecture: Unified statistical
training against adversarial examples while maintaining de- update screening (per-parameter Z-scores), slice-aware
tection accuracy on benign inputs. The contrastive learning DP(selective Gaussian perturbation with advanced comcomponent enables learning of discriminative representations position), and adversarial retraining FGSM to defend
resilient to adversarial perturbations. However, the approach against multiple attack vectors.
does not consider the FL context or specific privacy attacks rel- • Slice-based adaptation: Calibration of privacy paramevant to 6G network slicing scenarios. Further, comprehensive eters to match URLLC, eMBB, and mMTC service
surveys [21], [22] identify several critical limitations in con- requirements, enabling dynamic privacy-utility trade-off
temporary log-based anomaly detection approaches, including across network conditions.
insufficient privacy preservation consideration in distributed • Comprehensive attack mitigation: Integrated design desettings, limited robustness against sophisticated attacks, and fending against membership inference, model inversion,
a lack of adaptability to heterogeneous network environments and gradient leakage across all clients without perforsuch as 6G slices. Current approaches typically focus on mance loss.
single-aspect improvements rather than comprehensive defense • Service-aware differentiation: Real-time adjustment of
strategies. Critical analysis of deep learning approaches for log defenses per slice, balancing privacy, robustness, and
anomaly detection [22] questions the practical applicability of latency or throughput needs.
existing methods, noting significant gaps between academic • Theoretical and empirical validation: Rigorous privacy
research and real-world deployment requirements. Most exist- analysis and extensive experiments on CICIDS2017 and
ing methods fail to address complex operational constraints of N-BaIoT datasets demonstrate high accuracy (over 82%
production networks, including privacy requirements, commu- and 95%), improved F1-scores, up to 94% reduction in
nication limitations, and service differentiation needs. Table communication, and strong resistance to privacy attacks.
I provides a comprehensive comparison of related work, This defense-in-depth, slice-aware framework addresses key
limitations, and other aspects with our proposed framework. gaps in federated anomaly detection and provides a practical
 approach for balancing privacy, robustness, and efficiency in
C. Literature Basis for Our Experimental Baselines 6G network slicing deployments.
 To ensure a credible and reproducible experimental evaluation, we ground our baseline implementations in estab- III. M ETHODOLOGY
lished FL security and privacy literature. Privacy-preserving
 A. Overview and Workflow
FL has been explored for IoT-centric multiparty data sharing, using mechanisms such as local differential privacy and This section presents the proposed Defense-in-Depth framecryptographic protection to mitigate information leakage dur- work designed to secure federated anomaly detection across
ing collaborative training [32]. Robust FL under malicious heterogeneous 6G network slices. We focus on the threat
or abnormal client behavior has also been studied through model of honest-but-curious adversaries capable of inferring
Byzantine-tolerant aggregation and filtering strategies, which sensitive information via membership inference and model
motivate screening-based defenses that identify and reject inversion, while simultaneously satisfying slice-specific QoS
anomalous updates prior to aggregation [33]. Furthermore, constraints. The experimental datasets, preprocessing, and
robust asynchronous FL has been investigated in networked federated simulation settings are described in Section IV.
service scenarios such as cellular traffic prediction, highlight- Fig. 1 shows the system overview, and Table II summarizes
ing the practical importance of robustness and privacy consid- the key symbols used in this section. We employ a lightweight
erations in real network deployments [34]. In contrast to these multi-layer perceptron (MLP) optimized for edge devices with
prior-work directions that typically emphasize a single aspect limited computational resources. The model is trained using
(privacy or robustness), our proposed framework coordinates cross-entropy loss and stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with
multiple defense layers and calibrates them to heterogeneous a learning rate of 0.01, batch size of 64, and 5 local epochs
6G slice QoS requirements. per communication round. To enhance robustness, adversarial
 retraining is incorporated using the FGSM with perturbation
 magnitude ϵadv = 0.05.
D. Motivation and Contributions
 FL for anomaly detection in 6G network slices faces advanced privacy challenges and requires adaptable solutions to B. System Model and Notation
suit diverse QoS constraints. Existing approaches often lack Consider a FL system F = (C, S, A), where C =
multi-layered defenses and do not provide adequate robustness {C1 , C2 , . . . , CN } denotes the set of N clients, S =

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 4

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED W ORK WITH O UR D EFENSE - IN -D EPTH F RAMEWORK .

 Reference Short Title Connection to Our Work Limitations Our Work Addresses Gaps
 Anyanwu et CLDP-FATD for Vehicle Uses client-level DPfor Limited to vehicular net- Our framework provides sliceal. [23] Networks threat detection in federated works; no slice-aware aware DPwith multi-layer desettings adaptation; single de- fense (screening + DP + adfense layer versarial training)
 Barbieri et Layer-Wise Personalized Transformer-based Focuses only on person- We integrate comprehensive
 al. [24] FL for Anomaly Detection federated anomaly alization; lacks privacy privacy attack defense with
 detection with layer- attack defense; no net- slice-aware service differentiawise personalization work slicing considera- tion
 tion
 Wang et al. [25] Federated BiWGAN-GP Federated GAN-based Uses only generative Our defense-in-depth
 for Network Slicing anomaly detection for models; no differential combines statistical screening,
 virtualized network slicing privacy; vulnerable to differential privacy, and
 membership inference adversarial training
 attacks
 Zhang et al. [26] DP FL with Second-Order Differential privacy with Uniform privacy bud- We provide adaptive slice-
 Optimization Hessian information for get; no anomaly detec- aware privacy budgets with
 faster convergence tion focus; lacks adver- multi-layer anomaly-specific
 sarial robustness defenses
 Li et al. [27] Selective Shield Hybrid Combines selective homo- Focuses on gradient Our framework addresses mul-
 Defense morphic encryption with DP leakage; no slice tiple privacy attacks with QoSdifferentiation; limited aware slice management
 to parameter sensitivity
 analysis
 Hu et al. [28] Sparsification-Amplified Integrates random sparsifi- General FL; no anomaly We provide anomaly detection
 Privacy cation with gradient pertur- detection; lacks slice- with slice-aware privacy ambation specific optimization plification and service differentiation
 Liu et al. [29] Cross-silo FL with Record-level personalized Complex sampling Our approach provides real-
 Record-level DP DP for cross-silo settings mechanisms; no real- time slice-aware anomaly detime anomaly detection; tection with adaptive privacy
 lacks network slicing mechanisms
 support
 Xu et al. [30] Optimal Client Sampling Client grouping based on Focuses on client sam- We integrate optimal privacy
 with Heterogeneous DP privacy budgets with opti- pling; no anomaly de- allocation with comprehensive
 mized sampling tection; lacks adversarial anomaly detection and adverdefense mechanisms sarial training
 Shi et al. [25] DP-FedSAM with Uses SAM optimizer to im- General FL; no Our framework provides
 Sharpness-Aware prove robustness against DP anomaly-specific anomaly-specific robustness
 Minimization noise optimization; lacks with slice-differentiated
 slice awareness service guarantees
 Kiani et al. [31] Overlapping Grouped Privacy guarantees for over- Complex group manage- We provide real-time slice-
 Learning with DP lapping group memberships ment; no anomaly de- aware anomaly detection
 tection focus; lacks real- with simplified privacy
 time adaptation management
 Key Contributions of Our Defense-in-Depth Framework:
 1. Multi-Layer Defense Integration: Unlike existing works that focus on single defense mechanisms, our framework integrates statistical
 screening, slice-aware differential privacy, and adversarial retraining in a unified architecture.
 2. Slice-Aware Privacy Adaptation: We propose a slice-aware framework that calibrates privacy parameters to URLLC, eMBB, and mMTC
 service requirements, addressing heterogeneous QoS constraints.
 3. Comprehensive Attack Coverage: Our approach simultaneously defends against membership inference attacks, model inversion attacks,
 and gradient leakage while maintaining anomaly detection accuracy.
 4. Real-Time Service Differentiation: We enable dynamic privacy-utility trade-offs that adapt to slice-specific performance requirements
 without compromising security guarantees.
 5. Theoretical and Practical Validation: Our framework provides rigorous privacy analysis with practical deployment considerations for 6G
 network environments.

{URLLC, eMBB, mMTC} represents the network slices, and The global objective is to minimize the weighted empirical
A is the central aggregation server. Each client Ck is asso- risk across all clients:
ciated with a slice sk ∈ {0, 1, 2} and holds a private dataset N
Dk = {(xi , yi )}ni=1
 k
 , where xi ∈ Rd and yi ∈ {0, 1}.
 X |Dk |
 minp L(θ) = Lk (θ, Dk ), (1)
 θ∈R D
 k=1

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 5

Fig. 1. System model of the proposed federated learning system with multi-layer defense.

 TABLE II reduces gradient exploitability, providing practical privacy
 S UMMARY OF K EY S YMBOLS hardening under URLLC-grade QoS.
 Symbol Description
 F FL system D. Slice-Aware Defense-in-Depth Framework
 C Set of N clients
 S Network slices (URLLC, eMBB, mMTC) To mitigate these threats, we propose a three-layer defense
 θt Global model parameter vector at round t mechanism (Algorithm 1) comprising: (i) statistical update
 θ tk Local model parameters of client k at round t screening, (ii) slice-aware differential privacy, and (iii) adver-
 ∆θ tk Parameter update from client k at round t sarial retraining. The overall framework achieves a balance
 Dk Local dataset of client k
 sk Slice assignment for client k between privacy, robustness, and efficiency, tailored to the
 t
 zk,j Normalized Z-score for parameter j of client k at differentiated requirements of 6G network slices.
 round t 1) Layer 1: Statistical Update Screening: Z-score screen-
 τsk Slice-specific Z-score threshold
 ing operates as a pre-aggregation filter, checking whether
 σ sk Slice-specific DP noise standard deviation
 (ϵ, δ) Differential privacy parameters each client’s parameter updates deviate significantly from the
 ϵtotal Total privacy budget across all rounds population mean. This design differs from robust aggrega-
 L Loss function tion rules (e.g., Krum, Trimmed Mean) which operate at
 Ladv Adversarial loss
 ϵadv FGSM perturbation magnitude
 the aggregation stage by down-weighting outlier clients. Our
 xadv Adversarial example pre-aggregation screening is lightweight and communicationefficient but may be less effective against stealthy poisoning
 PN attacks that craft updates remaining within per-coordinate
where D = k=1 |Dk | and θ ∈ Rp denotes the global model acceptance bounds. Future work should investigate combining
parameters. Eq. (1) ensures that clients contribute proportion- screening with robust aggregation (screen then aggregate) for
ally to their dataset size, preserving fairness in aggregation. enhanced Byzantine resilience. At each communication round
 t, client k computes its local update as:
C. Threat Model
 ∆θ tk = θ tk − θ t−1 . (2)
 We assume an honest-but-curious adversary capable of
observing exchanged parameter updates ∆θ tk = θ tk − θ t−1 Eq. (2) defines the parameter difference transmitted to the
but without access to raw data. The adversary aims to in- server for aggregation.
fer sensitive information through gradient-based analysis or To detect anomalous updates, normalized Z-scores are comstatistical correlations, motivating the need for multi-layered puted for each parameter j:
 t
defenses. In our slice-aware setting, defense parameters are ex- t
 ∆θk,j − µtj
plicitly calibrated to heterogeneous QoS constraints: URLLC zk,j = , (3)
 σjt + 10−9
employs intentionally lightweight DP perturbation (near-zero
noise) to preserve stringent latency, while stronger formal DP where 10−9 prevents division by zero.
contributions are concentrated in the less latency-constrained The mean and standard deviation for parameter j across all
eMBB/mMTC slices via higher noise scales. Consequently, N clients are computed as:
URLLC protection is delivered by the coordinated defensev
 N u N
in-depth pipeline, where statistical screening reduces the t 1 X
 t t
 u1 X
 t − µt 2 .
 
 µj = ∆θi,j , σj = t ∆θi,j j (4)
exposed/abnormal update surface and adversarial retraining N i=1 N i=1

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 6

 An update is accepted if: Algorithm 1 Slice-Aware Defense-in-Depth FL Training.
 t
 zk,j ≤ τsk , ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , p}, (5) Require: Initial global model θ 0 , client set C, slice assignments sk , thresholds τs , noise parameters σs , total rounds
where τsk is the slice-specific threshold. For example, T.
τURLLC = 4.5, τeMBB = 5.0, and τmMTC = 6.0. These 1: for t = 1 to T do
thresholds are motivated by a normal-approximation heuristic 2: Ut ← ∅.
that makes Z-score cutoffs interpretable as conservative outlier 3: for all clients k ∈ C do
filters; however, strict Gaussianity is not required, and we treat 4: Perform local training with adversarial retraining
this assumption as a practical guideline for threshold selection using Eqs. (10) and (11).
rather than a formal prerequisite. 5: Compute update ∆θ tk = θ tk − θ t−1 via Eq. (2).
 2) Layer 2: Slice-Aware Differential Privacy: After screen- 6: Calculate Z-scores using Eq. (3).
ing, we enforce a bounded sensitivity via ℓ2 clipping and then 7: if update passes screening by Eq. (5) then
 t
apply the Gaussian mechanism with slice-calibrated noise. 8: Apply DP noise: ∆θ f = ∆θ t + nt , where nt ∼
 k k k k
Each accepted client update is clipped as N (0, σs2k I) (Eq. (7)).
 ! t
 t
 ¯ = ∆θ t · min 1, C 9: Ut ← Ut ∪ {∆θ f }.
 k
 ∆θ k k , (6)
 ∆θ tk 2 10: else
 11: Reject update.
where C is the clipping bound. The server then perturbs the 12: end if
clipped update: 13: end for
 ˜ t = ∆θ
 ¯ t + nt , nt ∼ N 0, σ 2 C 2 I . if |Ut | > 0 then
 
 ∆θ (7) 14:
 k k k k sk
 θ t ← θ t−1 + |U1t | ∆∈Ut ∆.
 P
 15:
 Noise magnitudes are calibrated to balance privacy and 16: else
utility: 17: θ t ← θ t−1 .
 σURLLC = 0.001, σeMBB = 0.05, σmMTC = 0.10. (8) 18: end if
 19: end for
Using the standard Gaussian mechanism bound, a per-round Ensure: Final global model θ T .
privacy loss can be related (conservatively) to (C, σsk , δ) as
 s   s  
 C 1.25 1 1.25
 ϵt ≈ 2 ln = 2 ln , (9) where λ ∈ [0, 1] satisfies λ + (1 − λ) = 1, and typically
 σsk C δ σsk δ
 λ = 0.5.
where the approximation reflects the commonly used analyti- 4) Integrated Training Procedure: Algorithm 1 provides
cal bound for the Gaussian mechanism and assumes the sen- the end-to-end realization of the proposed slice-aware
sitivity is bounded by clipping in (6). The total privacy budget Defense-in-Depth framework by explicitly integrating the
across T rounds is then computed via composition (or a tighter three defense layers into a single federated training loop.
accountant, e.g., Rényi/moments accountant), yielding ϵtotal for Specifically, it formalizes (i) the local adversarial retraining
a chosen δ. Because formal DP strength increases with the step using FGSM (Eqs. (10)–(11)), (ii) the statistical update
noise magnitude, URLLC employs intentionally lightweight screening performed on each client update using the Z-score
perturbation to preserve strict latency, while the strongest test (Eqs. (3)–(5)), and (iii) the slice-aware differential privacy
formal DP contribution is concentrated in the less latency- perturbation applied to accepted updates (Eqs. (7)–(9)). The
constrained eMBB/mMTC slices via larger noise. Accordingly, accepted and perturbed updates are then aggregated to update
URLLC protection is reinforced by defense-in-depth coordi- the global model for the next round, making Algorithm 1 the
nation (screening + adversarial retraining + lightweight DP) operational counterpart of the analytical formulation presented
rather than DP noise alone. in this section.
 3) Layer 3: Adversarial Retraining: To enhance robustness
against inference attacks exploiting model gradients, each E. Complexity and Theoretical Guarantees
client augments its local training with adversarial examples
 The per-round complexity is O(N p) for local training and
generated using the FGSM. For a clean input x, the adversarial
 Z-score computation, and O(p) for aggregation, where N
example is computed as:
 is the number of clients and p is the model dimension.
 xadv = x + ϵadv · sign(∇x L(θ k , x, y)) , (10) The framework provides an overall DP accounting bound
 through Eq. (9), robustness via Eqs. (10)–(11), and Byzantine
where L denotes the loss function, θ k represents the local
 resilience through Eqs. (3)–(5). Consistent with the slice-aware
model parameters, and ϵadv controls the perturbation magnidesign, the effective DP strength is slice-dependent due to the
tude.
 calibrated noise scales in Eq. (8).
 The local training objective is modified to combine clean
 Privacy Analysis: After statistical screening, we bound the
and adversarial samples:
 ℓ2 -sensitivity of each accepted client update by applying ℓ2
Ladv (θ k , Dk ) = λ Lclean (θ k , Dk )+(1−λ) Lperturbed (θ k , Dkadv ),clipping with norm bound C in Eq. (6). Given this bounded
 (11) sensitivity, adding Gaussian noise with covariance σs2k C 2 I

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 7

in Eq. (7) implements the Gaussian mechanism and yields
a per-round (ϵt , δ)-differential privacy guarantee, where ϵt is
conservatively related to (σsk , δ) as in Eq. (9). The cumulative
privacy loss over T communication rounds is then obtained
via composition (e.g., advanced composition or a tighter
Rényi/moments accountant), resulting in an overall privacy
budget ϵtotal for the chosen δ.
 Utility Preservation: Noise variance σs2k is minimized
for latency-critical slices (i.e., URLLC) to preserve accuracy,
while higher noise is applied to eMBB and mMTC for stronger Fig. 2. Final performance comparison on CICIDS2017 dataset across different
 defense methods.
privacy.
 Robustness Enhancement: Adversarial retraining
(Eqs. (10)–(11)) increases the perturbation required to Fig. 2 shows that the baseline FL (Vanilla FL) achieves
compromise predictions, improving resilience against a macro-averaged F1-score of 0.36 on CICIDS2017, reflectgradient-based inference attacks. ing limited detection of minority anomaly classes. Applying
 uniform defenses reduces the F1-macro to 0.13, a 63.9%
 IV. S IMULATION AND P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS relative drop that underscores the detrimental impact of nonadaptive defense strategies. In contrast, the Hybrid Defense
 To evaluate the proposed Defense-in-Depth framework, increases the F1-macro to 0.42, marking a 16.7% improvewe conduct simulations on two widely adopted benchmark ment over the baseline and more than tripling performance
datasets for network anomaly detection and compare against relative to uniform defenses. This gain demonstrates that slicemultiple baselines. Hereafter, the term baseline/baselines aware calibration of screening thresholds and noise parameters
refers only to our implemented experimental reference meth- substantially enhances robustness to class imbalance.
ods (Vanilla FL, Screening-only, Uniform Screening+DP,
Adversarial-only, and Uniform Full Defenses) evaluated under
the same protocol; Section II discusses prior work only. We
use (i) CICIDS2017 [35], [36], a comprehensive intrusion
detection dataset, and (ii) N-BaIoT [37], [38], a large-scale
IoT botnet dataset. All features are normalized to zero mean
and unit variance. We use a fixed split of each dataset into
training (70%), validation (15%), and test (15%) sets with
a fixed random seed (seed = 42) to ensure reproducibility,
and the same split is used for all baselines and defense con- Fig. 3. Performance comparison on N-BaIoT dataset across defense methods.
figurations to ensure fair comparison. We then partition only
the training split across clients to emulate realistic federated Fig. 3 demonstrates the performance comparison on the Nnon-independent and identically distributed (i.e., non-i.i.d.) BaIoT dataset, which exhibits different characteristics from
slice distributions, where each client is assigned to a slice CICIDS2017. The baseline FL achieves 95.41% accuracy and
(URLLC/eMBB/mMTC) reflecting heterogeneous QoS and F1-macro of 0.49, establishing performance bounds for IoT
traffic characteristics anticipated in 6G deployments (the vali- botnet detection. Uniform defenses cause catastrophic degradation split is used only for hyperparameter selection/tuning). dation to 40.64% accuracy and 0.33 F1-macro representing
Unless otherwise stated, all reported metrics (accuracy, macro- 57.4% and 32.7% relative performance losses, respectively.
F1, precision, and recall) are computed on the held-out central- This severe utility degradation illustrates the inadequacy of
ized test split using the global model (final round for summary one-size-fits-all privacy mechanisms for high-dimensional IoT
tables and per-round values for learning curves). CICIDS2017 data with 115 features. In stark contrast, the Hybrid Defense
provides diverse benign and attack traffic traces suitable for maintains 95.15% accuracy (99.7% utility retention) while
intrusion/anomaly detection evaluation. N-BaIoT captures IoT achieving 0.78 F1-macro (59.2% improvement over basetelemetry under botnet behaviors (e.g., Mirai/BASHLITE), line). The 54.51 percentage point accuracy improvement and
making it suitable for evaluating robustness under non-i.i.d. 136.4% F1-macro increase over uniform defenses quantitaand high-dimensional settings. We evaluate on two widely tively validate the superior privacy-utility balance achieved
adopted, complementary benchmarks (CICIDS2017 and N- through slice-aware defense calibration. These results confirm
BaIoT) to provide controlled and reproducible comparison that intelligent differentiation of defense parameters is crucial
of slice-aware defense coordination under heterogeneous QoS for maintaining practical utility in diverse 6G network slice enconstraints. While these datasets cover distinct traffic modal- vironments, particularly for IoT-dense scenarios requiring high
ities (enterprise intrusion traces vs. IoT botnet telemetry) detection accuracy and robust minority class identification.
and enable fair benchmarking, cross-dataset transfer (unseen- Fig. 4 illustrates the communication reduction achieved by
domain) evaluation is beyond the scope of this study; therefore, different defense strategies across both datasets. Vanilla FL
robustness under arbitrary dataset/environment shift remains (no-defense baseline) exhibits zero communication reduction
an open question and is deferred to future work. as it transmits all client updates without screening. Uniform

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 8

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D EFENSE M ETHODS .

 Method Accuracy (%) Macro F1-score Comm. Reduction (%)
 Vanilla FL 83.84 0.36 0.0
 Screening-only 82.50 0.39 15.2
 Uniform Screening+DP 47.98 0.13 100.0
 Adversarial-only 81.30 0.41 0.0
 Uniform Full Defenses 44.12 0.15 100.0
 Hybrid Defense (proposed) 82.15 0.42 91.3

Fig. 4. Communication reduction comparison across defense methods: (a)
CICIDS2017 dataset, (b) N-BaIoT dataset. Fig. 5. Round-by-round macro F1-score evolution on CICIDS2017: Baseline
 vs. Full Defenses vs. Hybrid (tuned).

Screening+DP (i.e., Applies the same screening threshold
and the same DP noise level to all slices (no slice-aware 83.84% accuracy without privacy protections, establishing the
calibration)) achieves complete communication reduction (∼ upper bound for model utility. The Full Defenses Uniform
100%) by applying strict screening that rejects nearly all approach, applying uniform noise and screening across all
updates, but this comes at the severe cost of model utility slices, suffers severe utility degradation to 47.98% accuracy, a
degradation as demonstrated in previous figures. The Hybrid substantial 35.86% point reduction. This dramatic performance
Defense achieves remarkable communication efficiency with loss demonstrates the inadequacy of uniform defense strategies
91.3% reduction on CICIDS2017 and 94.2% on N-BaIoT that fail to account for slice heterogeneity and QoS requirewhile maintaining near-baseline performance. This 8.7% and ments. In contrast, the proposed Hybrid Defense maintains
5.8% transmission overhead represents the minimal commu- 82.15% accuracy, representing only a 1.69% point decrease
nication cost required to preserve model utility through slice- from the baseline a 95.6% utility retention rate. This remarkaware screening. The higher reduction on N-BaIoT (94.2% able preservation of model performance while providing robust
vs. 91.3%) reflects the dataset’s inherent characteristics that privacy guarantees validates the effectiveness of slice-aware
enable more aggressive screening without utility loss. The defense mechanisms. The 34.17% point improvement over
integration of statistical screening and slice-aware DP achieves uniform defenses (82.15% vs. 47.98%) quantitatively demondramatic communication reduction exceeding ∼ 90%, by strates the superior privacy-utility balance achieved through
selectively rejecting anomalous updates and reducing uplink tailored slice-specific calibration of screening thresholds and
transmission payload. This efficiency gain not only conserves noise parameters.
network bandwidth but also prolongs battery life in resource- Fig. 5 shows the evolution of macro F1-score over 10 rounds
constrained clients. on the CICIDS2017 dataset for three scenarios. The Baseline
 a) Interpretation: The results demonstrate that intelli- FL starts at 0.14 in Round 1 and steadily rises to 0.36 by
gently combining slice-specific defense layers substantially Round 6, after which it plateaus, indicating rapid convergence.
improves robustness and privacy without incurring the typical The Full Defenses Uniform remains constant at 0.13 across
accuracy and communication penalties observed in uniform all rounds, reflecting its inability to learn meaningful class
defense models. This balance is critical for practical deploy- distinctions due to overly aggressive defenses. The Hybrid
ment in heterogeneous 6G network slicing environments. Defense (tuned) begins at 0.26, already 85.7% higher than
 Table III summarizes the performance on CICIDS2017 and the baseline’s initial performance, and increases consistently
N-BaIoT datasets. The Hybrid Defense approach attains near- each round, reaching 0.42 by Round 8. This represents a
baseline accuracy (e.g., exceeding ∼ 82% on CICIDS2017 61.5% improvement over the baseline’s final F1 (0.42 vs.
and ∼ 95% on N-BaIoT), closely matching Vanilla FL, 0.26) at convergence and more than a 223% gain over uniform
while significantly improving the macro F1-score compared to defenses. The steady upward trend and higher plateau demonuniform defenses. This indicates enhanced detection capability, strate that slice-aware calibration accelerates learning dynamespecially for minority anomaly classes. The accuracy compar- ics and enhances minority class detection without sacrificing
ison reveals critical insights into the privacy-utility trade-off convergence speed. These metrics over communication rounds
inherent in federated defense mechanisms. Vanilla FL achieves indicate stable convergence of the federated optimization pro-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 9

cess under defensive perturbations. In particular, the accuracy
and macro-F1 improve steadily from early rounds, and the
Hybrid Defense converges toward near-baseline performance
while improving minority-class detection. As specified in the
evaluation protocol above, the per-round curves and summary
tables report held-out test performance of the global model
rather than training-set performance.

A. Component Ablation Study
 Fig. 7. Parameter sweep on CICIDS2017: (a) Final accuracy vs. screening
 threshold T0 , (b) Final F1-Macro vs. screening threshold T0 .

 Further threshold increases to 5.0 and 5.5 reduce F1 to 0.40
 and 0.38, showing reduced robustness to rare anomaly classes
 as screening becomes lax. These results identify T0 = 4.5
 as the optimal trade-off point that maximizes both accuracy
 and F1-Macro, validating the importance of careful threshold
 tuning in slice-aware statistical screening.
Fig. 6. Ablation study on CICIDS2017: (a) Final accuracy contribution by
component, (b) Final F1-Macro contribution by component.

 Fig. 6(a) shows that Screening Only (tuned) retains 83.05%
accuracy and DP Only (tuned) 82.91%, each within 1% of the
83.84% baseline, indicating minimal utility loss when applied
in isolation. Adversarial Only slightly exceeds baseline at
83.86%, demonstrating its effectiveness at enhancing anomaly
separation without privacy noise. The Hybrid Defense (tuned)
yields 82.15%, a 1.69% point decrease from baseline but
a 39.7% improvement over uniform full defenses, confirm-
 Fig. 8. Parameter sweep on CICIDS2017: (a) Final accuracy vs. DP noise
ing that combined defenses harmonize component strengths. level σ0 , (b) Final F1-Macro vs. DP noise level σ0 .
Fig. 6(b) indicates that Screening Only improves F1-macro
to 0.39 (+8.3% vs. baseline), while DP Only achieves 0.34 Fig. 8(a) illustrates the impact of DP noise level σ0 on
(–5.6%), showing that privacy noise alone can harm mi- final accuracy. At σ0 = 0.01, accuracy is 82.95%, only 0.89%
nority detection. Adversarial Only matches baseline at 0.36, points below the optimum 82.15% at σ0 = 0.05. Increasing
reflecting stable class discrimination. The Hybrid Defense σ0 to 0.10 further reduces accuracy to 81.60%, a total drop
reaches 0.42, a 16.7% gain over baseline and ∼ 223% over of 1.35 points from the tuned optimum, demonstrating that
uniform defenses, illustrating that integrating screening, DP, moderate noise balances privacy with performance. Fig. 8(b)
and adversarial retraining yields the most robust minority class shows the corresponding F1-Macro trend. The F1-score peaks
performance without excessive utility trade-off. at 0.42 for σ0 = 0.05, matching the tuned Hybrid Defense’s
 • Screening-only: Employs statistical update screening optimal minority class detection. At σ0 = 0.01, F1 is 0.39
 without additional privacy or adversarial defenses. (7.1% below peak), while at σ0 = 0.10, it declines to 0.38
 • DP-only: Applies uniform Gaussian noise to all client (9.5% below peak). These results confirm that σ0 = 0.05
 updates without screening or adversarial training. provides the best trade-off between privacy noise and robust
 • Adversarial-only: Incorporates adversarial retraining but anomaly detection, maximizing both accuracy and F1-Macro.
 no screening or privacy noise.
 • Hybrid Defense: Combines all three layers with sliceaware calibration as proposed.
 Fig. 7(a) shows that the final accuracy sharply increases
from 3.85% at T0 = 4.0 to 82.15% at T0 = 4.5, indicating
that the screening threshold must exceed the anomaly Zscore distribution’s mean to allow meaningful updates. As T0
further increases to 5.0 and 5.5, accuracy gradually declines
to 81.76% and 81.23%, reflecting overly permissive screening
that admits noisy updates. Fig. 7(b) demonstrates a similar
trend for F1-Macro: at T0 = 4.0, the model barely learns Fig. 9. Parameter sweep heatmaps on CICIDS2017: (a) Final accuracy vs.
(F1=0.03), but performance surges to 0.42 at T0 = 4.5, match- screening threshold T0 and DP noise level σ0 (Fig. 15), (b) Final F1-Macro
ing the tuned Hybrid Defense’s optimal minority detection. vs. screening threshold T0 and DP noise level σ0 .

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 10

 Fig. 9(a) shows accuracy heatmap: at T0 = 4.0, accuracy
remains near 3.8% regardless of σ0 , indicating ineffective
screening. At T0 = 4.5, accuracy peaks between 82.15%
and 82.95% for σ0 ∈ [0.01, 0.05] before slightly dropping
to 81.60% at σ0 = 0.10. For T0 = 5.0, accuracy stays above
∼ 81%, demonstrating robustness across noise levels. Fig. 9(b)
displays F1-Macro heatmap: minimal F1 (0.02–0.03) at T0 =
4.0 for all σ0 . Peak F1 (0.42) occurs at (T0 , σ0 ) = (4.5, 0.05),
with slightly lower values (0.39 and 0.38) at σ0 = 0.01, 0.10.
At T0 = 5.0, F1 remains above 0.36 across noise levels. These
 Fig. 12. Accuracy vs. Communication Reduction on CICIDS2017.
heatmaps confirm that the optimal parameter region is centered
at T0 = 4.5 and σ0 = 0.05, maximizing both accuracy and F1-
Macro while offering tolerance to moderate noise variations.

 Fig. 13. Accuracy vs. Communication Reduction on N-BaIoT dataset.

Fig. 10. Slice-aware update acceptance: (a) Updates accepted vs. rejected by
slice, (b) Acceptance rate by slice. and URLLC together capture 90.6% of all acceptances, underscoring their high-priority status in maintaining network
 Fig. 10(a) shows that URLLC (Slice 0) accepted 26 updates
 performance and user experience. eMBB’s dominance aligns
and rejected 4, eMBB (Slice 1) accepted 32 and rejected
 with its bandwidth-intensive applications such as video stream-
8, while mMTC (Slice 2) accepted only 6 and rejected 24.
 ing and augmented reality, which demand frequent resource
This reflects the framework’s slice-aware screening, which
 reallocation. URLLC’s substantial share reflects the critical
admits the majority of URLLC and eMBB updates to preserve
 nature of latency-sensitive services like autonomous driving
low-latency and high-throughput requirements, but rigorously
 and industrial control, where even minor delays can have sefilters mMTC to enforce stricter anomaly checks. Fig. 10(b)
 vere consequences. Conversely, mMTC’s minimal acceptance
reports acceptance rates of 86.7% for URLLC, 80.0% for
 rate appropriately matches its delay-tolerant IoT charactereMBB, and ∼ 20% for mMTC. The lower rate for mMTC
 istics, where sporadic updates suffice for low-power sensor
indicates conservative handling of massive IoT slices to mitcommunications.
igate potential privacy and security risks, whereas the high
rates for URLLC and eMBB balance performance and privacy Fig. 12 maps each strategy on CICIDS2017 by communicaaccording to their QoS profiles. tion reduction (x-axis) versus final accuracy (y-axis). Vanilla
 FL achieves 83.84% accuracy with 0.0% reduction. Uniform
 Screening+DP and Uniform Full Defense reach 100.0% reduction but suffer severe utility degradation (47.98% and 44.12%
 accuracy, respectively). In contrast, the proposed Hybrid Defense achieves 91.3% reduction while preserving 82.15%
 accuracy, demonstrating a substantially better performance–
 efficiency trade-off than uniform defenses.
 Fig. 13 maps each strategy on the N-BaIoT dataset by communication reduction (x-axis) versus final accuracy (y-axis).
 Vanilla FL achieves 95.42% accuracy with 0.0% reduction,
 while Uniform Full Defense reaches 100.0% reduction but
 drops to 48.67% accuracy. In contrast, the proposed Hybrid
Fig. 11. Contribution of accepted update (URLLC 26, eMBB 32, mMTC 6). Defense achieves 94.2% reduction while preserving 95.15%
 accuracy, demonstrating a superior performance–efficiency
 Fig. 11 shows that among 64 total accepted updates, trade-off. The robustness against privacy attacks is quantified
URLLC contributes 40.6%, eMBB ∼ 50.0%, and mMTC by the reduction in MIA success rates and the increase in
only 9.4%. This distribution reflects the slice-aware screen- MInvA reconstruction errors compared with Uniform Screening’s prioritization of URLLC and eMBB requirements while ing+DP baselines.
imposing strict scrutiny on mMTC updates. Notably, eMBB Table V summarizes these metrics alongside total privacy

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 11

 TABLE IV
 C OMPREHENSIVE P ERFORMANCE R ESULTS OF D EFENSE - IN -D EPTH F RAMEWORK

 Defense Method Accuracy (%) Macro F1 Precision Recall Comm. Reduction (%) MIA Success (%) ϵtotal
 CICIDS2017 Dataset (2.83M samples, 78 features)
 Vanilla FL 83.84 0.36 0.84 0.38 0.0 78.3 -
 Screening-only 82.50 0.39 0.83 0.41 15.2 74.1 -
 Uniform Screening+DP 47.98 0.13 0.48 0.15 100.0 52.7 4.2
 Adversarial-only 81.30 0.41 0.82 0.43 0.0 63.5 -
 Uniform Full Defense 44.12 0.15 0.44 0.17 100.0 49.8 4.5
 Hybrid Defense (Proposed) 82.15 0.42 0.82 0.44 91.3 52.1 2.1
 N-BaIoT Dataset (7.06M samples, 115 features)
 Vanilla FL 95.42 0.75 0.95 0.77 0.0 81.7 -
 Screening-only 94.89 0.76 0.95 0.78 18.4 77.9 -
 Uniform Screening+DP 52.31 0.21 0.52 0.23 100.0 54.2 3.8
 Adversarial-only 93.75 0.77 0.94 0.79 0.0 67.4 -
 Uniform Full Defense 48.67 0.19 0.49 0.21 100.0 51.6 4.1
 Hybrid Defense (Proposed) 95.15 0.78 0.95 0.80 94.2 53.8 1.9

 TABLE V retraining. The framework is explicitly slice-calibrated, using
 S ECURITY E VALUATION : ATTACK S UCCESS AND P RIVACY B UDGET Z-score screening thresholds of 4.5 (URLLC), 5.0 (eMBB),
 Method MIA Success (%) MInvA Error ϵtotal and 6.0 (mMTC), together with Gaussian perturbation standard
 Uniform Screening+DP 78.3 Baseline 3.1 deviations of 0.001, 0.05, and 0.10, respectively, to align
 Hybrid Defense 52.1 +34.7% 2.1 privacy protection with heterogeneous QoS constraints while
 reducing gradient leakage. Across CICIDS2017 and N-BaIoT,
 the hybrid design preserves near-baseline accuracy (82.15%
budget ϵtotal . The slice-aware hybrid approach achieves a and 95.15%), improves macro-F1 (0.42 and 0.78), and reduces
significant MIA success reduction and higher inversion recon- communication by more than 90% (91.3% and 94.2%). Pristruction error, demonstrating strengthened protection. vacy and robustness gains are concrete: membership inference
 The numerical analysis in Table IV reveals several critical success drops to approximately 52% (52.1% on CICIDS2017
findings, such as the Hybrid Defense achieving a superior and 53.8% on N-BaIoT), model inversion reconstruction error
balance, maintaining 82.15% accuracy on CICIDS2017 and increases by 34.7, and the cumulative privacy loss under
95.15% on N-BaIoT, while reducing MIA success rates to advanced composition is bounded by an overall DP accounting
52.1% and 53.8%, respectively. This represents a 33.5% budget of ϵtotal ≤ 2.1 on CICIDS2017 and ϵtotal ≤ 1.9 on
and 34.1% improvement in privacy protection compared to N-BaIoT under slice-calibrated noise. Because DP strength
Vanilla FL, with only marginal accuracy degradation (1.69% scales with perturbation magnitude, the strongest formal DP
and 0.27% respectively). Further, the framework achieves contribution is concentrated in the less latency-constrained
remarkable communication reduction of 91.3% and 94.2% eMBB and mMTC slices, while URLLC maintains stringent
through statistical screening, significantly outperforming uni- latency by using lightweight perturbation and relying on the
form approaches while preserving model utility. This effi- coordinated protection of screening and adversarial retraining
ciency gain translates to substantial bandwidth savings and rather than DP noise alone. Overall, these results indicate that
reduced energy consumption in resource-constrained 6G en- per-slice calibration yields a superior privacy utility efficiency
vironments.The slice-aware hybrid approach achieves a sig- tradeoff compared with uniform defenses in heterogeneous 6G
nificant MIA success reduction and higher inversion recon- slicing deployments (URLLC, eMBB, mMTC).
struction error, demonstrating strengthened protection (Table IV). The reported privacy budget (e.g., ϵtotal =2.1 and R EFERENCES
ϵtotal =1.9 in Table V) is computed under slice-calibrated noise; [1] G. Singh, K. Sood, P. Rajalakshmi, D. D. N. Nguyen, and Y. Xiang,
consequently, formal DP strength is slice-dependent because “Evaluating federated learning-based intrusion detection scheme for
 next generation networks,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
URLLC uses intentionally lightweight perturbation to preserve Management, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4816–4829, 2024.
strict latency, while the strongest formal DP contribution is [2] B. Mi, H. Zou, and D. Huang, “Fedpp: Privacy-enhanced federated learnconcentrated in the less latency-constrained eMBB/mMTC ing for parameter aggregation in heterogeneous intelligent connected
 vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
slices via higher noise. vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 5705–5722, 2025.
 [3] M. Alsenwi, E. Lagunas, and S. Chatzinotas, “Distributed learning
 V. C ONCLUSION framework for embb-urllc multiplexing in open radio access networks,”
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 5,
 We presented a slice-aware, defense-in-depth framework pp. 5718–5732, 2024.
for federated anomaly detection in 6G network slices that [4] F. Saleh, A. O. Fapojuwo, and D. Krishnamurthy, “eslice: Elastic interslice resource allocation for smart city applications,” IEEE Transactions
integrates (i) statistical update screening, (ii) selective Gaus- on Network and Service Management, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 5619–5639,
sian differential privacy, and (iii) FGSM-based adversarial 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3699521

 12

 [5] M. A. Khan, N. Kumar, S. H. Alsamhi, G. Barb, J. Zywiołek, I. Ullah, [22] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep
 F. Noor, J. A. Shah, and A. M. Almuhaideb, “Security and privacy issues learning: How far are we?” in 2022 IEEE/ACM 44th International
 and solutions for uavs in b5g networks: A review,” IEEE Transactions Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2022, pp. 1356–1367.
 on Network and Service Management, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 892–912, 2025. [23] G. O. Anyanwu and H. Karimipour, “Cldp=fatd: Secure federated
 [6] L. Yang, M. E. Rajab, A. Shami, and S. Muhaidat, “Enabling automl averaging threat detection framework for intelligent vehicle sensor
 for zero-touch network security: Use-case driven analysis,” IEEE Trans- networks based on client-level differential privacy,” IEEE Internet of
 actions on Network and Service Management, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3555– Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 7693–7707, 2025.
 3582, 2024. [24] L. Barbieri, M. Brambilla, and M. Roveri, “A layer-wise personalization
 [7] A. Kamal Abasi, M. Aloqaily, and M. Guizani, “6g mmwave security approach for transformer-based federated anomaly detection,” in 2024
 advancements through federated learning and differential privacy,” IEEE 2nd International Conference on Federated Learning Technologies and
 Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. Applications (FLTA), 2024, pp. 32–38.
 1911–1928, 2025. [25] W. Wang, C. Liang, L. Tang, H. Yanikomeroglu, and Q. Chen, “Fed-
 [8] J. Chen, C. Hu, W. Sheng, R. Li, R. Zhao, and J. Yu, “A trust-based erated multi-discriminator biwgan-gp based collaborative anomaly depersonalized differential privacy guarantees for online social networks,” tection for virtualized network slicing,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 22, no. 4, Computing, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 6445–6459, 2023.
 pp. 3213–3227, 2025. [26] Q. Zhang, L.-F. Li, X. Yang, L.-M. Zhao, and M.-X. Luo, “Differentially
 [9] T. Cao, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Xiao, and C. Xu, “Ptcc: A privacy- private federated learning model with second-order optimization,” in
 preserving and trajectory clustering-based approach for cooperative 2025 10th International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data
 caching optimization in vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Analytics (ICCCBDA), 2025, pp. 10–17.
 Sustainable Computing, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 615–630, 2024. [27] B. Li, L. Yan, and J. Liu, “Selectiveshield: Lightweight hybrid
[10] B. Li, S. Ma, R. Deng, K.-K. R. Choo, and J. Yang, “Federated anomaly defense against gradient leakage in federated learning,” 2025. [Online].
 detection on system logs for the internet of things: A customizable and Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.04265
 communication-efficient approach,” IEEE Transactions on Network and [28] R. Hu, Y. Gong, and Y. Guo, “Federated learning with sparsification-
 Service Management, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1705–1716, 2022. amplified privacy and adaptive optimization,” in Proceedings of the
[11] G. D. Parra, L. Selvera, J. Khoury, H. Irizarry, E. Bou-Harb, and Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
 P. Rad, “Interpretable federated transformer log learning for cloud threat IJCAI-21, Z.-H. Zhou, Ed. International Joint Conferences on
 forensics,” in Proc. 2022 Network and Distributed System Security Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2021, pp. 1463–1469, main
 Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2022. Track. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2021/202
[12] P. Himler, M. Landauer, F. Skopik, and M. Wurzenberger, “Anomaly [29] J. Liu, J. Lou, L. Xiong, J. Liu, and X. Meng, “Cross-silo
 detection in log-event sequences: A federated deep learning approach federated learning with record-level personalized differential privacy,”
 and open challenges,” Machine Learning with Applications, vol. 16, in Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
 p. 100554, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ and Communications Security, ser. CCS ’24. New York, NY, USA:
 science/article/pii/S2666827024000306 Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 303–317. [Online].
[13] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. Fung, R. He, Y. Zhao, H. Yang, and Z. Luan, Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3670351
 “Hitanomaly: Hierarchical transformers for anomaly detection in system [30] J. Xu, R. Hu, and O. Kotevska, “Optimal client sampling in
 log,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, vol. 17, federated learning with client-level heterogeneous differential privacy,”
 no. 4, pp. 2064–2076, 2020. CoRR, vol. abs/2505.13655, May 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
[14] T. Xiao, Z. Quan, Z.-J. Wang, Y. Le, Y. Du, X. Liao, K. Li, and //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.13655
 K. Li, “Loader: A log anomaly detector based on transformer,” IEEE [31] S. Kiani, F. Boenisch, and S. C. Draper, “Controlled privacy leakage
 Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3479–3492, propagation throughout overlapping grouped learning,” IEEE Journal
 2023. on Selected Areas in Information Theory, vol. 5, pp. 442–463, 2024.
[15] N. Liao and Z. Liu, “Log anomaly detection method based on trans- [32] L. Yin, J. Feng, H. Xun, Z. Sun, and X. Cheng, “A privacy-preserving
 former and temporal convolutional networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. federated learning for multiparty data sharing in social iots,” IEEE
 68 547–68 560, 2025. Transactions on Network Science and Engineering, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
[16] R. Xiao, H. Chen, J. Lu, W. Li, and S. Jin, “Allinfolog: Robust diverse 2706–2718, 2021.
 anomalies detection based on all log features,” IEEE Transactions on [33] Q. Xia, Z. Tao, Q. Li, and S. Chen, “Byzantine tolerant algorithms
 Network and Service Management, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2529–2543, 2023. for federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
[17] Y. Zhao, R. Yang, N. Yang, T. Lin, Q. Fu, and Y. Ma, “Robust log-based Engineering, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3172–3183, 2023.
 anomaly detection with hierarchical contrastive learning,” in ICASSP [34] H. Ma, K. Yang, and Y. Jiao, “Cellular traffic prediction via byzantine-
 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and robust asynchronous federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Network
 Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2023, pp. 1–5. Science and Engineering, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2402–2414, 2025.
[18] G. Tian, N. Luktarhan, H. Wu, and Z. Shi, “Cldtlog: System log [35] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
 anomaly detection method based on contrastive learning and dual new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
 objective tasks,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 11, 2023. [Online]. Available: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information Systems
 https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/23/11/5042 Security and Privacy - Volume 1: ICISSP,, INSTICC. SciTePress, 2018,
[19] S. Huang, Y. Liu, C. Fung, H. Yang, and Z. Luan, “Black-box attacks pp. 108–116.
 to log-based anomaly detection,” in 2022 18th International Conference [36] Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity, “Intrusion detection evaluation
 on Network and Service Management (CNSM), 2022, pp. 310–316. dataset (cic-ids2017),” University of New Brunswick. [Online].
[20] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Wang, and Z. Cao, “Log sequence anomaly Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
 detection method based on contrastive adversarial training and dual [37] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, Y. Mathov, Y. Mirsky, D. Breitenbacher,
 feature extraction,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 1, 2022. [Online]. Available: A. Shabtai, and Y. Elovici, “N-baiot-network-based detection of iot
 https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/24/1/69 botnet attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
[21] X. Zhao, Z. Jiang, and J. Ma, “A survey of deep anomaly detection vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
 for system logs,” in 2022 International Joint Conference on Neural //ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8490192/
 Networks (IJCNN), 2022, pp. 1–8. [38] Y. Meidan et al., “detection of IoT botnet attacks N BaIoT,” UCI
 Machine Learning Repository, 2018, DOI: https://doi.org/10.24432/
 C5RC8J.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.