IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026 457

 MOON: A Modality Conversion-Based Efficient
 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Yuanyuan Yao , Yuhan Shi, Lu Chen , Ziquan Fang , Member, IEEE, Yunjun Gao , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Leong Hou U , Member, IEEE, Yushuai Li , Senior Member, IEEE, and Tianyi Li , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Multivariate time series (MTS) anomaly detection including finance [38], healthcare [3], and industrial monitoridentifies abnormal patterns where each timestamp contains ing [14], [44], where timely detection of anomalies can lead
multiple variables. Existing MTS anomaly detection methods to significant improvements in decision-making and framework
fall into three categories: reconstruction-based, prediction-based,
and classifier-based methods. However, these methods face three reliability [15], [53]. In recent years, deep learning techniques
key challenges: (1) Unsupervised learning methods, such as have been widely applied to time series anomaly detection and
reconstruction-based and prediction-based methods, rely on error achieved superior performance.
thresholds, which can lead to inaccuracies; (2) Semi-supervised In multivariate time series anomaly detection, the scarcity
methods mainly model normal dataand often underuse anomaly la- of labeled anomalies and high annotation costs pose major
bels, limiting detection of subtle anomalies; (3) Supervised learning
methods, such as classifier-based approaches, often fail to capture challenges. To address these, unsupervised methods are widely
local relationships, incur high computational costs, and are con- used [5], [12], [13], [26], [39], [42], [49], modeling normal bestrained by the scarcity of labeled data. To address these limitations, havior and detecting deviations via prediction or reconstruction
we propose MOON, a supervised modality conversion-based multi- errors. However, unsupervised methods typically rely on large
variate time series anomaly detection framework. MOON enhances amounts of continuous and stable normal data as the basis for
the efficiency and accuracy of anomaly detection while providing
detailed anomaly analysis reports. First, MOON introduces a novel modeling. In real-world applications, such as in financial or
multivariate Markov Transition Field (MV-MTF) technique to con- industrial systems, data often fluctuates due to external shocks,
vert numeric time series data into image representations, capturing making it difficult to obtain stable normal sequences. Moreover,
relationships across variables and timestamps. Since numeric data the definition of “normal” is often ambiguous and prone to
retains unique patterns that cannot be fully captured by image labeling errors, where certain anomalous points may be misconversion alone, MOON employs a Multimodal-CNN to integrate
numeric and image data through a feature fusion model with takenly marked as normal, further limiting the adaptability of
parameter sharing, enhancing training efficiency. Finally, a SHAP- these methods. Semi-supervised methods attempt to combine a
based anomaly explainer identifies key variables contributing to small amount of anomalous labels with unlabeled data, improvanomalies, improving interpretability. Extensive experiments on ing performance while controlling label dependence. However,
six real-world MTS datasets demonstrate that MOON outperforms
 they still rely on large amounts of stable normal data, limiting
six state-of-the-art methods by up to 93% in efficiency, 4% in
accuracy and, 10.8% in interpretation performance. effectiveness in dynamic environments, while scarce anomalies hinder learning complex patterns. In contrast, supervised
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, interpretable system, methods, while exhibiting strong discriminative performance
multivariate time series.
 when sample labels are available [9], [50], [51], are highly
 dependent on labels. In scenarios with scarce samples, they
 I. INTRODUCTION are prone to overfitting, leading to insufficient generalization
 ULTIVARIATE time series anomaly detection identifies capability.
M unusual patterns or behaviors across multiple variables
over time. It benefits a wide range of real-life applications,
 The interpretability of anomaly detection methods is also
 crucial for understanding the root causes of anomalies. Existing
 methods [8], [27], [29], [34], [39], [42], [43] often rely on differences between reconstructed and ground-truth data to identify
 Received 21 January 2025; revised 6 September 2025; accepted 30 September
2025. Date of current version 25 November 2025. This work was supported by variables causing anomalies. However, they treat all models as
NSFC under Grant 62472377, Grant 62402431, Grant 62025206, and Grant closed-box models, ignoring unique structures and offering low
U23A20296. Recommended for acceptance by D.-N. Yang. (Corresponding interpretability. Thus, we aim to develop an accurate, efficient,
author: Lu Chen.)
 Yuanyuan Yao, Yuhan Shi, Lu Chen, Ziquan Fang, and Yunjun Gao are with and interpretable anomaly detection framework.
the College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China Accurate anomaly detection: To achieve accurate and robust
(e-mail: yoyoyao@zju.edu.cn; shiyuhan@zju.edu.cn; luchen@zju.edu.cn; zq- anomaly detection under limited supervision, it is crucial to effang@zju.edu.cn; gaoyj@zju.edu.cn).
 Leong Hou U is with the Department of Computer and Information Science, fectively leverage scarce anomaly labels, enhancing the model’s
University of Macau, Macau (e-mail: ryanlhu@um.edu.mo). ability to recognize and model abnormal patterns with minimal
 Yushuai Li and Tianyi Li are with the Department of Computer Sci- annotation cost. Multimodal data improves performance by
ence, Aalborg University, 9220, Aalborg, Denmark (e-mail: yusli@cs.aau.dk;
tianyi@cs.aau.dk). combining complementary information from different sources,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2025.3622154 thereby enhancing the overall result quality. However, collecting

 1041-4347 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
458 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 MODAL CONVERSION TIME (SECONDS) FOR MTS

multimodal data is often costly and impractical, while numeric Fig. 1. An example of an anomaly report.
time series data is readily available.
 To address this, we propose Multivariate Markov Transition
Field (MV-MTF), which explicitly encodes variable-to-variable 99.97% reduction compared to Extended MTF. Furthermore,
and time-to-time transitions in a 2D format to enhance anomaly in the multimodal-CNN module, we adopt a parameter-sharing
representation by capturing structural dynamics that are difficult strategy to reduce the overall number of trainable parameters,
to extract from raw sequences. However, MV-MTF may lose which not only decreases the memory footprint but also accelfine-grained numerical details that are crucial for identifying erates model convergence. This contributes to a more efficient
point anomalies or small deviations. To compensate for this, training process and significantly shortens the overall training
we integrate MV-MTF with raw numerical features using a time.
shared-parameter multimodal CNN. This architecture allows Interpretable anomaly detection: Interpretability is one of the
the model to jointly learn global structural patterns and local core objectives of our anomaly detection framework. For multinumerical variations [6], [17]. The multimodal-CNN employs variate time series detected as anomalous, the anomaly typically
convolutional kernels with varying receptive fields to capture involves only a subset of variables. Accordingly, solving the
multi-scale features from both the image-like representations anomalies requires not only determining whether an anomaly
and the raw time series. These kernels effectively extract in- has occurred but also precisely localizing the affected variables.
formation across variable and timestamp dimensions, enabling Existing threshold-based interpretability methods [39], [42] face
robust multimodal feature fusion. To further enhance the model’s two main limitations in anomaly detection. First, error score
ability to process multimodal data, we incorporate a Multimodal threshold-based methods risk misjudgment or omission. Second,
Attention mechanism within Multimodal-CNN. This mecha- they lack intuitive, model-specific explanations, limiting their
nism identifies and focuses on the most relevant features across interpretability.
different modalities, enabling the model to prioritize key in- To address these issues, we propose a high-interpretability
formation effectively. By integrating this attention mechanism, method leveraging multimodal information. Gradient Shapley
Multimodal-CNN achieves greater sensitivity and accuracy in Additive Explanations (SHAP) [1] values are used to quantify
detecting anomalous patterns. the impact of other variables on a target variable and assess
 Efficient anomaly detection: Efficient modal conversion di- the current variable’s contribution to anomaly occurrence. This
rectly contributes to efficient anomaly detection by reducing enables a multi-dimensional evaluation of anomalies, clarifying
the computational overhead associated with processing large how various factors contribute to the detection process.
datasets. Markov Transition Field (MTF) is an effective modal Next, we apply a weighted ranking method to prioritize
conversion method that transforms time-series data into image variables based on their contributions to anomaly detection,
representations for analysis. It captures local temporal infor- generating a ranked list of the most likely causes. To ensure
mation, representing short-term dependencies between consec- reliability, we introduce an evaluation module that validates
utive or nearby data points [25], [46]. However, existing MTF top-ranked variables, reducing false positives and enhancing the
methods primarily focus on univariate data [25], [46] and are robustness of the explanations. Finally, we categorize anomalies
computationally intensive, as they calculate transitions between into specific types based on expert insights. By clustering the
every pair of data points. A straightforward extension of MTF data and constructing classifiers, we identify patterns that refine
to MTS is calculating transitions across different variables and anomaly categorization.
timestamps. As shown in Table I, the extended MTF incurs A comprehensive anomaly report is then generated, as exemvery high processing times, with 10,000 data points requiring plified in Fig. 1. The report highlights key information about
nearly 10 hours to process. Moreover, combining data from both the anomaly, including (i) the dataset (SMD), (ii) the timestamp
modalities may increase the training cost. (2024-08-02, 07:15:23), (iii) the contributing variables (Vari-
 To address these limitations, we propose an optimized MV- ables 1 and 3), and (iv) actionable recommendations (verifying
MTF strategy to improve efficiency of modal conversion, we configuration settings and running network diagnostics). The
simplify the time dimension. Since the influence between vari- report helps users quickly understand and address anomalies
ables decreases with temporal distance, we consider only the and enhances framework interpretability and reliability.
impact of values from the previous time step on the current time. We integrate the above novel techniques to propose MOON,
This reduces computational complexity from O(n2 ) to O(n), a modality conversion-based anomaly detection framework for
significantly accelerating MV-MTF while preserving essential MTS that is accurate, efficient, and interpretable. First, MOON
local information. As shown in Table I, with 10,000 data points, employs the Multimodal-CNN to represent and fuse multimodal
MV-MTF processes 10,000 data points in just 9.25 seconds, a data while training a classifier for accurate anomaly detection.
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 459

Next, it efficiently converts numeric MTS data into image data and x3 = [50, 101310, 20]. Hence, X 1 = [30, 32, 50],
 2
using a new MV-MTF technique. Finally, MOON integrates an X = [101325, 101300, 101300], and X 3 = [20, 21, 20].
interpretability module to refine anomaly categories and gener- Anomaly detection identifies x3 as an anomalous data
ate detailed anomaly analysis reports. point (y3 = 1). Anomaly interpretability determines that
 To sum up, we have made the following key contributions: the temperature value x13 = 50 is the primary contributor to the
 r We present MOON, a modality conversion-based MTS anomaly, while pressure x23 = 101310 and humidity x33 = 20
 anomaly detection framework, that efficiently and effec- remain normal.
 tively supports MTS anomaly detection.
 r We propose a supervised classification Multimodal-CNN, B. Markov Transition Field Technology (MTF)
 which integrates numerical MTS data and image represen-
 MTF techniques [25], [46] are primarily designed for converttations using convolution kernels with varying receptive
 ing univariate time series data to image data. For a univariate
 fields and a Multimodal Attention mechanism. It multitime series X = (x1 , . . . , xn ) with a single variable (c = 1),
 scale features and prioritizes key information, enhancing
 data points are first discretized by mapping continuous values
 anomaly detection accuracy.
 r We propose a MV-MTF technique designed to simultane- to discrete bins, reducing computational cost. Let Q denote
 the number of bins used to partition the data range. After
 ously capture transitions across both time and variables. By
 discretization, each data point xt is assigned to a bin with
 leveraging the strong temporal dependencies in time-series
 identifier qi (i ∈ [1, Q]). A Q × Q state transition matrix W is
 data, we further simplify the calculation of transitions
 then constructed, where Wij represents the transition probability
 between variables, accelerating the modal conversion.
 r We present a SHAP-based anomaly explainer that inte- from bin qi to bin qj (1 ≤ i, j ≤ Q).
 ⎡ ⎤
 grates multimodal data to compute SHAP values and incor- w11 | P11 · · · w1Q | P1Q
 porates a reliable evaluation module to enhance accuracy. ⎢ ⎥
 ⎢ w21 | P21 · · · w2Q | P2Q ⎥
 By categorizing anomalies into distinct types, it signifi- W =⎢ ⎢ ⎥, (1)
 .. .. ⎥
 cantly improves anomaly detection interpretability. ⎣ . . ⎦
 r We conduct experiments on six real-world datasets. The wQ1 | PQ1 · · · wQQ | PQQ
 results demonstrate that MOON outperforms six state-ofthe-art methods by up to 93% in efficiency, 4% in accuracy where wij denotes the transition probability in Pij from qj to
 and, 10.8% in interpretation performance. qi , with Pij = P (xt ∈ qi | xt−1 ∈ qj ), and t denotes any given
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We provide the time.
preliminaries in Section II. Section III provides our framework Example 2. Given three bins q1 = [0, 0.2), q2 = [0.2, 0.3),
overview and main components of our framework. Section IV q3 = [0.3, 0.4), and a univariate time series X = (0.1, 0.3,
presents the experimental results. We review related work in 0.05, 0.4, 0.15, 0.2), the data points are discretized as follows:
Section V, and conclude the paper in Section VI. x1 , x3 , and x5 are classified into q1 , x2 and x4 into q3 , and x6 into
 q2 . The resulting converted time series is (1, 3, 1, 3, 1, 2). For the
 state transition matrix, w13 = 2/3, where 2 represents the two
 II. PRELIMINARIES
 occurrences of the consecutive pair (1, 3) in the converted series,
A. Problem Definition and 3 is the total occurrences of pairs starting with 1 (1 ≤ i ≤ 3).
 Definition 1 (Multivariate time series). A multivariate time Based on the obtained state transition matrix W , an n × n
series X = (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) is a sequence of numerical observa- Markov Transition Field (MTF) matrix M is constructed to captions ordered by time, where xt (1 ≤ t ≤ n) is a c-dimensional ture the transition probabilities between states (i.e., timestamps),
vector (c > 1) representing the observation at timestamp t, and where mij represents the transition probability of state i to the
n is the length of the time series. The dimension of X is n × c. state j, and its value equals to wab (i.e., xi ∈ qa , and xj ∈ qb ).
For the v th variable (1 ≤ v ≤ c), X v represents its univariate Note that, the obtained MTF matrix M is typically viewed as an
time series, and xvt denotes its value at timestamp t. image.
 Definition 2 (Anomaly detection). Given a training time se- Example 3. Continuing Example 2, m12 = w13 due to x1 ∈
ries X, anomaly detection predicts Y = {yt }n̂t=1 for any unseen q1 and x2 ∈ q3 , m23 = w31 due to x2 ∈ q3 and x3 ∈ q1 , and
test time series X̂ of length n̂ with the same modality as X. m34 = w13 due to x3 ∈ q1 and x4 ∈ q3 .
yt ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the data point at timestamp t of
X̂ is anomalous (yt = 1 denotes anomalous points). C. Shapley Additive Explanations (SHAP)
 Definition 3 (Anomaly interpretablity). Given an anomalous SHAP [1] is a unified framework for interpreting the output
time series data point x̂t at timestamp t with c variables, anomaly of machine learning models, grounded in cooperative game
interpretability identifies the variables that contributed to clas- theory. The theoretical foundation of SHAP is based on the
sifying x̂t as anomalous. Shapley value, which provides a fair distribution of payoffs to
 Example 1. Consider a multivariate time series players depending on their contribution to the total payoff in a
X = (x1 , x2 , x3 ), where each xt (1 ≤ t ≤ 3) has three cooperative game. In machine learning, SHAP values assign an
variables: temperature, pressure, and humidity. The importance value to each feature, representing its contribution
observations are x1 = [30, 101325, 20], x2 = [32, 101300, 21], to the model’s output. Given a model f and an instance x, the
460 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 2. Framework overview.

SHAP value φi (x) for feature i is computed as: weighted SHAP values to identify the variables causing
 the anomalies. In addition, we train an explainer classifier
  |S|!(|F | − |S| − 1)!
φi (x) = [fx (S ∪ {i}) − fx (S)] , to refine the anomaly categories.
 |F |! The online anomaly detection process includes the following
 S⊆F \{i}
 (2) three steps. (i) MTS data is converted into image data using
where F is the set of all features, S is a subset of F excluding MV-MTF. (ii) Both the original MTS data and the converted
feature i, |S| is the number of features in subset S, and fx (S) is image data are simultaneously fed into a Multimodal-CNN to
the model output for the subset S with the instance x. determine if the data is anomalous. (iii) For data identified as
 The SHAP value computation ensures that the sum of SHAP anomalous, it is processed by an interpretable classifier to clasvalues for all features equals the difference between the model sify the anomaly type and generate a detailed anomaly detection
output and the expected output. If two features contribute equally report.
to all subsets, they receive equal SHAP values.
 IV. FRAMEWORK DESIGN
 III. FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW A. Modality Conversion
 Fig. 2 illustrates an overview of MOON, comprising modal To enable efficient multivariate time series conversion, we
conversion, anomaly detection, and anomaly explainer.
 r Modal conversion. To capture the local information be- introduce MV-MTF technology, which generates an image capturing the time dependency relationships between variables, as
 tween multivariate time series, we use the proposed MV- shown in the left part of Fig. 2.
 MTF technique to efficiently calculate the transition prob- Let X u = {xu1 , xu2 , . . . , xun } represent the time series for
 abilities from other variables to a specific variable, thereby variable u (u ∈ [1, c]), mapped into Qu distinct bins. Similarly,
 converting the multivariate time series into an image.    
 let X u = {xu1 , xu2 , . . . , xun } represent the time series for anr Anomaly detection. To support two different data modal- 
 other variable u mapped into Qu distinct bins. To determine
 ities (i.e., numerical time series data and image data), we an appropriate bin count Qu for each variable u, we search
 propose Multimodal-CNN that utilizes a parameter sharing over a candidate set of bin counts Q. For each Qu ∈ Q, we
 mechanism to cross-extract features from two modalities, apply quantile-based binning to discretize X u into Qu bins.
 significantly reducing computational complexity and pa- The resulting discretized sequence Qu is then evaluated using
 rameter count. In addition, a multi-modal attention mech- entropy:
 anism and a separable convolution-based feature fusion
 technique are introduced to combine the features from both |Qu |−1 n
  1
 modalities, thereby improving the classifier’s performance. H(Qu ) = − pi log pi , pi = I(Qut = i) (3)
 r Anomaly explainer. To provide a user-friendly anomaly n t=1
 i=0
 explainer, we generate an anomaly detection report for
 each detected anomly. Specifically, for the anomalous time where I(·) is an indicator function that equals 1 if the t-th
 series data points, we use the kernel explainer and gradient sample falls into the i-th bin, and 0 otherwise. We then seexplainer to generate SHAP values based on numerical and lect the optimal bin count that maximizes the entropy: Q∗u =
 image time series data, respectively. Next, we use these arg maxQu ∈Q H(Qu ).
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 461

 With the optimal bin count determined for each variable, variables k (1 ≤ k ≤ c and k = u) are computed. These matrices
we proceed to analyze temporal transitions between discretized are then averaged to obtain a new Markov Random Field matrix
states, in contrast to hierarchical binning [28], which first par- Mu,· , as shown in Equation (5).
titions the data by layers or groups before discretization. For c
 
 
two consecutive timestamps, data points xut−1 and xut from Mu,· = ωu,k × Mu,k , (5)
 
variables u and u are classified into bins qiu (i ∈ [1, Qu ]) and qju k=1,k=u
(j ∈ [1, Qu ]), respectively. A Qu × Qu state transition matrix where ωu,k is the weight parameter for Mu,k , denoting the
W is then calculated as follows. influence degree of k on u. The previously computed MTF
  
 W = wij | P xut ∈ qiu | xut−1 ∈ qju , (4) matrix Mu,u for variable u ( 2) is weighted and summed with
 Mu,· to obtain the Multivariate Markov Transition Field matrix
where 1 ≤ i ≤ Qu , 1 ≤ j ≤ Qu , and wi,j is the transition prob- Mu for variable u, as shown in Equation (6),
   
ability P (xut ∈ qju |xut−1 ∈ qiu ) from qiu in variable X u to qju in Mu = α × Mu,u + (1 − α) × Mu,· , (6)
variable X v .
 Based on the obtained state transition matrix W , we compute where α is the weight parameter to control the influence degree
the n × n Markov Transition Field matrix M . For any data of the same variable on the transition probability.
 
point xui of variable u at timestamp i and data point xuj of For a multivariate time series data X with c variables, we
variable u at timestamp j (xui is classified into qau , while xuj is
  obtain the MV-MTF MX for the multivariate time series data
  X by summing the MTF matrices of all variables, as shown in
classified to qbu ), the value mij in M equals to the state transition
  Equation (7).
probability wab in W , which represents the probability of xut
  c
 
at time t belonging to qbu given that the data in xut−1 at time
 MX = Mu , (7)
t − 1 belonging to qau . This gives us the Markov Transition Field
 u=1
matrix Mu,u for variables u and u .
 Example 4. Given two time series for variables u where Mu is the MV-MTF matrices for all variables u (u ∈
and u : X u = (0.1, 0.3, 0.05, 0.4, 0.15, 0.2) and X u =
 
 [1, c]).
(0.2, 0.3, 0.45, 0.3, 0.35, 0.4), with their respective bins defined Time complexity analysis: The computational complexity of
as Qu : q1u = [0, 0.2), q2u = [0.2, 0.3), q3u = [0.3, 0.4) and each MTF matrix computation is O(n2 ). In particular, the MTF
    
Qu : q1u = [0.2, 0.3), q2u = [0.3, 0.4), q3u = [0.4, 0.5). matrix M requires calculating the values for all pairs in X u and
 
 The sequence X u is classified as follows: xu1 , xu3 , and xu5 are X u , resulting in very high complexity.
classified into q1u ; xu2 and xu4 are classified into q3u ; while xu6 is However, for time series data, the temporal relevance is cru-
  
classified into q2u . For the sequence X u : xu1 is classified into cial, and calculating the relationship between two timestamps
 u u u u u  
q1 ; x2 , x4 , and x5 are classified into q2 ; while xu3 and xu6 time points do not make sense. Therefore, we optimize M as:
 u
are classified into q3 . Thus, we obtain the converted time series mi,j , if j = i + 1
 
Xqu = (1, 3, 1, 3, 1, 2) and Xqu = (1, 2, 3, 2, 2, 3) respectively. Mij = , (8)
 0, otherwise
The transition probability w12 = 23 , where 2 indicates two ocu Each element in M represents the transition relationship becurrences of the pair (1, 2) in consecutive time steps from qt−1
 u tween two consecutive timestamps. In this way, the complexity
to qt , and 3 represents the total occurrences of pairs starting of Markov Transition Field matrix computation is reduced from
from q1u (1 ≤ i ≤ 3). The corresponding matrices W and M are O(n2 ) to O(n).
shown below.
 ⎡ ⎤
 0 2/3 1/3 B. Anomaly Detection
 ⎢ ⎥
 W = ⎣0 0 0 ⎦ We present Multimodal-CNN with two key components: mul-
 0 1/2 1/2 timodal feature extraction and multimodal feature fusion.
 ⎡ ⎤ 1) Multimodal Feature Extraction: This component incor-
 0 2/3 1/3 2/3 2/3 1/3 porates a unified framework for extracting features from both
 ⎢ ⎥
 ⎢0 1/2 1/2 1/2 1/2 1/2⎥ numerical and image data, as illustrated in Fig. 3. It begins by
 ⎢ ⎥ initializing parameters, with a focus on designing the receptive
 ⎢0 2/3 1/3 2/3 2/3 1/3⎥
 M =⎢ ⎢ ⎥ field for the CNN-Block. Using this design, the Multimodal-
 ⎥
 ⎢0 1/2 1/2 1/2 1/2 1/2⎥ CNN extracts multi-scale features, capturing critical information
 ⎢ ⎥
 ⎣0 2/3 1/3 2/3 2/3 1/3⎦ through a multimodal attention mechanism. Moreover, parame-
 0 0 0 0 0 0 ter sharing is employed across modalities, further enhancing fea-
 
 ture extraction performance. The detailed process is described
 According to W , the probability 23 from q1u to q2u is assigned below.
  
to m12 , since xu1 ∈ q1u and xu2 ∈ q2u . Receptive field design. In the multimodal feature extraction
 Note that, we have more than two variables in a multivariate module, determining the receptive field size of the 1D-CNN
time series data, thus, for a specific variable u, the Markov is crucial, as it directly influences the range of features cap-
Transition Field matrices Mu,k between variable u and all other tured during convolution. To handle features at different scales
462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 3. Multimodal feature extraction.

effectively, the receptive field design must be both flexible To preserve information in deeper networks, multimodal feaand efficient. Using convolution kernels of even sizes enables ture extraction adopts a residual connection design. Through
coverage of receptive fields at various scales [41]. skip connections, the input data is directly added to the output,
 The receptive field (denoted as RF ) is calculated as RF = ensuring original information is passed to subsequent layers
p(1) + p(2) + p(3) − 2. For example, if the kernel size of the and mitigating the gradient diminishing problem. In each layer,
first convolutional layer p1 is 3 and the second layer p2 is 5, the the input passes through both the main network and a 1 × 1
receptive field after a 1D convolution is RF = 3 + 5 + 1 − 2 = convolution layer, which adjusts the channel dimensions to
7. Similarly, after a 2D convolution, the receptive field becomes match the extracted features. The residual connection output,
RF = 3 + 5 + 2 − 2 = 8. Extending this concept, ensuring that Conv1×1 (X), is the transformed input, while the combined
p(1) + p(2) covers all even numbers smaller than n enables the output, Foutput , is the sum of the concatenated features Fconcat and
network to achieve receptive fields of all sizes less than n. the residual connection Conv1×1 (X), computed as follows.
 To maximize coverage, the network uses sets of prime numbers smaller than n as convolution kernel sizes for each layer. Foutput = Fconcat ⊕ Conv1×1 (X) (10)
This allows processing of receptive fields at different scales, To enable each input type to focus on relevant features from the
avoiding limitations in local feature extraction and enhancing other, we calculate cross-type attention weights. For the numerthe network’s ability to capture multi-scale information. In the ical input, we compute the query Qnum , key Knum , and value
final layer, two convolution kernels—1 × 1 and 2 × 2—are em- Vnum as follows: Qnum = Fnum WQ , Knum = Fnum WK , and
ployed to optimize receptive field coverage. The 1 × 1 kernel Vnum = Fnum WV . For the image input, we compute the query
captures features at the smallest scale, while the 2 × 2 kernel Qimg , key Kimg , and value Vimg as follows: Qimg = Fimg WQ ,
captures slightly larger-scale features. This ensures complete Kimg = Fimg WK , and Vimg = Fimg WV . Here, WQ , WK , and
coverage of all receptive field sizes, preventing information loss WV are weight matrices learned during training. Next, we
due to incomplete receptive fields and enhancing the network’s compute attention weights to let the numerical data attend to
robustness in feature extraction. the image data, extracting relevant features:
 CNN-Block and Multimodal attention. Based on the defined  
 T
parameter list, different convolution kernel sizes are determined Qnum Kimg
for the model. Each convolution layer is responsible for process- Attentionnum→img = softmax √ ,
 d
ing different temporal windows, allowing the model to extract information across multiple time scales as shown in Equation (9). Fnum→img = Attentionnum→img ⊕ Vimg , (11)
 T
 where Qnum is multiplied by Kimg (transpose of Kimg ) to compute
 Fp = Convkp ×kp (X), √
 similarity scores, scaled by d, where d is the feature dimension.
 Fconcat = Concat(F1 , F2 , . . . , Fp ), (9) The result is passed through a softmax function to calculate
 attention weights Attentionnum→img . These weights are then
where kp is the pth kernel size in each layer, and Convkp ×kp (X) applied to Vimg to produce updated features Fnum→img .
denotes the convolution operation applied to the input X with Finally, we reverse the process to let the image data attend to
a kernel size of kp × kp . This operation extracts local patterns the numerical data:
and features within a specific temporal window defined by kp .  T
 
 Qimg Knum
Concat is used to concatenate the features with different ker- Attentionimg→num = softmax √ ,
nel sizes along the channel dimension, forming a consolidated d
feature representation Fconcat . Fimg→num = Attentionimg→num ⊕ Vnum , (12)
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 463

 T suppresses noise: when one modality’s gradient is noisy, the
where Qimg is multiplied by Knum √(transpose of Knum ) to compute similarity scores, scaled by d. The softmax function other can partially offset the disturbance, enhancing training
converts the scores into attention weights, Attentionimg→num , stability and model robustness. Additionally, by reusing the
which are applied to Vnum to produce updated features Fimg→num . same parameter set, parameter sharing drastically reduces the
The above process allows each input type to focus on comple- total number of model parameters, lowering computational and
mentary information from the other, enhancing feature repre- storage costs, while simplifying the model architecture and
sentation. training process, thus improving overall the training efficiency.
 Parameter sharing:Parameter sharing across different data 2) Multimodal Feature Fusion: It integrates features from
types reduces the number of parameters and improves training multiple modalities to enhance representation for classification
efficiency. The shared parameters include the weights W, biases tasks. Multimodal feature fusion includes five key steps: (i)
B, and masks M for each convolution kernel in the CNN-Block. concatenation, (ii) depthwise separable convolution, (iii) layer
During each epoch, the model trains sequentially on numerical normalization, and (iv) gated Feedforward Network.
data and image data, initializing parameters from the previous Concatenation:The features extracted from different modalitraining iteration. The process is defined as follows: ties are concatenated to form a combined feature vector Fconcat =
 [Fimg ; Fnum ].
 Nb = fb (Xn , (Wb , Bb , Mb )) Depthwise separable convolution:The concatenated feature
 ← fb−1 (Xi , (Wb−1 , Bb−1 , Mb−1 )) , vector Fconcat is processed using a depthwise separable convolution. This encompasses two sequential steps: (i) a depthwise
 Ib = fb (Xi , (Wb , Bb , Mb )) , (13) convolution extracts spatial or temporal relationships within
where Xn and Xi are the numerical and image data, respec- individual feature channels, and (ii) a point wise convolution
tively; b denotes the batch index in an epoch; W, B, and integrates information across all channels, enhancing feature
M are the shared weight, bias, and mask parameters of the interaction and representation. The resulting output Fout is com-
CNN-Block; Nb and Ib are the embeddings generated for the puted as follows:
numerical and image data, respectively; and fb represents the
above multimodal feature extraction process. For each batch b,
the numerical data Xn is processed first using the parameters Fout = PointwiseConv (DepthwiseConv(Fconcat ))
Wb , Bb , and Mb obtained from the image data in the previous (16)
batch b − 1. The image data Xi is then processed using the Splitting standard convolution into these two steps significantly
parameters updated after training on Xn in the current batch. reduces computational complexity by minimizing cross-channel
This sequential training captures correlations between numerical operations, while preserving the richness of extracted features
and image data, enhancing the model’s ability to learn effectively through efficient intra-channel pattern extraction and crossfrom multimodal inputs. channel integration.
 Parameter sharing not only significantly accelerates gradient Layer normalization:Layer normalization stabilizes and acconvergence but also offers multiple additional benefits. The- celerates training by normalizing the input across features for
oretically, consider gradients from two modalities denoted as each data sample, resulting in Fnorm .
gn and gi . The gradient update for the shared parameters is a Gated Feedforward Network:The Gated Feedforward Netweighted linear combination: work (GDFN) achieves refined fusion of multimodal features
 through dynamic channel weight. Given the input feature Fnorm ,
 Δθs = λgn + (1 − λ)gi , (14) it is first projected into a higher-dimensional space through a
where λ ∈ [0, 1] is a weighting factor that controls the relative pointwise convolution. A subsequent depthwise convolution is
contribution of the two gradients to the final parameter update. applied to capture intra-channel dependencies, producing in-
The magnitude Δθs denotes the overall step size of the update, termediate features Fv . The feature Fv is then split along the
determined by the direction and scale of the combined gradients, channel dimension into two parts, Fv1 and Fv2 . A gating mechand can be calculated as: Δθs = anism is applied as follows: Fw = GELU(Fv1 )  Fv2 , where 
  denotes element-wise multiplication. This operation adaptively
 λ2 gn 2 + (1 − λ)2 gi 2 + 2λ(1 − λ) gn gi cos θ, reweights the feature channels, suppressing modality-specific
 (15) redundancy while emphasizing informative signals. Finally, a
where cos θ = ggnn ·ggii , measures the alignment between the 1 × 1 convolution reduces dimensionality: Z = Conv1×1 (Fw ).
two gradient directions. When cos θ approaches to 1 (indicating This process enables GDFN to perform fine-grained modeling
high directional similarity), the combined gradient magnitude is and learnable weighting of multimodal features, effectively enmaximized, resulting in more effective updates and significantly hancing the discriminative power and robustness of the reprefaster convergence. sentation. The fused vector Z is then passed to the classifier for
 This mechanism enables parameter sharing to promote in- anomaly detection.
formation fusion between different modalities, allowing the The classifier begins with global average pooling to commodel to learn more generalizable and robust feature represen- pute the global averages of the input features, reducing their
tations, thereby improving generalization and noise resilience. dimensionality and generating a compact representation. This
Furthermore, the weighted combination of gradients inherently low-dimensional representation is further processed by a fully
464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 Algorithm 1: Multimodal-CNN Model. Training:During the training phase, the algorithm iterates
 through each training epoch. For each batch, it processes the
 original time series data using the convolutional blocks. The
 output output n from each block is added to the original input,
 followed by applying the ReLU function to generate a new input
 output n (lines 7–11).
 Second, the algorithm applies a fully connected layer and
 pooling operation to output n , producing the feature Fnum (line
 12). Similarly, the image time series data is processed, generating output i , which passes through a fully connected layer and
 pooling operation to derive the feature Fimg (lines 14–16).
 Next, We initialize the parameters Q, K, and V for the
 multimodal attention mechanism, which is then employed to
 capture and fuse inter-modal relationships, producing updated
 features Fnum and Fimg (lines 18–21). These features are fused
 into a combined feature Fconcat , and the model is optimized using
 the Adam optimizer [23] with a learning rate adjustment function
 (lines 22–23).
 Finally, the algorithm returns the trained MultiModal Feature Extraction model model. This enables effective extraction
 and fusion of features from multiple modalities, enhancing the
 model’s overall performance.

 C. Anomaly Explainer
 The explainer interprets the results of anomaly detection models, as illustrated in the lower right corner of Fig. 2. It includes
 the Kernel Explainer and Gradient Explainer [1], which are
 used to interpret numerical and image data, respectively. Kernel
 methods and gradient methods are employed to generate SHAP
 values (sK and sG ), which evaluate each variable’s contribution
 to anomaly detection. sK represents the direct impact of the
 current variable’s raw data on anomaly detection results, while
 sG captures the influence of the current variable’s MV-MTF
 data on the current variable. During anomaly evaluation, sK
 and sG are combined to identify the variables that significantly
 contribute to anomalies. For the v th variable, its SHAP value sv
 is computed as follows:

connected layer, which produces the final anomaly detection c K G
 j=1 sj × sv
results. sv = ω × sK
 v + (1 − ω) × , (17)
 3) Model Construction and Training: Algorithm 1 outlines c
the construction and training process of the Multimodal-CNN.
 Construction:The algorithm begins by defining input parame- where c is the total number of variables, ω is a weight parameter
ters, including the original time series data (denoted as input n ), balancing the contributions of sK and sG , sK v is the SHAP value
image time series data (denoted as input i ), model parameters reflecting the direct impact of the v th variable, and sG v is the
(denoted as parameter _l ist), the weight, bias and mask of impact of other variables on the v th variable. Equation (17)
each layer (denoted as W , B, and M ), the number of layers exhibits Bounded Controllability and Top-k Ranking Plateau
(denoted as layers), and the number of training epochs (denoted properties.
as epoch_num). Let the fused attribution cfor variable v be sv (ω) = ω sK
 v +
 G 1 K
 Next, convolutional layers are constructed iteratively. For (1 − ω) γ sv with γ = c j=1 sj . Collecting terms in ω yields
each layer, the algorithm checks if it is the final layer and sv (ω) = av ω + bv with av := sK G
 v − γsv and bv := γsv .
 G

determines whether to apply the ReLU activation function ac- Lemma 1 (Bounded controllability). Given sv (ω) = av ω +
cordingly (lines 2–3). The Build_Layer function is then used bv and let L :=  a ∞ = maxv |av |. Then for any v and any
to create the current layer, which is appended to the layer_list. ω, ω  ∈ [0, 1], sv (ω  ) − sv (ω) ≤ |av | |ω  − ω| ≤ L |ω  −
Finally, all layers are combined into a sequential CNN model ω|. Hence each sv is L-Lipschitz in ω, ensuring bounded sensinamed CNN-Block (lines 4–5). tivity and controllability with respect to the weighting parameter.
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 465

 Proof. For any perturbation δ with ω + δ ∈ [0, 1], since the weight of the raw data contribution is increased. Accordsv (ω) = av ω + bv , we have ing to |δ| < sk (ω)−sSk+1 (ω) , it follows that as sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω)
 increases, Δ also grows, thereby widening the plateau region.
 sv (ω + δ) − sv (ω) = av δ This weighting scheme effectively balances the contributions
   of raw numerical features and MV-MTF modalities, ensuring
 ⇒ sv (ω + δ) − sv (ω) = |av | |δ| ≤ max |av | |δ|. (18)
 v anomaly detection primarily relies on reliable raw data while
   
 = a ∞ =L moderately integrating the complex structural information captured by MV-MTF.
Equivalently, for any ω, ω  ∈ [0, 1], Based on Equation (17), we rank variables by their contri-
     bution to anomalies. Variables with higher sv contribute more,
 sv (ω  ) − sv (ω) = av (ω  − ω) ≤ L |ω  − ω|. (19) while those with lower sv have little or no contribution. Identifying the contributing variables is essential. To achieve this,
Hence, each sv is L-Lipschitz in ω, establishing bounded con- we propose a binary search strategy to efficiently determine a
trollability.  critical point k, defined as follows:
 As L = maxv |aK v | and a v = s K
 v − γs G
 v , we can get that Definition 4 (Critical point). Given a list of variables L
L ≤ maxv |sK G
 v | + γ · maxv |sv |. In binary classification, it is ranked by their contribution to anomalies, k is a critical point
known that maxv |sK v | = 1, and for anomalous data the MV- such that the first k variables in L contribute to the anomalies,
MTF values are very small, which leads to |sG v | ≈ 0. Therefore, while the remaining variables do not. Lo,o denotes a sublist of
we can derive that L ≤ 1. Hence, for any ω, ω  , it holds that L from Lo to Lo , where Lo is the oth variable in L.
|sv (ω  ) − sv (ω)| ≤ |ω  − ω|. This indicates that as ω varies, the Example 5. For an anomaly time series with eight variables,
contribution of variable v is constrained by a uniform upper we first calculate sv (1 ≤ v ≤ 8) using 10 and rank the variables
bound, and its ranking is therefore stable. by sv to obtain L = {2, 4, 5, 1, 8, 7, 6, 3}. This ranking indicates
 Given the ranked contribution list C(ω) = {si (ω)}ni=1 , where that variable 2 is ranked first, variable 4 s, and so on.
n is the number of variables and C(ω) is in descending order of Next, we apply the binary search strategy. First, we replace
si (ω), the Top-k set is defined as k variables with highest si (ω), the first four variables L1,4 = {2, 4, 5, 1}—the first half of L—
i..e, Top-k(ω) = {s1 (ω), . . . , sk (ω)}. with normal sequences and check whether the anomaly remains.
 Lemma 2 (Top-k ranking plateau). For any two vari- Two cases arise: (i) If the anomaly remains, 4 ≤ k ≤ 8, and we
ables u and v, the pairwise contribution difference is defined replace L4,5 —the first half of L4,8 —with normal sequences. (ii)
as Δuv (ω) := su (ω) − sv (ω) = Auv ω + Buv , where Auv = If the anomaly is resolved, 1 ≤ k ≤ 4, and we replace L1,2 —
au − av and Buv = bu − bv . Then, with S := maxu,v |Auv |, the first half of L1,4 —with normal sequences. This process is
the Top-k set remains locally invariant within radius |δ| = repeated until k is determined, identifying the first k variables
(sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω))/S, i.e., Top-k(ω + δ) ≡ Top-k(ω). as those contributing to the anomalies.
 Proof. For any u ∈ Top-k and v ∈ / Top-k, given the offset During anomaly analysis, anomalous data is clustered and
value δ of ω, then evaluated with expert knowledge to determine the nature of
 each anomaly. For example, in the SMD dataset, anomalies are
 Δuv (ω + δ) = Auv (ω + δ) + Buv categorized into the three types: (i) network failure, (ii) hardware
 damage, and (iii) software service anomaly. New anomalies can
 ≥ Δuv (ω) − |Auv | |δ|
 be classified into these predefined types and further interpreted
 ≥ (sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω)) − |Auv | |δ|. (20) in detail.
 Finally, by combining the results of anomaly evaluation and
Only when Δuv (ω + δ) > 0, we have Top-k(ω + δ) = analysis, an anomaly report is generated. This report not only
Top-k(ω). To ensure this condition simultaneously across all provides detailed explanations of anomaly detection results but
variable pairs, we set S := maxu,v |Auv |, which leads to the suf- also enhances the accuracy and actionability of the analysis
ficient condition |δ| < (sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω))/S. Here, sk (ω) − through evaluation and classification mechanisms. It offers users
sk+1 (ω) represents the minimal margin between Top-k and deeper insights and robust support for decision-making.
non-Top-k variables. Under this condition, the Top-k set remains
unchanged. 
 S := maxu,v |Auv | is the same for all ω. Therefore, δ is V. EXPERIMENTS
determined by sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω). From sv (ω) = ω sK v + (1 −
 A. Experimental Setting
ω) γ sGv , we can find that increasing ω raises the contribution
of the raw data sK , while decreasing ω raises the contribu- Datasets: We evaluate MOON on six real-world MTS datasets.
tion of the transition MV-MTF data γsG . Under anomalies, r Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) [19]: It consists of
the values of the transition structure MV-MTF tend to de- soil samples and telemetry data collected by NASA’s Mars
crease (due to the low probability of anomalous transitions), rover.
which in turn drives the contribution sG close to zero, thereby r Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) [48]: It is similar to SMAP
leading to a very small sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω) value. The value of but corresponds to the sensor and actuator data for the Mars
sk (ω) − sk+1 (ω) increases only when ω grows, which means rover itself.
466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 TABLE II are configured as follows: the coefficient α in (6) is set to 0.9,
 DATASET STATISTICS
 the learning rate is set to 0.001, and the weight ω in (17) is fixed
 at 0.8.
 Performance metrics: We evaluate anomaly detection performance using Precision, Recall, F1 score, and F1PA score.
 F1PA score is a segment-based F1 score using point adjustment (PA), where a segment is considered abnormal if at
 least one point within it is detected as abnormal [18], [22].
 PrecisionPA ·RecallPA
 F1PA = 2 · Precision PA +RecallPA
 , where PrecisionPA and RecallPA are
 r Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [32]: It is collected from a the precision and recall calculated using the PA method.
 real-world water treatment plant with seven days of normal We evaluate the interpretability of anomaly detection using
 and four days of abnormal operation. This dataset consists Hit@P%, which measures the proportion of true anomalous
 of sensor values (water level, flow rate, etc.) and actuator dimensions included among the top candidates predicted by the
 operations (valves and pumps). model [30]. Here, P% is the percentage of true anomalous dimenr Water Distribution dataset (WADI) [32]: It is an extended sions at each timestamp, defining the number of top predicted
 dataset of SWAT. WADI features 14 days of normal oper- candidates considered.
 ation KPIs and two days of attack scenario KPIs. Environment: All methods are executed on a machine with an
 r Pooled Server Metrics (PSM) [2]: It is collected from Intel(R) Core(TM) i9-10900 K CPU, featuring 10 cores and a
 multiple eBay application server nodes, anonymized for 3.70 GHz clock speed. The framework is also equipped with an
 publication. It includes 26 features related to server ma- NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 graphics card, which has 24 GB
 chine metrics like CPU utilization and memory, with some of video memory. The source code of MOON are available.7
 localization meta-attributes omitted. The training set spans
 13 weeks, followed by eight weeks for testing. B. Comparison Study
 r Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [39]: It is a five-week
 We compare MOON with reconstruction-based methods
 long dataset of stacked traces of the resource utilizations (TRANAD, OMNIANOMALY, MAD_GAN, LSTM_AD, TIMESof 28 machines from a compute cluster. Similar to MSL, NET, ADTRANSFORMER, DCDETECTOR and CATCH) and
 we use the nontrivial sequences, specifically the traces for classification-based methods (HYPERROCKET and ROCKET) in
 machine-2-1, machine-2-6, and machine-3-7. six datasets. Table III presents the results, highlighting the best
 The datasets used are publicly available and can be accessed performance in bold.
at the following URLs: SMAP1 , MSL2 , SWaT3 , WADI4 , PSM5 , Compared with reconstruction-based methods: MOON
and SMD6 . We summarize the key characteristics of the datasets achieves the highest or near-highest Recall, F1 and F1PA
in Table II. “#Entities” refers to the number of distinct time on most datasets, with Precision values almost reaching 1
series, and “#Dimensions” refers to the number of dimensions across all datasets. In contrast, reconstruction-based methods
in each dataset. Each dataset includes a training set without such as TRANAD, OMNIANOMALY, MAD_GAN, CATCH, and
anomaly detection labels and a testing set with labels. For LSTM_AD often have lower F1 and F1PA on complex datasets,
our experiments, we use 6,000 training samples for the WADI particularly on the SMAP and SWaT datasets where the F1
dataset and 10,000 for the other five datasets. All datasets use are below 0.9. This is because the Moon method improves the
5,000 testing samples. ability to identify anomalies in complex multivariate time-series
 Baselines and setting: We compare MOON with eight state- data through modal transformation and deeper feature extracof-the-art reconstruction-based methods: TRANAD [42], OM- tion and fusion techniques. Meanwhile, reconstruction-based
NIANOMALY [39], MAD_GAN [26], LSTM_AD [20], TIMES- methods rely on reconstruction error, which is effective for
NET, ADTRANSFORMER, DCDETECTOR and CATCH [49] and simple patterns. However, they struggle with multivariate, hightwo classification-based methods: HYPERROCKET [11] and dimensional, and complex dependencies because they cannot
ROCKET [10], [40]. We choose the two types of methods as base- fully capture anomaly characteristics, resulting in lower deteclines because (i) prediction-based methods are theoretically sim- tion performance.
ilar to reconstruction-based methods, with the latter being more Furthermore, although many reconstruction-based methods
mainstream, and (ii) MOON is a classification-based method. generally excel in Recall, detecting most anomalies and thus
Due to the space limitation, please refer to Section VI for more maintaining a low miss rate, they struggle with Precision, with
details about baselines. In our experiments, the hyperparameters higher false positive rates. For instance, OMNIANOMALY has a
 Precision of only 0.7991 on the SMAP dataset, and MAD_GAN
 1 https://nsidc.org/data/smap/data has a Precision of only 0.8725 on the PSM dataset, both sig-
 2 https://pds-atmospheres.nmsu.edu/data_and_services/atmospheres_data/
 nificantly lower than MOON. This indicates that these methods
Mars/Mars.html
 3 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/dataset_info/#swat have difficulties distinguishing between normal and anomalous
 4 https://itrust.sutd.edu.sg/itrust-labs_datasets/dataset_info/#wadi data, possibly due to reconstruction error inadequately capturing
 5 https://github.com/eBay/RANSynCoders/tree/main/data
 6 https://github.com/NetManAIOps/OmniAnomaly/tree/master/
ServerMachineDataset 7 https://github.com/Syh517/Moon/
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 467

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON RESULTS

anomaly characteristics. In contrast, the comprehensive feature
extraction and classification techniques of MOON enable accurate anomaly detection across various datasets. In addition,
MOON outperforms CATCH in most cases. This is because
CATCH transforms time series into the frequency domain,
capturing frequency features but potentially losing temporal
structure, making it less effective for anomalies that rely on
fine-grained temporal context. However, MOON uses raw and
enhanced anomaly data to better capture details, achieving more Fig. 4. Training efficiency study.
accurate detection.
 Compared with classification-based methods: MOON outper- achieve higher F1-Score than reconstruction-based methods on
forms the classification-based methods in F1-Score on most most datasets. This is due to classification methods not relying
datasets in all performance metrics. However, classification- on anomaly scores, allowing them to more effectively capture
based methods often show a clear disparity between Precision abnormal patterns in the data.
and Recall. For instance, in the SMAP dataset, HYPERROCKET
has a Precision of only 0.9107, while its Recall reaches 1.0.
 C. Efficiency Study
This result indicates that HYPERROCKET is highly sensitive to
anomalies but lacks the ability to accurately distinguish be- Training efficiency study:To evaluate the efficiency, we comtween normal and anomalous data. This occurs because the pare the running time per epoch of MOON with that of
Rocket method assigns random kernels to each variable, disre- reconstruction-based methods. HYPERROCKET and ROCKET,
garding the correlations between variables. In contrast, Moon which use predefined feature extraction instead of deep neural
enhances the ability to identify anomalies in complex MTS networks, do not require training. Hence, their epoch running
data by capturing local information between variables through times cannot be measured and are excluded from the comparmodality conversion, showcasing excellent overall performance. ison. The results shown in the Fig. 4(a) indicate that MOON’s
Additionally, HyperRocket performs slightly worse than Rocket. running time per epoch is comparable to that of TRANAD and
This is because HyperRocket emphasizes global modeling and significantly lower than that of other methods, especially on
cross-variable dynamics, which benefits sequence-level classi- SMD datasets. This result stems primarily from two factors.
fication [50] but may overlook subtle point-wise anomalies. In First, MOON’s efficiency is primarily due to its use of parameter
contrast, Rocket uses random convolutional kernels to extract lo- sharing, which reduces redundant computations, and its CNNcal features, making it more effective for detecting anomalies at based feature extraction module, which accelerates the feaindividual time points. Classification-based methods generally ture extraction process and further enhances overall efficiency.
468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 5. The test time (ms) of each time series data point.

Second, TRANAD is a lightweight method which contributes
to its fast performance. In contrast, other reconstruction-based
methods process all sequential windows, making them more
computationally intensive.
 Fig. 4(b) presents the execution time of MV-MTF technology
in MOON across all six datasets. The results demonstrate that the
execution time of MV-MTF increases with the number of variables. For instance, it takes only a few seconds when the number
of variables is less than 40, as seen in PSM (26 variables), SMAP
(25 variables), and SMD (38 variables). However, the execution Fig. 6. Ablation Study on Multimodal-CNN of Moon.
time increases significantly when the number of variables exceeds 50, as demonstrated by the MSL (55 variables), SWaT
(51 variables) and WADI (123 variables) datasets. However,
 outperforms both ResNet, LSTM and CNN across all evaluation
MV-MTF transformation is performed once during the entire
 metrics, with especially notable improvements over ResNet.
training process. We have optimized its time complexity to O(n)
 This arises from Multimodal-CNN’s use of convolutional ker-
(see Section IV-A), making its time consumption negligible
 nels with varying sizes, enabling it to capture receptive fields
compared to overall training time. In real-time applications,
 at different scales and model both local and global features
reconstruction- and prediction-based methods compare with
 effectively. In contrast, ResNet’s fixed receptive field limits its
original data, while Moon uses modal conversion. Both have
 ability to fully capture the range of data features.
O(n) complexity, proportional to window size and number of
 Furthermore, Multimodal-CNN demonstrates a clear advanvariables, resulting in minimal efficiency differences.
 tage over LSTM and CNN in handling high-dimensional MTS
 Inference efficiency study:To demonstrate the practical feasidata, such as MSL with 55 variables and WADI with 123
bility of our approach in real-time streaming settings, we further
 variables. This advantage stems from its ability to effectively
report the online testing time, as shown in Fig. 5. It is important
 capture complex inter-variable relationships using a MV-MTF
to note that our method is not designed for real-time anomaly
 and to enhance key information extraction through a cross-modal
detection in streaming settings. Therefore, we first calculate the
 attention mechanism. These features enable Multimodal-CNN
total test time, then divide by the number of samples to get the
 to better integrate multimodal information and model depeninference time per TS point. Experimental results show that the
 dencies between variables. In contrast, LSTM and CNN lack
anomaly detection time (i.e., 0.2 ms) of our classification-based
 the capability to effectively capture inter-variable dependencies.
model is comparable to that of existing unsupervised methods.
 As a result, they often overlook interactions and relationships
Although the MV-MTF transformation introduces an additional
 between variables, leading to the loss of critical information.
1.5 ms per time series data point, the overall time remains
 Ablation study on four key components:We evaluate the effecmore efficient than traditional supervised classifiers Rocket and
 tiveness of three key components—modality conversion, feature
HyperRocket, as our model avoids complex high-dimensional
 fusion, parameter sharing, and multimodal attention—through
computations during inference.
 ablation experiments on the PSM and SMD datasets. Table IV
 presents the results, with bold values indicating the best perfor-
D. Ablation Study mance.
 Ablation study on multimodal-CNN:We evaluate the effec- As observed, omitting any component leads to a performance
tiveness of the proposed Multimodal-CNN by comparing it to drop, particularly in Recall, F1, and F1PA . On the PSM dataset,
ResNet, LSTM, and CNN models across four metrics: Precision, removing the feature fusion module reduces Recall, F1, and F1PA
Recall, F1, and F1PA , on six datasets. Fig. 6 presents the compar- by 0.0530, 0.0282, and 0.0277, respectively. This is because simative results, demonstrating that Multimodal-CNN consistently ple data concatenation fails to capture the relationships between
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 469

 TABLE IV
 ABLATION STUDY ON MODALITY CONVERSION, FEATURE FUSION, AND
 PARAMETER SHARING OF MOON

 Fig. 7. The efficiency of different window size .

modalities, resulting in decreased performance. On the SMD
dataset, omitting modality transformation (i.e., only raw data)
causes a significant drop in Recall, F1, and F1PA , decreasing
by 0.1349, 0.0688, and 0.0690, respectively. This highlights
the critical role of modality transformation in capturing local
inter-variable relationships and improving performance. Only
the MV-MTF data or replacing MV-MTF with Gramian Angular Fig. 8. Parameter study of α.
Fields (GAF) method still lead to a decline in performance,
particularly on the PSM dataset. This is because MV-MTF
is specifically designed to capture temporal dependencies and
inter-variable relationships in time series. This enables more
effective modeling of complex dynamic behaviors and significantly enhances the distinguishability between normal and
anomalous patterns. In contrast, GAF primarily relies on static
spatial or temporal mappings and struggles to uncover such rich
structural information. In addition, the absence of parameter
sharing leads to a notable performance decline, emphasizing
its importance in integrating information across modalities to
enhance feature extraction and overall model performance. Finally, the ablation of the multimodal attention module results
in a substantial performance degradation, with Recall, F1, and
F1PA dropping to 0.2444, 0.1374, and 0.1374, respectively. Fig. 9. Parameter study on historical time-step length in performance.
This highlights the pivotal role of multimodal attention in capturing cross-modal correlations and complementary information, thereby improving the model’s ability to detect abnormal optimal α value for achieving the best performance varies across
patterns. datasets due to differences in variable dependencies.
 Parameter study on historical window sizes:In addition, we
 conduct a sensitivity analysis on different historical window
E. Parameter Study sizes on MSL dataset to evaluate the robustness of our method.
 Parameter study on α:We conduct a parameter study on the The results presented in Fig. 9 demonstrate that the model
weight parameter α (cf. Equation 5), using the PSM, SMAP, achieves optimal performance—in terms of both F1 and F 1PA
and SMD datasets. As shown in Fig. 8, α exhibits a similar scores—when the window size is set to 0.6. This is because
trend. When α is set to 0.1, the performance is notably poor a smaller window may fail to capture the distinction between
because this setting reduces the transition probabilities between normal and abnormal patterns, while a larger window tends to
timestamps, leading to insufficient information capture from in- obscure critical local anomaly signals.
dividual time dimensions and consequently, lower performance. From an efficiency perspective, smaller window sizes result
As α increases, performance generally improves. However, the in faster computation, as illustrated in Fig. 7. This is because
470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 10. The weight parameter balancing in the interpretability contribution equation.

 TABLE V a Hit@150% of 0.7034. In contrast, the state-of-the-art
 ANOMALY INTERPRETATION PERFORMANCE
 reconstruction-based model TRANAD performs significantly
 worse on the same dataset, with a Hit@100% of 0.4905 and
 a Hit@150% of 0.6634. Reconstruction-based methods such
 as TRANAD rely on thresholding to identify anomalous variables, making their performance highly dependent on detection accuracy and often overlooking the model’s influence on
 individual variables. In contrast, MOON focuses on explaining
 the model’s internal mechanisms rather than merely interpreting
 its outputs. Moreover, Moon achieves superior performance on
both the transformation overhead of MV-MTF and the overall
 the NDCG@P% metric, as it emphasizes ranking order rather
model complexity increase with the growth of window size.
 than simply detecting whether a target is hit. By integrating a
 Parameter study of ω:We perform a parameter study of the
 scoring mechanism to filter out unreliable explanations, Moon
fusion weight ω in Eq. (17) over [0,1] on three SMD subsets
 provides more precise interpretations, thereby enhancing both
stratified by interpretability ground-truth length—long (SMDthe interpretability and reliability of anomaly detection.
2-8), medium (SMD-2-9), and short (SMD-3-11). The results in
Fig. 10 yield two consistent findings, aligned with Lemmas 1
and 2: (i) performance varies slightly with ω, fluctuations occur G. Case Study
mainly for ω ∈ [0, 0.4]; and (ii) there exists a broad plateau (i.e.,
ω ∈ [0.6, 1.0]) on which the variable-interpretability ranking To validate the performance of our method in real-world
remains essentially unchanged. These patterns persist across all scenarios, we conducte a case study using the SMD dataset.
three length regimes, indicating robustness both to the choice of We selected the SMD 1–4 subset and focus our analysis on the
ω and to the ground-truth duration. Therefore, we fix ω = 0.8 time interval [370, 430]. Within this interval, the dataset labels
as a robust default. the period [385, 417] as anomalous. It is important to note that
 in SMD, anomaly labels are assigned at the time-point level: if
 any variable is anomalous at a given timestamp, all variables
F. Performance of Anomaly Interpretation
 at this timestamp are marked as anomalous. However, based on
 We evaluate the anomaly interpretability by using Hit@P% = the dataset’s provided interpretable labels, we confirm that the
Hit@P%
 |GTt | , where GTt is the ground truth array of dimensions true anomalous variables during this period are variables 12,
that contribute to the anomaly and |GTt | is its length. Here, 15, and 16, corresponding to disk_svc, disk_wa, and disk_wb,
Hit@P% [39] represents the number of ground truth dimensions which represent the average service time per disk request, the
in the top P % × |GTt | of the AS list, where P is set to 100 I/O wait time, and the write-back time, respectively. As shown
and 150. For example, for an anomaly in a time series with 5 in Fig. 11, the top three subplots display the time-series curves
variables, where the ground truth GTt is {2, 3} and the AS list of these anomalous variables, with red shaded regions indicating
generated by MOON is {2, 1, 3, 5, 4}, the Hit@100% is 50% the actual anomalous intervals. For comparison, we also include
since only one of the top two variables in AS matches GTt . several variables (e.g., 19, 20, 21) that remained normal during
The Hit@150% is 100%, as both variables in GTt are among the same period.
the top three in the AS list. We also use metric (NDCG) [21] to Interpretable anomaly detection must not only identify
measure the ranking quality of anomaly interpretation. Similar anomalous timestamps but also accurately locate the responto HitRate@P%, NDCG@P% considers the top P % × |GTt | sible variables. Once an anomaly is detected, we compute the
variables, but it further emphasizes the positions of the ground contribution of each variable by combining the MV-MTF repretruth dimensions in the ranking. We evaluate MOON exclusively sentation with the original TS data. To assess the performance
on the SMD dataset, as other datasets lack interpretation labels. of Moon’s explainer, we visualize the contribution results in
 As shown in Table V, MOON achieves superior anomaly Fig. 12. As observed, Moon’s explainer correctly identifies
interpretation accuracy, with a Hit@100% of 0.5294 and 2 out of the 3 ground-truth anomalous variables within its
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 471

Fig. 11. Time series plots of anomalous variables (12, 15, 16) and partial normal variables (19, 20, 21) in time interval [370, 430] of the SMD 1-4 dataset.

 Moreover, time series data can be encoded into images and
 feature extraction and classification can be performed using
 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Common techniques
 include Gramian Angular Field (GAF) [47], Recurrence Plots
 (RP) [16], Markov Transition Field (MTF) [47], Difference
 Field [52], and Relative Position Matrix [7]. GAF converts time
 series data into cosine and sine Gramian matrices, preserving
 angular information and capturing dynamic features. RP generates two-dimensional matrices reflecting similarity structures,
 making it suitable for identifying repeating patterns and periodicity. MTF creates Markov transition matrices, generating
 images that reflect state transitions and capture dynamic evolution. DF highlights data trend changes by producing images
 through differential operations. RPM maps time series data to
 high-dimensional spaces to generate images reflecting relative
 positional relationships. Among these, MTF is particularly ef-
Fig. 12. The relative contribution of variables to the anomalies . fective for time series data with strong contextual links, as it
 captures dynamic characteristics and evolutionary trends. However, current research on multivariate MTF techniques remains
 limited.
top-3 predictions, yielding a Hit@100% score of 0.667. Finally, To address this gap, this paper proposes MV-MTF that transengineers can leverage the identified anomalous variables to forms MTS with contextual links into two-dimensional images.
perform root cause analysis and promptly address system issues. MV-MTF preserves transition relationships between variables
For example, Moon’s explainer highlights variables 12 and 15 over time, effectively enhancing anomaly detection.
as anomalous, we can investigate potential disk bottlenecks by Deep Learning Anomaly Detection. Deep learning models [5],
examining which processes are heavily utilizing disk I/O and [35], [41], [42], [47] have demonstrated exceptional effectivetake corresponding optimizations. ness in anomaly detection tasks for complex and large-scale
 datasets due to their ability to learn intricate data representations
 and features.
 VI. RELATED WORK OmniAnomaly [39] utilizes a stochastic recurrent neural net-
 Modality Conversion:Time series data can be transformed work combined with a planar normalizing flow to generate
into time-frequency representations using various modal con- reconstruction probabilities. It integrates an improved Peak Over
version methods, such as Short-Time Fourier Transform Threshold (POT) method for automated anomaly threshold se-
(STFT) [45], Wavelet Transform [37], and Hilbert-Huang Trans- lection, significantly enhancing performance. However, its trainform (HHT) [24]. Each method has distinct characteristics: ing process is lengthy and resource-intensive. MAD-GAN [26]
STFT uses a fixed window scale, which cannot adjust based employs an LSTM-based GAN model to capture time-series
on frequency; WT is better suited for non-stationary signals; distributions through its generator, incorporating both prediction
and HHT offers adaptability but with lower resolution. error and discriminator loss into anomaly scoring. This method
472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

boosts anomaly detection performance but can also be compu- each component/technique in MOON. compared with existing
tationally demanding. state-of-the-arts methods, MOON achieves high efficient and
 USAD [5] is more efficient than the above methods because accurate anomaly detection and provides the detail anomaly
it utilizes a simple autoencoder with dual decoders trained in an analysis report for good interpretability. In the future, it is of
adversarial framework. This lightweight design significantly re- interest to extend our anomaly detection model to handle other
duces training time while maintaining competitive performance. downstream tasks.
TranAD [42] incorporates focus score-based self-conditioning
for robust multimodal feature extraction, adversarial training
for stability, and Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) for REFERENCES
effective training on limited data. [1] Shap, 2024. Accessed: Aug. 2, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://shap.
 CNNs have proven highly effective in extracting and learning readthedocs.io/en/latest/
features from data, enabling them to capture complex struc- [2] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynchronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
tures. Omni-Scale CNN [41] is particularly adept at handling in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
multi-scale MTS data through its multi-scale feature extraction pp. 2485–2494.
capabilities. However, it does not support multimodal data, [3] M. Abououf, S. Singh, R. Mizouni, and H. Otrok, “Explainable AI for
 event and anomaly detection and classification in healthcare monitoring
limiting its applicability to more diverse datasets. systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 3446–3457, Jan. 2024.
 To address this limitation, we enhance Omni-Scale CNN by [4] R. Assaf and A. Schumann, “Explainable deep neural networks for multiincorporating parameter sharing and a feature fusion module, variate time series predictions,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
 2019, pp. 6488–6490.
creating a multimodal anomaly detection model. This enhanced [5] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, “USAD:
model significantly improves its ability to process and analyze Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in Proc. 26th
multimodal data, further advancing its effectiveness in anomaly ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, R. Gupta, Y. Liu, J.
 Tang, and B. A. Prakash, Eds., 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
detection. [6] A. Bhatta, D. Mery, H. Wu, J. Annan, M. C. King, and K. W. Bowyer,
 Explainable Anomaly Detection: Explainable Anomaly De- “Our deep CNN face matchers have developed achromatopsia,” in
tection (XAD) extracts insights from anomaly detection models, Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2024,
 pp. 142–152.
emphasizing data relationships to help users understand the [7] W. Chen and K. Shi, “A deep learning framework for time series classicauses of anomalies, thereby enhancing interpretability and fication using relative position matrix and convolutional neural network,”
usability. In time-series data, XAD methods can be classified Neurocomputing, vol. 359, pp. 384–394, 2019.
 [8] X. Chen et al., “DAEMON: Unsupervised anomaly detection and interinto sample-based and model-based methods. pretation for multivariate time series,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data
 Sample-based methods explain anomalies by comparing Eng., 2021, pp. 2225–2230.
anomalous and normal objects, focusing on local neighbor- [9] E. Çokaj, H. S. Gustad, A. Leone, P. T. Moe, and L. Moldestad, “Supervised
 time series classification for anomaly detection in subsea engineering,”
hoods, counterexamples, or contextual anomalies. For example, 2024, arXiv:2403.08013.
reconstruction-based methods such as OmniAnomaly [39] and [10] A. Dempster, F. Petitjean, and G. I. Webb, “ROCKET: Exceptionally
TranAD [42] identify anomalous variables by comparing recon- fast and accurate time series classification using random convolutional
 kernels,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1454–1495, 2020.
structed values with original ones. [11] A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb, “Hydra: Competing convo-
 Model-based methods explain the internal workings or predic- lutional kernels for fast and accurate time series classification,” Data Min.
tions of anomaly detection models. They can be further divided Knowl. Discov., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1779–180, 2023.
 [12] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
into glass-box and closed-box methods. Glass-box methods are in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 35th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
inherently in terpretable, while closed-box methods use post-hoc pp. 4027–4035.
techniques, often model-agnostic, to explain predictions [4], [13] N. Ding, H. Ma, H. Gao, Y. Ma, and G. Tan, “Real-time anomaly detection
 based on long short-term memory and gaussian mixture model,” Comput.
[36]. For example, closed-box methods such as SHAP val- Electr. Eng., vol. 79, 2019, Art. no. 106458.
ues [31], [33] provide insights into feature importance within [14] G. B. Gaggero, A. Armellin, G. Portomauro, and M. Marchese, “Industrial
the model. We integrate sample-based and model-based methods control system-anomaly detection dataset (ICS-ADD) for cyber-physical
 security monitoring in smart industry environments,” IEEE Access, 12,
by leveraging SHAP values to enhance interpretability and using pp. 64140–64149, 2024.
normal samples to define the range of anomalous variables. [15] M. Gupta, J. Gao, C. C. Aggarwal, and J. Han, “Outlier detection for
 temporal data: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, no. 9,
 pp. 2250–2267, Sep. 2014.
 VII. CONCLUSION [16] N. Hatami, Y. Gavet, and J. Debayle, “Classification of time-series images
 using deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Mach.
 This paper introduces MOON, an efficient and effective frame- Vis., A. Verikas, P. Radeva, D. P. Nikolaev, and J. Zhou, Eds., 2017, vol.
 10696, Art. no. 106960.
work for multivariate time series anomaly detection. MOON [17] M. Huang, C. Nie, and W. Zhong, “A visualization method for data domain
utilizes the MV-MTF technology to provide more detailed changes in CNN networks and the optimization method for selecting
multi-modal information via mode conversion, while introduces thresholds in classification tasks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2024, pp. 986–994.
Multimodal-CNN to effectively learns and integrates informa- [18] A. Huet, J. M. Navarro, and D. Rossi, “Local evaluation of time series
tion from different modalities. Additionally, MOON provides anomaly detection algorithms,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
user-friendly anomaly interpretability by using SHAP values to Discov. Data Mining, A. Zhang and H. Rangwala, Eds., 2022, pp. 635–645.
 [19] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
rank variables in ascending order of their impact on anomalies “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic
and select the top-ranked ones. Extensive experiments evaluate thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
the performance of Moon and validate the effectiveness of 2018, pp. 387–395.
YAO et al.: MOON: A MODALITY CONVERSION-BASED EFFICIENT MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION 473

[20] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Söderström, [42] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric dynamic networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data VLDB Endow., vol. 15,no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, 2022.
 Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. [43] H. Wang, Z. Luo, J. W. L. Yip, C. Ye, and M. Zhang, “ECGGAN:
[21] K. Järvelin and J. Kekäläinen, “Cumulated gain-based evaluation of IR A framework for effective and interpretable electrocardiogram anomaly
 techniques,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 422–446, 2002. detection,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
[22] S. Kim, K. Choi, H. Choi, B. Lee, and S. Yoon, “Towards a rigorous 2023, pp. 5071–5081.
 evaluation of time-series anomaly detection,” in Proc. 36th AAAI Conf. [44] J. Wang et al., “Real-time workload pattern analysis for large-scale cloud
 Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 7194–7201. databases,” Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 3689–3701, 2023.
[23] D. P. Kingma and J. B. Adam, “A method for stochastic optimization,” in [45] T. Wang and F. Kirchner, “Grasp stability prediction with time series data
 Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, vol. 5, no. 6, 2015. based on STFT and LSTM,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Robot. Mechatron.,
[24] V. G. Kurbatsky, D. N. Sidorov, V. A. Spiryaev, and N. V. Tomin, “Fore- 2023, pp. 587–593.
 casting nonstationary time series based on Hilbert-Huang transform and [46] Z. Wang and T. Oates, “Encoding time series as images for visual inspecmachine learning,” Autom. Remote. Control., vol. 75, no. 5, pp. 922–934, tion and classification using tiled convolutional neural networks,” in Proc.
 2014. Workshops 29th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2015, pp. 91–96.
[25] H. Lee and J. Lee, “Convolutional model with a time series feature based on [47] Z. Wang and T. Oates, “Imaging time-series to improve classification
 RSSI analysis with the markov transition field for enhancement of location and imputation,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell., Q. Yang and M.
 recognition,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 7, 2023, Art. no. 3453. J. Wooldridge, Eds., 2015, pp. 3939–3945.
[26] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multi- [48] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks
 variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE Trans. Knowl.
 networks,” in Proc. Artif. Neural Netw. Mach. Learn., in Lecture Notes in Data Eng.,vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2021.
 Computer Science, 2019, vol. 11730, pp. 703–716. [49] X. Wu, “CATCH: channel-aware multivariate time series anomaly detec-
[27] L. Li, X. Lin, B. Ran, and B. Du, “Tensor decomposition of transportation tion via frequency patching,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Representatemporal and spatial Big Data: A brief review,” Fundam. Res., early access, tions., 2025, pp. 56894–56922.
 Sep. 25, 2024, doi: 10.1016/j.fmre.2024.03.032. [50] Y. Yao, H. Jie, L. Chen, T. Li, Y. Gao, and S. Wen, “TSec: An efficient and
[28] C. Lin, B. Du, L. Sun, and L. Li, “Hierarchical context representation effective framework for time series classification,” in Proc. IEEE 40th Int.
 and self-adaptive thresholding for multivariate anomaly detection,” IEEE Conf. Data Eng., 2024, pp. 1394–1406.
 Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3139–3150, Jul. 2024. [51] M. Zhang, B. Xu, and J. Gong, “An anomaly detection model based on
[29] H. Liu and L. Li, “Anomaly detection of high-frequency sensing data one-class SVM to detect network intrusions,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf.
 in transportation infrastructure monitoring system based on fine-tuned Mobile Ad-hoc Sensor Netw., 2015, pp. 102–107.
 model,” IEEE Sensors J.,vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 8630–8638, Apr. 2023. [52] Y. Zhang and X. Chen, “Motif difference field: A simple and ef-
[30] H. Liu, W. Luo, L. Han, P. Gao, W. Yang, and G. Han, “Anomaly fective image representation of time series for classification,” 2020,
 detection via graph attention networks-augmented mask autoregressive arXiv:2001.07582.
 flow for multivariate time series,” IEEE Internet Things J.vol. 11, no. 11, [53] Y. Zhao et al., “A comparative study on unsupervised anomaly detection
 pp. 19368–19379, Jun. 2024. for time series: Experiments and analysis,” 2022, arXiv:2209.04635.
[31] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
 predictions,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017,
 pp. 4765–4774.
[32] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWAT: A water treatment testbed for
 research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. CySWater, 2016, pp. 31–36. Yuanyuan Yao received the master’s degree in
[33] F. Mujkanovic, V. Doskoc, M. Schirneck, P. Schäfer, and T. Friedrich, computer science from the University of Chinese
 “Timexplain - A framework for explaining the predictions of time series Academy of Sciences, China, in 2018. She is currently
 classifiers,” 2020, arXiv:2007.07606. working toward the PhD degree in the College of
[34] G. Pang, J. Li, A. V. D. Hengel, L. Cao, and T. G. Dietterich, “AN- Computer Science, Zhejiang University, China. Her
 DEA: Anomaly and novelty detection, explanation, and accommoda- research interests include time series management,
 tion,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, compression, and analytics.
 pp. 4892–4893.
[35] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
 for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[36] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Anchors: High-precision modelagnostic explanations,” in Proc. 32nd AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 30th Innov.
 Appl. Artif. Intell. Conf.; Proc. 80th AAAI Symp. Educ. Adv. Artif. Intell., Yuhan Shi received the BS degree in computer sci-
 2018, pp. 1527–1535. ence from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics
[37] L. Sasal, T. Chakraborty, and A. Hadid, “W-transformers: A wavelet-based and Astronautics, China, in 2024. She is currently
 transformer framework for univariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. 21st working toward the master’s degree in the College of
 IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl., M. A. Wani, M. M. Kantardzic, V. Software, Zhejiang University, China. Her research
 Palade, D. Neagu, L. Yang, and K. Y. Chan, Eds., 2022, pp. 671–676. interests include anomaly detection in time series data
[38] A. Song, E. Seo, and H. Kim, “Anomaly VAE-transformer: A deep learning and distributed databases.
 approach for anomaly detection in decentralized finance,” IEEE Access,
 vol. 11, pp. 98115–98131, 2023.
[39] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Lu Chen received the PhD degree in computer sci-
 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 ence from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
[40] C. W. Tan, A. Dempster, C. Bergmeir, and G. I. Webb, “Multirocket:
 in 2016. She was an assistant professor in Aalborg
 Multiple pooling operators and transformations for fast and effective
 University for a 2-year period from 2017 to 2019, and
 time series classification,” Data Min. Knowl. Discov., vol. 36, no. 5, she was an associated professor in Aalborg University
 pp. 1623–1646, 2022.
 for a 1-year period from 2019 to 2020. She is currently
[41] W. Tang, G. Long, L. Liu, T. Zhou, M. Blumenstein, and J. Jiang, “OMNIa ZJU Plan 100 professor in the College of Computer
 scale CNNS: A simple and effective kernel size configuration for time
 Science, Zhejiang University. Her research interests
 series classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022,
 include indexing and querying metric spaces.
 pp. 1–17.
474 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 Ziquan Fang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD Yushuai Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 degree in computer science from Zhejiang Univer- PhD degree in control theory and control engineering
 sity, Hangzhou, in 2023. He is currently a researcher from the Northeastern University, Shenyang, China,
 with Zhejiang University’s “Hundred Talents Pro- in 2019. He is currently an assistant professor with
 gram”. His research interests include big trajectory the Department of Computer Science, Aalborg Unidata management, spatio-temporal data mining, and versity. He is also an associate editor for IEEE Transdistributed streaming data processing. actions on Industrial Informatics, IEEE Transactions
 on Automation Science and Engineering, Journal of
 Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy, and IEEE
 Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Magazine. His main
 research interests include machine learning, digital
 twin, and integrated energy.
 Yunjun Gao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 PhD degree in computer science from Zhejiang University, China, in 2008. He is currently a professor in
 the College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University. His research interests include spatial and spatiotemporal databases, metric and incomplete/uncertain
 data management, graph databases, spatio-textual
 data processing, and database usability. He is a mem- Tianyi Li (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 ber of the ACM and a senior member of IEEE. from Aalborg University, Denmark, in 2022. She
 currently an assistant professor with the Department
 of Computer Science, Aalborg University. Her main
 research interests include data management and analytics, machine learning, and digital twin. She is also
 an associate editor for IEEE Transactions on Intelli-
 Leong Hou U (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 gent Vehicles and IEEE Network. She is a member of
 degree in computer science from the University of
 IEEE.
 Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2010. He is currently an
 assistant professor with the University of Macau. His
 research interest include spatial and spatio-temporal
 databases, advanced query processing, web data management, information retrieval, data mining, and optimization problems.