920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 MPdetector: A Multi-Party Collaborative Federated
 Transfer Learning Approach for IoT
 Intrusion Detection
 Li Lin , Member, IEEE, and ZhenKun Chen

 Abstract—The pervasive adoption of the Internet of Things (IoT) attacks and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks [6].
is accompanied by numerous network security threats, making the According to statistics, IoT devices on the Internet suffered up to
timely detection of anomalies in traffic data through intrusion de- 5.7 billion attacks in 2020, most of which were DDoS and botnet
tection increasingly critical. The existing intrusion detection methods based on federated learning can achieve good results under attacks launched by malware such as Mirai and Gafgyt [7]. In
the condition of sufficient labeled data. However, the traffic data of addition, there are differences in terminal devices, applications
participants in real IoT environments have various characteristics and network protocols in IoT network, which makes network
and there are a large amount of unlabeled data, which easily leads traffic highly heterogeneous and leads to increasingly complex
to the performance degradation of the intrusion detection model. patterns of network attacks. Consequently, detecting potential
To address this challenge, this paper proposes a novel federated
transfer learning approach for IoT intrusion detection based on intrusions in IoT environment to avoid more threats is crucial
multi-party collaboration called MPdetector. MPdetector uses an for the healthy and sustainable development of IoT.
encoder to extract the feature representation of diverse traffic data Traditional network intrusion detection methods are typifrom heterogeneous clients, and maps the feature representation of cally divided into two categories: signature-based and anomalyeach client to a unified feature space. In addition, a label transfer based [8]. Signature-based methods identify intrusions by
strategy is introduced to make full use of unlabeled data, and a
new mapping function is used to reconstruct the traffic data of each matching known attack features or patterns stored in a feature
client to expand client’s local data set, which can further improve library. However, it is difficult for these methods to detect
the detection performance of the model in varied and complex IoT unknown attacks such as Zero-day attacks [9]. With the adenvironments. Theoretical analysis proves that the entire transfer vancement of machine learning and deep learning, anomalylearning process of MPdetector is conducted within a secure con- based detection methods have shown improved performance
text. Experiments on four widely used intrusion detection datasets
show that MPdetector can detect known and unknown abnormal in recognizing complex attack patterns and detecting Zero-day
traffic more accurately than the existing three classical intrusion attacks [10]. Despite these advances, the training of these models
detection algorithms, and has strong generalization. Meanwhile, often relies on single-source datasets i.e., traffic data collected
the detection effect of MPdetector will be further improved with from a single node. Single-souce datasets are insufficient to
the increase of the volume of labeled traffic. reflect the complex network intrusions behaviors such as DDoS
 Index Terms—IoT, intrusion detection, federated transfer and botnet attacks that widely appear in IoT environments. For
learning, deep learning. instance, botnet attacks typically involve large amounts of data
 from multiple nodes [11]. If the detection model lacks sufficient
 I. INTRODUCTION information, it often causes problems such as model overfitting
 and poor generalization.
 ITH the rapid development and widespread application
W of IoT technology [1], [2], [3], the number and types
of IoT devices have increased rapidly in the past few years [4].
 In addition, the above schemes also ignore the privacy leakage
 problem introduced by collecting the data of IoT devices [12]. A
 common approach to address the privacy issue is the deployment
However, most IoT devices are small, low-cost, lack fixed power
 of federated learning technology in network intrusion detecsupplies, and are difficult to maintain. These characteristics
 tion [13], where participant nodes only upload model parameters
often result in inadequate security considerations, making these
 without sharing their local training data, a intrusion detection
devices more vulnerable to cyber-attacks [5] such as Zero-day
 center server is responsible for aggregating the model parameters
 and distributing to the participant nodes, and the participant
 Received 2 January 2025; revised 10 July 2025; accepted 13 August 2025.
Date of publication 19 August 2025; date of current version 3 December 2025. nodes update the model locally. However, most existing feder-
This work was supported by the China National Science Foundation under ated learning-based network intrusion detection schemes usually
Grant 61502017. Recommended for acceptance by F. Restuccia. (Corresponding require data samples to have the same feature space. Then the
author: Li Lin.)
 Li Lin is with the College of Computer Science, Beijing University of heterogeneous traffic data in the real IoT environments will
Technology, Beijing 100124, China, and also with the Beijing Key Laboratory of significantly affect the global model performance of federated
Trusted Computing, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: linli_2009@bjut.edu.cn). learning IoT intrusion detection [14].
 ZhenKun Chen is with the College of Computer Science, Beijing University
of Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: 1317889183@qq.com). Several studies have proposed to use federated transfer learn-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2025.3600306 ing technology to achieve knowledge sharing required for IoT

 1536-1233 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 921

intrusion detection while protecting participant’s privacy [15], generalization performance and detection performance of
that is, leveraging rich labels in fully labeled data source do- the model on target domains were improved.
mains to help build flexible and efficient detection models in r We have successfully implemented and evaluated MPdetarget domains with large amounts of unlabeled data. Unlike tector on the UNSW-NB15 [24], NSL-KDD [25], CItraditional federated learning methods, federated transfer learn- CIDS2017 [26], and N-BaIoT [27], [28] datasets. The reing technology does not require participants to have the same sults demonstrate that MPdetector can achieve a detection
features or the same sample space, so it is now receiving more accuracy of up to 98.2%, substantially outperforming the
and more attention. According to the number of participants, existing methods based on deep learning, semi-supervised
existing schemes can be divided into two categories. One is learning, federated learning and semi-supervised federated
designed for two parties (a single source domain and a single learning.
target domain) [16], [17], which still faces the limitation of
single-source data.The other is suitable for multiple parties [8],
[18], [19], [20], [21], [22], but it requires the central server to II. PROBLEM STATEMENT
have a common data set for initializing the model and the local In the traditional IoT intrusion detection scenarios using
training data set of participants must be labeled data. However, machine learning or deep learning, IoT devices provide their
in real IoT environments, most traffic data is unlabeled. On local data as participants to participate in the network intrusion
the one hand, manual labeling requires professional knowledge detection model training, and the final model is used to distinand is time-consuming. On the other hand, labeled data usually guish normal and abnormal traffic. However, these methods face
raises privacy concerns, so many participating organizations or two main challenges. On the one hand, the detection accuracy of
institutions only provide unlabeled data. these methods is limited by the small amount of labeled data per
 To address the above issues, exploiting the idea of client. On the other hand, it is easy to expose the user privacy of
SHFTL [23], this paper proposes a novel federated transfer learn- IoT devices when aggregating network traffic data from multiple
ing approach for IoT intrusion detection based on multi-party clients. Although the IoT intrusion detection scheme based on
collaboration called MPdetector. In MPdetector, each participat- federated learning does not require clients to provide local traffic
ing client extracts the feature representation of its traffic data, data, the model performance is still affected by the heterogeneity
which is mapped into a unified feature space by a task manager of network traffic data. To overcome the above issues, federated
to realize the alignment of feature representations of traffic data transfer learning can be employed to assign pseudo-labels to unand reduce the difference between feature representations. A labeled data and then clients can use both labeled and unlabeled
label transfer scheme is introduced to assign pseudo-labels to data for intrusion detection model training. Meanwhile each IoT
unlabeled network traffic data, and these pseudo-labeled data client does not expose data information during the process of
are integrated into the set of labeled data to participate in collaborative transfer learning, which ensures the security of
supervised training. Additionally, a deep learning-based traffic users’ privacy.
data reconstruction mechanism is proposed to facilitate feature This paper proposes a method designed for scenarios involvtransfer among clients, and a new mapping function is used to ing multiple participants, where most of the data on the client
reconstruct unlabeled traffic data of each client, so as to fully side is unlabeled, as illustrated in Fig. 1. It is important to note
integrate multi-source data information. that, unlike existing two-party-based approaches [17], the pro-
 Compared with existing work, our contributions are summa- posed method fully supports collaborative participation of over
rized as follows. 100 clients in the same task. A central task manager coordinates
 r A novel IoT intrusion detection method is proposed, which with all clients to jointly perform federated transfer learning.
 uses multi-party semi-supervised federated transfer learn- This design offers greater generality and scalability. Assume
 ing to better exploit unlabeled valuable data, and integrates that there are n IoT device participants, denoted as client k (k =
 feature representation alignment and reconstruction mech- 1, 2 . . . , n), participating in the collaboration. Each client posanisms, to solve the performance degradation problem of sesses a network traffic dataset, represented as X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X n ,
 detection model caused by a large number of unlabeled with the corresponding sample sizes M 1 , M 2 , . . . , M n . Considdata of participants and heterogeneity of data samples in ering the heterogeneity of traffic data features between multiple
 existing IoT attack detection methods. clients, that is, there is no overlap of traffic data features between
 r A traffic data reconstruction mechanism is proposed to clients but their traffic data samples partially overlap. Denote
 generate pseudo-labels from unlabeled data, which op- the overlap of traffic data samples between the kth client and
 k
 timizes the mapping function in the classical federated MO
 other clients as Ok = {xki }i=1 and the non-overlapping part as
 transfer learning, achieves high detection accuracy without Mk
 N k = {xkj }j=1
 N
 , where MOk represents the number of overlapincreasing the training cost and with minimal labeled data
 requirements, enhancing the ability of the model to identify ping samples and MN k
 represents the number of non-overlapping
 malicious traffic data. samples. Obviously there is M k = MOk + MN k
 . Moreover, the
 r The auxiliary training information provided by the unla- overlapping traffic data is labeled as yo = {yik }i=1 O Mk
 , and the
 beled data in the target domain of intrusion detection was label information is stored by the task manager, while the nonfully used to realize the collaborative training between a overlapping traffic data remains unlabeled. A specific example
 single source domain and multiple target domains, and the of network traffic data distribution is illustrated in Fig. 2.
922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 1. IoT intrusion detection scenario with federated transfer learning.

 TABLE I
 SYMBOL DEFINITIONS

Fig. 2. Illustration of data distribution.

 The goal of this paper is to propose a new federated transfer
learning approach that is applicable to the above multi-party
scenarios and has high performance. That is, the following
problem will be solved.
 The Optimal Ferderated Transfer Learning Problem is as
follows.
 Input: The number of participants n, the initial Intrusion Detection Classification Model gcla
 k
 , the local dataset of participants
is X .
 k

 Question: Is there an optimal federated transfer learning approach that maximizes the ACC of intrusion detection classification models.
 To address unlabeled traffic data, an effective feature extraction scheme and a label transfer scheme are presented in
the proposed transfer learning approach. Participating clients
provide unlabeled traffic data and extract network traffic feature
representations. The task manager aligns these feature representations, assigns pseudo-labels to the unlabeled data, and
reconstructs participating clients’ traffic data using mapping
functions.
 To standardize the notation, the symbols used are defined in
Table I. label information and handles feature representation alignment,
 label transfer, and feature transfer. The workflow of MPdetector
 III. DESIGN OF MPDETECTOR is as follows.
 1 Each participating client trains an encoder to extract the
 In this section, we will give the design of the proposed apfeature representation of its traffic data and sends it to the
proach MPdetector, including its working principles and detailed
 task manager.
functions.
 2 The task manager aligns the feature representations of
 the clients to reduce the differences between the feature
A. Sections and Subsections
 representations of different clients.
 As depicted in Fig. 3, in MPdetector, each participating client 3 The task manager assigns pseudo-labels to the nonis responsible for achieving the feature representation extraction, overlapping traffic data using the aligned global reprewhile the task manager stores the overlapping network traffic sentation, selects the non-overlapping traffic data with
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 923

Fig. 3. Interaction flow between the task manager and the client.

 classification result is denoted as ŷlk = gcla
 k
 (RO
 k
 ). The classification loss function is as follows.
 M0k
   
 Arg min Lcla =
 k
 XE ŷik , yik , (1)
 k
 θenc k
 ,θcla i=1

 where, θenc
 k
 , θcla
 k
 represent the model parameters of the encoder
 genc and classifier gcla
 k k
 , respectively, and M SE is the cross-
Fig. 4. Extracting feature representations of traffic data.
 entropy loss function.
 For the feature representation of unlabeled traffic data, the
 more reliable pseudo-labels to participate in the training client uses the decoder gdeck
 for reconstruction. The reconstrucof intrusion detection model, and sends the unified fea- tion result is denoted as x̃j = gdec
 k k
 (RN
 k
 ). The reconstruction loss
 ture representation and pseudo-labels to the participating is defined as follows:
 clients. k
 
 4 Each participating client uses an optimized traffic data 
 MN
  
 mapping function to reconstruct the unified feature rep- Arg min Ldec =
 k
 M SE x̃kj , xkj , (2)
 k
 θenc k
 ,θdec j=1
 resentation of non-overlapping traffic data from other
 clients, and adds the reconstructed traffic data to its train- where θdec
 k
 is the model parameter of the decoder gdec
 k
 and M SE
 ing dataset. is the mean square error loss function. In this way, the final
 
 5 Each participating client uses the extended data set to objective function for extracting the feature representation of
 train and obtain an intrusion detection model, and then traffic data is as follows.
 uses the model to classify and detect the traffic data.
 Arg min Lkr = Lkdec = Lkcla + λLkdec , (3)
 k
 θenc k ,θ k
 ,θcla dec
B. Local Representation Extraction
 where λ(λ ∈ (0, 1)) is a hyperparameter that balances classifi-
 In MPdetector, each client extracts the feature representation
 cation and reconstruction.
of its networking traffic data using a combination of encoder,
 The specific feature extraction algorithm is outlined in
classifier and decoder, and the extraction process is divided
 Algorithm 1.
into two tasks, supervised classification and unsupervised reconstruction, according to whether the data has labels, as shown
in Fig. 4. C. Feature Representation Alignment
 For client k, as described in Table I, its overlapping traffic data In order to reduce the feature differences of traffic data be-
Ok contains labeled data where labels information is stored by tween clients, MPdetector map the traffic data features of clients
the task manager, its non-overlapping traffic data N k contains into a unified feature space, that is, to realize the alignment of
unlabeled data. The encoder genc k
 is uesd to extract feature traffic data features between clients.
representation RO = genc (O ) of Ok and RN
 k k k k
 = genc
 k
 (N k ) of  uses client k’s classification accuracy
 First, the task manager
N .k
 wk as the weight wk ( nk=1 wk = 1), to synthesize the feature
 For the feature representation of labeled traffic data RO k
 , representations of different clients’ traffic data to obtain ithe
the task manager uses the classifier gcla for classification. The
 k
 global feature representation of traffic data RU ( ni=1 wi ∗ RO ).
924 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 Algorithm 1: Local Feature Representation Extraction. Algorithm 2: Feature Representation Alignment.
 Input: Overlapping and non-overlapping portions of client Input: The feature representation of the client k’s labeled
 and unlabeled traffic data, label set of the client k’s labeled
 k
 MO
 k’s network traffic data Ok = {xki , yik }i=1 and k
 MO
 N k = {xkj }j=1
 Mk N
 , client k’s encoder genc k
 , classifier gcla
 k
 , and traffic data {yik }i=1 , classification accuracy wk of
 classifier gcla , and initialized mapping function F k and
 k
 decoder gdeck
 .
 classifier FCk (k = 1, 2 . . . , n).
 Output: The feature representation of client k’s labeled and
 Output: Unified feature representations of client k’s
 unlabeled traffic data RO k
 and RN k
 , classification accuracy
 labeled and unlabeled traffic data RU k
 O and RU N .
 k
 wk of classifier gcla k
 .
 1: w (k = 1, 2 . . . , n) is normalized such that
 k
 1: for k = 1 to n do
 ( nk=1 wk = 1);
 2: Client k calculates RO k
 = genc
 k
 (xki ) and sends RO k
 to
 2: RU k
 O = F (RO );
 k k
 the task manager;
 3: RU N = F (RN
 k k k
 );
 3: Client k calculates RN k
 = genc
 k
 (xkj );
 calculate
 4:  the reconstruction loss
 4: (x̃kj ) = gdec k
 (RN k
 ); MOK
 L (R k
 , R );
 j=1 M SE UO U
 5: The task manager calculates ŷlk = gcla k
 (ROk
 );
 5: ŷlk = FCk (RU k
 O );
 6: The task manager calculates the classification loss Lkcla MOk
 according to Formula (1); 6: calculates the classification loss i=1 LXE (ŷik , yik );
 7: Client k calculates the reconstruction loss Lkdec 7: update θmap and θclb based on Formula (4);
 k k

 O and RU N ;
 k k
 according to Formula (2); 8: returnRU
 8: Client k’s updates θenc k
 , θcla
 k
 , θdec
 k
 based on Lkdec and
 Lcla ;
 k

 9: Client k uses the trained gcla k
 to calculate wk ; unlabeled traffic data by leveraging the similarity between the
 10: end for labeled and unlabeled traffic data. The label transfer process
 11: returnRO k
 , RN k
 and wk ; is illustrated in Fig. 5. The task manager concatenates feature
 representations RU k
 O and RU N of the client k’s traffic data to
 k

 obtain RU = [RU O ; RU N ], which is used to construct its W k .
 k k k

The task manager uses the mapping function F k to map the A labeling matrix Y k is defined for client k, where the row
labeled traffic data feature representations and obtain the uni- vectors in the Y k corresponding to the one-hot encoded vectors
fied feature representation RU of labeled traffic data and the rows for unlabeled traffic data are
 O = F (RO ). To ensure that the
 k k k

mapped feature representations retain their classification infor- set to zero.
mation, the classifier FCk is used to classify the mapped feature The probability matrix Z k is used to assign pseudo-labels to
representations ŷlk = Fck (RU unlabeled traffic data. The probability matrix Z k can be obtained
 O ). Then, the objective function
 k

for traffic data feature mapping is then expressed as follows. by using the conjugate gradient method to solve the linear system
 (I − αS k )Z k = Y k [29], where I is the identity matrix, and
 α(α ∈ (0, 1)) is used to regulate the relative importance of a
 k
 
 MO
   k 
 arg min LkU = MSE F k RO , RU traffic data samples and its neighboring traffic data samples.
 k ,θ k
 θmap clb j=1 Finally, based on the probability matrix Z k , the pseudo-labels
 ⎛ k
 ⎞ of unlabeled traffic data are calculated as follows.
 
 MU O
    
 +γ⎝ XE Fck RU
 k
 O , yi ⎠ , (4) ŷpk = Arg max Z k (i, j), (5)
 i=1 j

where θmapk
 and θclb
 k
 are the model parameters of the mapping where the element Z k (i, j) represents the values at the i-th row
 and j-th column in the matrix Z k .
function F and the classifier ŷlk = FCk , respectively γ(γ ∈
 k
 The pseudo-labels derived from this process may not always
(0, 1)) is a hyperparameter. Using the optimized mapping funcbe accurate, and training with incorrect pseudo-labels can detion, the aligned uniform feature representation of labeled traffic
 grade the performance of the client-side intrusion detection
data RU k
 O = F (RO ) and the unified feature representation of
 k k
 model. To mitigate this issue, the entropy value of traffic data
unlabeled traffic data RU k
 N = F (RN ) can be obtained.
 k k
 samples is calculated to measure the uncertainty. The pseudo-
 The specific algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2.
 labels with high certainty ŷps
 k
 are selected to ensure accuracy, and
 the feature representation of corresponding traffic data samples
D. Label Transfer Nhk is expressed as RU k
 NS.
 In real IoT environments, the amount of labeled traffic data To further improve pseudo-label accuracy, each client initialavailable to each client is limited. Only using labeled traffic izes a N N Rw model. The model is trained using the global feadata to train intrusion detection models is easy to cause model ture representations RU k
 O of labeled traffic data. After training
overfitting. To fully utilize the information in unlabeled traffic completion, this model is applied to label unmarked traffic data,
data, a label transfer scheme is introduced into MPdetector, generating a membership matrix for each sample. This matrix
which enable the task manager to assign pseudo-labels to the represents the probability distribution of samples belonging to
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 925

Fig. 5. K-nearest neighbors matrix propagation process.

Fig. 6. Label transfer process.

different categories. The fuzziness of traffic data is then calcu- either the size of the labeled traffic dataset stabilizes or the maxlated through membership vectors V = {u1 , u2 , . . ., un }. imum number of iterations is reached. The detailed algorithm is
 provided in Algorithm 3.
 1
 n
 F (V ) = − [ui log ui + (1 − ui ) log (1 − ui )] , (6) E. Feature Transfer
 n i=1
 Through the above label transfer scheme, client k can obtain
where u1 represents the membership degree of the traffic data. pseudo-labels ŷps
 k
 for unlabeled traffic data and the correspond-
 As shown in Fig. 6, the traffic data is divided into low fuzziness ing global feature representation RU k
 N S . However, since the
group F Glow , medium fuzziness group F Gmid , and high fuzzi- feature information of each clients’ traffic data is limited, a
ness group F Ghigh based on the fuzziness value F(V). Samples feature transfer scheme is introduced into MPdetector. In the
belonging to F Gmid and F Ghigh are selected, and their labeling scheme, a new nonlinear mapping function H k is proposed,
results from the N N Rw model are used as pseudo-labels ŷpsf k
 . which is used to reconstruct the unlabeled traffic data from other
Additionally, pseudo-labels ŷps for unlabeled traffic data are
 k
 clients and expand the missing features of the labeled traffic data
obtained using the K-nearest neighbor matrix label propagation by client k, so that the intrusion detection model can learn a
method. The pseudo-labels generated by the N N Rw model more comprehensive network traffic feature representation and
are then compared with those obtained through the K-nearest improve the ability of the model to identify abnormal traffic and
neighbor matrix label propagation approach. Consistent results normal traffic.
from both methods are selected as the final pseudo-labels for Compared with the linear mapping matrix, the deep learning
these unlabeled traffic data samples. These filtered unlabeled model uses nonlinear activation functions to extract and learn
traffic data are subsequently merged into the labeled traffic the abstract features and representations of the data step by step
dataset to retrain the N N Rw model. This process repeats until through the multi-level structure [10]. It can better fit the network
926 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 Algorithm 3: Label Transfer. Algorithm 4: Feature Transfer.
 Input: global feature representations RU Input: global feature representations RU k
 O and RU N S of
 k
 O and RU N for
 k k

 client k’s labeled and unlabeled traffic data the clients’ labeled and unlabeled traffic data, mapping
 (k = 1, 2, . . . , n). function H k (k = 1, 2 . . . , n).
 Output: highly accurate pseudo-labels ŷps k
 and the Output: the expanded traffic dataset XE k
 of client k.
 corresponding global feature representation RU k 1: reconstruct the global feature representation of the
 NS.
 1: for k = 1 to n do labeled traffic data H k (RU k
 O );
 2: RU ← [RU 2: calculate the reconstruction loss Lk based on Formula
 O ; RU N ];
 k k k
 Rk (i,:)−Rk (j,:)2 (6);
 3: Generate W k where Wijk = exp(− U σ2
 U
 ) 3: update θres
 k
 according to the reconstructed loss Lk ;
 (i = j); 4: (x̃js ) = H n (xti ) is sent to other client;
 kt
 4: S k ← (Dk )−1/2 W k (Dk )−1/2 ;
 5: merges the data set XE k
 js ; . . .; xjs ; . . .; x̃js };
 = {xki ; x̃k1 k kn
 5: Z k ← (I − αS k )−1 Y k ; k
 6: Calculate ŷpk using Formula (5); 6: returnXE ;
 7: while iteration ≤ T do
 8: Calculate F (V ) using Formula (6); Algorithm 5: Traffic Data Recognition.
 9: Select samples RU K
 N E from both F Gmid and Input: client k s trained encoder genc
 k
 and classifier gcla
 k
 ,
 F Ghigh groups;
 and its network traffic dataset X .
 k
 10: Check consistency between ŷpsf k
 and ŷpk , then send
 Output: predicted labels Ŷ k for the network traffic dataset
 matching pseudo-labels ŷps to clients;
 k
 Xk.
 11: ŷpsf
 k
 = N N Rw (RU k
 N E ); 1: Ŷ k = gcla
 k
 (genc
 k
 (X k ));
 12: Select high confidence ŷpsk
 and denote the 2: returnŶ k ;
 corresponding feature representation as RU k
 NS;
 13: end while
 14: Send ŷps k
 and RUk
 N S to client k; the traffic data feature representation, which ensures the privacy
 15: end for security of client k. The detailed algorithm is shown as follows.
 16: return ŷps
 k
 and RUk
 NS;
 F. Traffic Data Recognition
 Next, client k uses the expanded traffic dataset XE k
 to train an
traffic data, understand the internal structure of traffic data more intrusion detection model to accurately identify normal traffic
accurately, and then realize more effective data reconstruction. and abnormal traffic. To achieve this goal, client k retrains
However, in real IoT environment, most of IoT devices have the encoder genc
 k
 and classifier gcla
 k
 , to minimize the following
limited computing and storage resources, so it is more important objective function.
to save the cost of client-side intrusion detection model training.  k  k  k  K 
 Arg min Lkcla = XE gcla genc XE , YE , (8)
Therefore, MPdetector uses a nonlinear deep learning model to k
 θenc k
 ,θcla
reconstruct traffic data, which can not only reduce the pressure of
client model training, but also improve the reconstruction effect where θenc
 k
 and θcla
 k
 are the model parameters of encoder genc
 k

of traffic data. and classifier gcla , respectively.
 k

 The objective function of traffic data feature reconstruction The detail is presented in Algorithm 5.
can be expressed as follows.
 IV. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
 k
 
 MO
  k  A. Complexity Analysis of Mapping Functions
 Arg min LkC = M SE RU N S , H (RU O ) ,
 K K
 (7)
 k
 θres j=1 Theorem 1: Let H k be the new mapping function for feature
 transfer on client side in MPdetector, where a deep neural
where θresk
 is the model parameter of the mapping function H k . network model replaces the mapping matrix M (n∗) . The compu-
 Client k (k = 1, 2 . . . , n) uses the trained mapping function tational complexity of H k is O(Eiter MOn L−1
 l=1 Sl Sl+1 ), which
H k to reconstruct the unlabeled traffic data from other clients is approximately the same as the computational complexity
x̃kt
 js = H (xi ). Then, the reconstructed traffic data and the origik t O(MOn 3 ) of M (n∗) .
nal traffic data set of client k can be merged to obtain the extended Proof: The computational cost of matrix mapping
traffic data set XE k
 js ; . . .; xjs ; . . .; x̃js }, with the cor-
 = {xki ; x̃k1 k kn mainly lies in matrix multiplication. The matrix M n∗ =
 −1
responding label set YE = {y , {ŷs }j=1 }. Since the traffic data
 k k j k
 RUn
 N S RU O (RU O RU O + μI)
 n T n n T
 has a computational comn3
feature representation needs the original traffic data dimension plexity of O(MO ), where MO represents the number of overn

to reconstruct the original traffic data, the original traffic data lapping traffic data samples.
dimension is only accessed by client k, and other parties cannot For deep neural network mapping, the computational cost
obtain the information of the original traffic data only through is concentrated in the forward and backward transfer phases.
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 927

If the network has L layers with Sl neurons in each layer, V. EXPERIMENT EVALUATION
and the number of iterations during training is Eiter , the
 In this section, comprehensive experiments have been contime complexity is O(Eiter MOn L−1 l=1 Sl Sl+1 ), where, Eiter = ducted to evaluate the effect of MPdetector.
epochs ∗ (MOn /batch_size). And the epochs and batch size are
approximately the same, that means, epochs ≈ batch_size, so
Eiter ≈ MOn . With the increase of the amount of traffic data A. Experimental Environment
MOn , in order to ensure that the deep learning model can better We have implemented MPdetector using Python3 and Pyfit the traffic data structure, the number of layers of the neural Torch to achieve deep learning algorithm. An autoencoder is
network may increase, and the model can still converge when used as the feature extraction model, a decoder is used to
 L−1
 l=1 Sl Sl+1 ≈ MO . 
 n
 reconstruct the traffic data, and a classifier is used to classify
 Theorem 1 indicates that the computational complexity of the traffic data. The learning objective is to classify the traffic
deep neural networks is approximately the same as that of data into two classes. The learning rate is set to 0.0001, and the
matrix mapping. This means that, compared with the traditional experiments is conducted on Intel Core i9-12900H, 2.50 GHz
lightweight matrix mapping reconstruction methods applicable CPU, 16 GB memory.
to resource-constrained IoT devices, the method in MPdetector, Four well-known intrusion detection datasets: UNSWwhich uses deep learning (non-linear mapping functions) to NB15 [24], NSL-KDD [25], CICIDS2017 [26], and Nreconstruct traffic features, does not introduce additional time BaIoT [27], [28] are used to evaluate the performance of MPdeoverhead. tector. The UNSW-NB15 dataset was collected in 2015 from a
 real network environment at the Australian Security Laboratory.
B. Security Analysis It includes a diverse range of network traffic, featuring both
 common network attacks and normal traffic. The NSL-KDD
 Theorem 2: During the the feature representation alignment dataset is a refined version of the classic KDD dataset, created
process in MPdetector, the task manager cannot retrieve client by removing duplicate samples from the original training and
k’s original traffic data (k ∈ (1, n)). test sets. The CICIDS2017 dataset contains daily benign activity
 Proof: If the task manager want to obtain client k’s traffic data traffic data and various types of attacks, closely resembling
Ok and N k (k ∈ (1, n)), it must access the feature dimensions of real-world data. The N-BaIoT dataset consists of raw traffic
Ok and N k and client k’s encoder parameters θenc k
 . As stated in captured from nine kinds of IoT devices infected by the Mirai
Section III, the task manager can only access to the the encoded and BASHLITE botnets.
representations RO k
 and RN k
 in MPdetector but cannot get the The experimental procedure consists of the following steps.
feature dimensions of the traffic data.  First, we preprocess the aforementioned datasets by ran-
 Theorem 3: During the label transfer process in MPdetector, domly sampling the processed traffic data to create overlapthe task manager cannot retrieve client k’s original traffic data ping and non-overlapping traffic data for IoT clients. Withk (k = 1, 2 . . . , n). out loss of generality, the non-overlapping data is then di-
 Proof: During the label transfer process, if the task manager vided into training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of
want to access client k’s original traffic data Ok and N k , the 7:2:1.
number of the unified feature representations RU k
 O and RU N
 k
 MPdetector fully supports applications in scenarios with
must exceed the feature dimension. The labels corresponding homogeneous traffic data or partial feature overlap. However,
to the unified feature representations RU k
 O and RU N have two
 k
 to experimentally verify its detection performance under fully
categories: yˆis
 k ∈ (0, 1) and y ∈ (0, 1). The feature dimension
 o heterogeneous client traffic data, we partition the traffic features
of RU O and RU
 k k
 N is equal to the number of neurons Eenc in
 k
 to simulate a feature-heterogeneous environment, where the
the final layer of the encoder genc , and since Eenc
 k k
 2, the feature spaces of different clients do not overlap at all, as shown
feature dimensions of RU k
 O and RU N will also
 k
 2, therefore in Table II. To simulate such a setting, in our experiments, if
the task manager is prevented from accessing the client k’s orig- there are n clients participating in training, the traffic features
inal traffic data.the labels corresponding to the uniform feature are divided into n parts. Each client is then assigned a distinct
representations RU ˆk
 O and RU N are yis ∈ (0, 1) and yo ∈ (0, 1),
 k k
 feature space, achieving feature heterogeneity. However, to exrepresenting two classes. The feature dimension of RU k
 O and tend this partitioning to over 100 clients, the features would
RU N is determined by the number of neurons Eenc in the final
 k k
 need to be split into more than 100 parts. Due to the limited
layer of the encoder genc k
 . If Eenc
 k
 2, the feature dimensions feature dimensions in existing intrusion detection datasets, this
of RU O and RU N will also greatly exceed 2. Therefore, the task
 k k
 would inevitably cause overlap between client feature spaces,
manager is prevented from accessing client k’s original traffic making it impossible to simulate a completely heterogeneous
data.  scenario. Therefore, to evaluate MPDetector in a setting where
 Theorems 2 and 3 show that even if the task manager is un- feature spaces are entirely disjoint, we conducted experiments
trusted, it cannot obtain the clients’ original traffic data through on multiple clients (without loss of generality, n = 3) using
feature representations or pseudo-labels of traffic data, thus datasets with limited feature dimensions. Among these, the
ensuring the security of clients’ data. That is, the entire federated client responsible for maintaining network traffic data labels
transfer learning process in MPdetector is conducted within a serves as the task manager, which typically initiates the intrusion
secure context. detection model training process. The remaining clients function
928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 TABLE II
 FEATURE PARTITIONING OF THE DATASET

as participants. The final experimental results are reported as the TABLE III
 COMPARISON ON ACC, FAR, AND F1 FOR DIFFERENT DATASETS UNDER FIVE
average performance across all participating clients. METHODS

B. Classification Performance
 In the experiment, MPdetector was compared with deep
learning (DL), semi-supervised deep learning (SDL), federated
learning (FL), and semi-supervised FL (SFL) based intrusion
detection methods. In DL-based methods, each client uses an
autoencoder to extract feature representations from the training data and then trains a classifier to detect intrusions. In
SDL-based methods, each client extracts feature representations
using an autoencoder, clusters the non-overlapping traffic data
with K-means, and then trains classifiers on both overlapping
and non-overlapping traffic data. The FL-based method applies
the FedAVG algorithm to detect intrusions using an aggregated
model. In SFL-based methods Each client employs an autoencoder to extract feature representations from training data. The As shown in Table III, FL performs worse than DL on
K-means technique is then applied to cluster feature represen- the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS2017 datasets. It is due to the
tations of non-overlapping traffic data. Both overlapping and different training data characteristics used by each client, and
non-overlapping traffic data are subsequently used as inputs for the heterogeneity of data feature space between clients, which
the FedAVG algorithm during federated training. Finally, the affects the performance of FL. For the UNSW-NB15 dataset,
aggregated model obtained from this training process is utilized SDL achieves higher detection accuracy than DL. However,
to evaluate the training data. on the NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 datasets, SDL performs
 In the experiment, some common machine learning perfor- worse than DL. This is because when using K-means techmance indicators are used to compare and evaluate the perfor- nology for clustering, some traffic data clustering results do
mance of different intrusion detection methods as follows. not match the actual labels, which affects the performance of
 Accuracy (ACC) is the ratio of traffic data correctly identified the final model. On relevant datasets, SFL consistently demonby the intrusion detection model, which is calculated according strates higher accuracy than FL, as semi-supervised learning
to the following Formula (8). effectively addresses the insufficiency of labeled data across
 TP + TN clients. However, the persistent feature heterogeneity among
 ACC = , (9) clients results in SFL’s accuracy remaining lower than SDL’s
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 performance. MPdetector demonstrates superior performance
 False Alarm Rate (FAR) represents the proportion of normal across all evaluated datasets, achieving particularly outstanding
traffic data being misclassified as abnormal traffic data resulting results on the CICIDS2017 dataset with 98.86% accuracy. This
in false positives and is calculated according to Formula (9). exceptional performance stems from the fine-grained feature
 FP characteristics of CICIDS2017 dataset, combined with MPde-
 F AR = , (10) tector’s collaborative transfer mechanism that effectively inte-
 TN + FP
 grates comprehensive feature representations. The model’s abil-
 The F1 Score (F1 ) provides a balanced evaluation of precision ity to precisely capture complex attack patterns is significantly
and recall. It is calculated using (10): enhanced through this feature integration approach. Experimen-
 TP tal results confirm that MPdetector exhibits strong generalization
 F1 = , (11) capabilities across diverse datasets. Compared with DL, SDL,
 T P + 12 (F P + F N )
 FL, and SFL methods, MPdetector consistently achieves higher
 In the above equations, TP represents correctly classified accuracy and F1 scores while maintaining lower false alarm
normal traffic data, FP refers to normal traffic data misclassified rates.
as abnormal, TN represents correctly classified abnormal traffic, In MPdetector, the task manager acts as the knowledge-rich
and FN refers to abnormal traffic misclassified as normal. source domain, while the clients act as the knowledge-poor
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 929

Fig. 7. Feature distribution and correlation analysis on the UNSW-NB15 dataset.

target domain. Collaborative knowledge transfer occurs be- by tracking connection frequencies of source/destination adtween the task manager and multiple clients. This cooperative dresses within time windows. Abnormal values in Sload (source
framework helps the clients train intrusion detection models, instantaneous transmission rate) and Sttl (initial time-to-live)
effectively addressing the issue of insufficient labeled data. typically correlate with Exploits or Shellcode attacks, as these
Additionally, MPdetector employs a label transfer mechanism to often involve non-standard packet rates or forged hop counts.
assign pseudo labels to unlabeled data, and uses a nonlinear data Swin (TCP receive window size) reflects protocol-level flow
reconstruction mechanism to achieve feature transfer to enrich control anomalies. Additionally, Proto (protocol type) and Dttl
the feature representation of traffic data. These measures collec- (destination-to-source TTL value) further assist in detecting
tively solve the problem of data heterogeneity and significantly abnormal behaviors, such as UDP protocol abuse or TTL maimprove the detection accuracy of client traffic analysis. nipulation. These features collectively form the detection basis
 To better interpret the detection results, we conducted fea- for MPdetector, and the correlation analysis demonstrates its
ture correlation analysis on the UNSW-NB15 dataset based effectiveness in capturing attack-related anomalies.
on MPdetector’s outputs, as illustrated in Fig. 7. The analysis Fig. 7 shows the feature distribution of traffic data, comreveals that connection timing features (ct_srv_dst, ct_src_ltm, paring normal and anomalous traffic across clients. The most
ct_srv_src, ct_dst_ltm) and traffic behavior features (Sload, Sttl, distinguishable features between normal and anomalous traf-
Swin) show the most significant correlations with intrusion fic are crucial for model detection. For Client 1, significant
detection. Specifically, ct_srv_dst effectively identifies abnor- distribution differences appear in ct_srv_dst, ct_src_ltm, and
mal service access patterns by counting connection frequen- ct_dst_sport_ltm. The median ct_srv_dst value for normal traffic
cies between specific services and destination addresses, while reaches 0.3, substantially higher than anomalous traffic, with a
ct_src_ltm and ct_dst_ltm detect lateral movement behaviors wider interquartile range. For Client 2, clear differences appear
930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 8. Different numbers of overlapping data versus detection accuracy under Fig. 9. Different numbers of overlapping data versus Pseudo-labeling accuracy
two different traffic mapping functions. on different datasets under MPdetector.

in ct_srv_src, ct_dst_src_item, and ct_dst_ltm. Although swin
and proto_udp demonstrate high correlation with detection results in Fig. 7, their distributions show no discernible difference
between normal and anomalous traffic, potentially leading to
model misclassification. For Client 3, marked differences exist
in dttl and ct_state_ttl between traffic types.

C. Influence of Different Mapping Function
 This experiment evaluates whether the new nonlinear mapping function proposed in the feature transfer part of MPdetector
can improve the detection performance while ensuring the computational overhead of participating clients. We compare detection accuracy of two mapping functions: a linear mapping matrix Fig. 10. Different numbers of overlapping data versus detection accuracy on
(LiMatrix) and the nonlinear mapping function (NonLiFunc) in different datasets under MPdetector.
MPdetector, across various amounts of overlapping traffic data.
Detection accuracy is the model performance trained on both
overlapping and non-overlapping data. As illustrated in Fig. 8, Fig. 10, the horizontal axis represents the number of overlapping
the horizontal axis represents the number of overlapping data, data, and the vertical axis represents detection accuracy. The
and the vertical axis represents detection accuracy. The results results reveals that as the amount of overlapping data increases,
show that NonLiFunc significantly improves the performance the shared knowledge among clients grows, the effect of transof the intrusion detection model. Notably, the enhancement is fer learning is improved, and model detection performance is
more pronounced when the number of overlapping data reaches significantly improved. In summary, pseudo-labeling accuracy
50 and 1,000 rows. significantly impacts model performance. When the amount
 of overlapping data reaches 500, both pseudo-label accuracy
D. Influence of Different Amounts of Overlapping Data and model detection performance achieve satisfactory results
 on relevant datasets. MPdetector significantly mitigates the ad-
 This experiment examines how different amounts of over- verse impact of limited overlapping data on model performance
lapping data affect pseudo-labeling accuracy and detection ac- through its nonlinear data reconstruction method and label transcuracy, when MPdetector is applied. Pseudo-label accuracy is fer approach. With the increasing of overlapping data, pseudothe accuracy of pseudo-labels assigned to non-overlapping data labeling accuracy continues to rise, and detection accuracy is
during label transfer process, detection accuracy is the model further improved.
performance trained on both overlapping and non-overlapping
data. The results are illustrated in Figs. 9 and 10 . Fig. 9 shows
 E. Generalization Performance
the impact of overlapping data on pseudo-labeling accuracy
across different datasets. As shown in Fig. 9, the horizontal axis This experiment uses the N-BaIoT dataset to evaluate whether
represents the number of overlapping data, and the vertical axis MPdetector not only detects abnormal traffic within the training
represents the pseudo-labeling accuracy. The results indicate set but also enhances the ability to identify unknown abnormal
that pseudo-labeling accuracy improves with the increasing in traffic through knowledge transfer. Since the datasets of seven
overlapping data and the number of labeled data involved in the kinds of IoT devices in the N-BaIoT dataset contain two types
transfer of labels. Fig. 10 illustrates the effect of overlapping of botnets, Gafgyt and Mirai, the data of these seven kinds
data on detection accuracy for different datasets. As shown in of IoT devices are mainly used in this experiment, denoted
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 931

Fig. 11. Different kinds of IoT devices versus detection accuracy under different intrusion detection methods on two different cases.

as device1 - 7. The experiment involves two cases. Case 1 is be shared between clients. Meanwhile, various types of client
called OnlyMirai, where Gafgyt attack data is removed from attack data are unbalanced. Different types of attack data from
the training set and only Mirai attack data is retained to test different clients also suffer from imbalance.
the detection accuracy for Gafgyt attack data. Case 2 is called Federated learning offers a solution by allowing clients to
OnlyGafgyt, where the Mirai attack data is removed from the collaboratively train a model without directly sharing local data,
training set and only Gafgyt attack data is retained to test the thus maintaining data security and achieving privacy protecdetection accuracy for Mirai attack data. tion. Idrissi et al. [33] proposed a federated learning based
 The experimental results are shown in Fig. 11, where the hori- intrusion detection method to tackle privacy issues associated
zontal axis represents the data of seven kinds of IoT devices and with centralized models. An autoencoder is used to calculate
the vertical axis represents detection accuracy under different the intrusion score based on the reconstruction error, which
intrusion detection methods. The results show that the detection achieves high accuracy and low false alarm rate. Li et al. [34]
accuracy of MPdetector in identifying unknown abnormal traffic adopted federated learning with dynamic filtering and weighting
data is higher than that of other methods, which indicates that strategies to protect data privacy and reduce communication
MPdetector has strong generalization ability. This is because overhead, and proved through experiments that the detection
MPdetector uses the similarity between labeled and unlabeled performance was improved with minimal network communicadata for label transfer, makes full use of the information provided tion. Rashid et al. al. [35] show that federated learning can ensure
by unlabeled data, and then greatly improves the identification privacy and security by having IoT clients only share parameter
ability of unknown traffic data. updates and a central server is responsible for aggregating and
 refining parameters. Karmakar et al. [36] enhanced the sharing of
 Autonomous Aerial Vehicle (AAV) data with federated learning,
 VI. RELATED WORK which enables multiple deep neural network models to collabo-
 With the development of machine learning and deep learning ratively learn and update their parameters. Although the above
technology, intrusion detection methods based on deep learning federated learning schemes can solve the problem of privacy
have achieved good results in learning complex attack patterns protection, they still require enough labeled data for local model
and zero-day attack detection [10]. These algorithms have been training. In addition, data heterogeneity among participants can
used to detect anomalies in IoT networks, and have achieved affect model performance. Consequently, numerous studies have
good detection results. Abdelmoumin et al. [30] used hyper- proposed intrusion detection methods utilizing self-supervised
parameter adjustment and ensemble learning to optimize the learning and transfer learning approaches.
learning model to detect intrusion in the Internet of things in Self-supervised learning is an unsupervised approach that
order to solve the problem of insufficient training data and generates supervisory signals from data characteristics without
single model easily falling into local optimum. Saba et al. [31] manual labeling. Nguyen et al. [37] proposed a GNN-based
used genetic algorithm to select important features to improve self-supervised method for IoT intrusion detection, which learns
the accuracy of the model, and machine learning algorithm to node features through graph networks and enhances representadistinguish malicious traffic from regular traffic. Ge et al. [32] tion learning via traffic attribute prediction. Evaluations on real
proposed an intrusion detection method based on deep learning network traffic demonstrated its superiority in binary/multi-class
network traffic classification, considering both multi-class and attack detection, significantly outperforming GNN baselines in
binary classification schemes. A feed-forward neural network AUC and F1-score. Xu et al. [38] developed a graph contrastive
with embedding layers and a second neural network for binary learning framework using edge-attention encoders to capture
classification are used to leverage network embedding and trans- traffic interaction patterns, achieving supervised-comparable
fer learning. However, IoT intrusion detection methods based on accuracy with lower computational costs. However, these graphmachine learning or deep learning rely on a large amount of data based methods suffer from high complexity when handling
to achieve high performance. In reality, there is a phenomenon of large-scale node-edge relationships, making them unsuitable for
data islands. Due to privacy and security concerns, data cannot IoT scenarios.
932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 Adaptive transfer learning dynamically optimizes knowledge VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
transfer between domains. Anley et al. [39] designed depth-
 To address the challenges of heterogeneous IoT network
adaptive CNNs with traffic-to-image conversion, enabling pre- traffic data and the large volume of unlabeled data, this paper
trained vision models to process non-visual data and achieve
 proposes a federated transfer learning method for IoT intrusion
cross-dataset feature transfer. Ajayi et al. [40] proposed an
 detection based on multi-party collaboration, called MPdetector.
LSTM-based domain adaptation method for host intrusion de- In MPdetector each client extracts feature representations of
tection, transferring knowledge via sequence modeling and
 both label and unlabeled traffic data using an autoencoder. The
fine-tuning to reduce label dependency. While effective, these
 task manager maps these feature representations to a unified
approaches only support single-source-to-single-target transfer, feature space and applies a label transfer scheme to assign
requiring separate adaptations for multiple targets with substanpseudo-labels to unlabeled data, enabling label transfer. Each
tial resource consumption. client then can use a new proposed new mapping function to
 Federated transfer learning seeks to transfer knowledge from reconstruct the traffic data of other clients, achieving feature
diverse data sources to enhance local models’ performance.
 transfer of the traffic data. The effectiveness of MPdetector is
This approach often outperforms models trained solely on local verified by theoretical analysis and experiments. Experimental
data [41]. Khoa et al. [17] introduced a collaborative learning results show that MPdetector can achieve a detection accuracy
framework that allows a target network, which has only unlaas high as 98.2% and has strong generalization. Meanwhile the
beled data, to learn efficiently from an original network with higher the number of labeled traffic data, the better the detection
extensive labeled data. This framework improves performance performance.
by over 40% compared to existing deep learning methods.
 The effectiveness of MPdetector has been validated through
However, it is limited to interactions between two parties. When experiments. The experimental results show that the intrusion
multiple participants are involved, updating models requires
 detection accuracy of MPdetector is as high as 98.2%, which
exchanging parameters in pairs, which complicates the process
 can effectively identify known and unknown abnormal traffic
and increases both communication and computational costs. data, and has strong generalization. The higher the number of
Cheng et al. [21] integrated federated 11 transfer learning
 labeled traffic data, the better the detection performance.
with reinforcement learning to optimize intrusion detection in
 MPdetector introduces a label transfer scheme to realize label
mobile edge computing. Their approach aims to achieve the transfer and reconstruct client traffic data to enable feature
highest detection accuracy with a limited number of clients
 transfer across clients. However, the pseudo-labeling accuracy
while reducing costs. Ji et al. [20] proposed a method combining
 and the quality of data reconstruction may lead to irrelevant
federated transfer learning with convolutional neural networks. knowledge being learned, resulting in a decrease in detection
This method builds a cloud model and then personalizes learning
 accuracy. There are still some challenges to improve the pseudoacross organizations through transfer learning. After numerous labeling accuracy and the quality of data reconstruction. In the
iterations, it produces a highly effective detection model. Fan next step, the optimized pseudo-label allocation method and data
et al. [18] developed a federated transfer learning-based intrumapping method will be given to improve thepseudo-labeling
sion detection frame work for 5 G IoT. The framework aggre- accuracy and the quality of data reconstruction, and further
gates data through federated learning and customizes detection improve the identification efficiency of traffic data. In addition,
models through transfer learning, allowing IoT clients to share
 the current MPdetector approach involves multiple interactions
knowledge while preserving privacy, which in turn improves between participating clients. In the future, the interaction bedetection performance. Zhang et al. [8] proposed a lightweight tween the task manager and the clients will be further optimized
anomaly based intrusion detection algorithm using a two-step
 to ensure the detection accuracy while reducing the commufusion boosting strategy. This strategy evaluates data distribution nication overhead of clients. In the future, it is expected to
variance with maximum average variance and adjusts model
 reduce the interaction between clients, and reduce the comweights to enhance overall detection performance. However,
 munication overhead of clients while ensuring the detection
these federated transfer learning methods typically require a accuracy.
central server to possess a large, labeled dataset to initialize the
model, making them unsuitable for intrusion detection scenarios
with extensive amounts of unlabeled data. REFERENCES
 Unlike the above methods that require both extensive labeled [1] L. Catarinucci et al., “An IoT-aware architecture for smart healthcare
traffic data for training initial detection models and homoge- systems,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 515–526, Dec. 2015.
 [2] Y. Tian, B. Zheng, and Z. Li, “Agricultural greenhouse environment
neous data distribution to achieve optimal performance, this pa- monitoring system based on Internet of Things,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int.
per propose MPdetector, a federated transfer learning approach Conf. Comput. Commun., 2017, pp. 2981–2985.
for IoT intrusion detection, which supports the collaborative [3] H. Ghayvat, S. Mukhopadhyay, X. Gui, and N. Suryadevara, “WSN-and
 IoT-based smart homes and their extension to smart buildings,” Sensors,
transfer learning of multiple clients and is effective even when vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 10350–10379, 2015.
most local data is unlabeled. It also addresses the challenges of [4] F. Sattler, S. Wiedemann, K.-R. Müller, and W. Samek, “Robust and
IoT traffic data heterogeneity and the abundance of unlabeled communication-efficient federated learning from non-i.i.d. data,” IEEE
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 3400–3413, Sep. 2020.
data. Experimental results demonstrate that MPdetector can [5] M. Abomhara and G. M. Køien, “Cyber security and the Internet of Things:
maintain superior detection accuracy even with limited labeled Vulnerabilities, threats, intruders and attacks,” J. Cyber Secur. Mobility,
data and under significant feature heterogeneity conditions. vol. 4, pp. 65–88, 2015.
LIN AND CHEN: MPDETECTOR: A MULTI-PARTY COLLABORATIVE FEDERATED TRANSFER LEARNING APPROACH 933

 [6] Y. R. Siwakoti, M. Bhurtel, D. B. Rawat, A. Oest, and R. Johnson, “Ad- [30] G. Abdelmoumin, D. B. Rawat, and A. Rahman, “On the performance of
 vances in IoT security: Vulnerabilities, enabled criminal services, attacks, machine learning models for anomaly-based intelligent intrusion detection
 countermeasures,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11224– systems for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 6,
 11239, Jul. 2023. pp. 4280–4290, Mar. 2022.
 [7] NSFocus Information Technology Co Ltd, “2020 cybersecurity insights,” [31] T. Saba, T. Sadad, A. Rehman, Z. Mehmood, and Q. Javaid, “Intrusion
 vol. 1, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://nsfocusglobal.com/wp-content/ detection system through advance machine learning for the Internet of
 uploads/2021/06/2020-NSFOCUS-Cybersecurity-Insights.pdf Things networks,” IT Professional, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 58–64, 2021.
 [8] J. Zhang, C. Luo, M. Carpenter, and G. Min, “Federated learning for [32] M. Ge, N. F. Syed, X. Fu, Z. Baig, and A. Robles-Kelly, “Towards a
 distributed IIoT intrusion detection using transfer approaches,” IEEE deep learning-driven intrusion detection approach for Internet of Things,”
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 8159–8169, Jul. 2023. Comput. Netw., vol. 186, 2021, Art. no. 107784.
 [9] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and machine learning [33] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-ANIDS: Federated learning for anomaly-based
 methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234, 2023,
 Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, Second Quarter, 2016. Art. no. 121000.
[10] A. Aldweesh, A. Derhab, and A. Z. Emam, “Deep learning approaches [34] J. Li, X. Tong, J. Liu, and L. Cheng, “An efficient federated learning
 for anomaly-based intrusion detection systems: A survey, taxonomy, and system for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. 17, no. 2,
 open issues,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 189, 2020, Art. no. 105124. pp. 2455–2464, Jun. 2023.
[11] H. Wang, J. Hou, and Z. Gong, “BotNet detection architecture based on [35] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R. Sabuj, and M.
 heterogeneous multi-sensor information fusion,” J. Netw., vol. 6, no. 12, Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach for improving intrusion
 2011, Art. no. 1655. detection in industrial Internet of Things networks,” Network, vol. 3, no. 1,
[12] S. Hui et al., “Systematically quantifying IoT privacy leakage in mo- pp. 158–179, 2023.
 bile networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 7115–7125, [36] R. Karmakar, G. Kaddoum, and O. Akhrif, “A novel federated learning-
 May 2021. based smart power and 3D trajectory control for fairness optimization in
[13] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system: secure UAV-assisted MEC services,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23,
 Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 195, no. 5, pp. 4832–4848, May 2024.
 pp. 346–361, 2022. [37] H. Nguyen and R. Kashef, “TS-IDS: Traffic-aware self-supervised learn-
[14] K. Chen et al., “Privacy preserving federated learning for full heterogene- ing for IoT network intrusion detection,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 279,
 ity,” ISA Trans., vol. 141, pp. 73–83, 2023. 2023, Art. no. 110966.
[15] Y. Liu, Y. Kang, C. Xing, T. Chen, and Q. Yang, “A secure federated [38] R. Xu, G. Wu, W. Wang, X. Gao, A. He, and Z. Zhang, “Applying selftransfer learning framework,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 70–82, supervised learning to network intrusion detection for network flows with
 Jul./Aug. 2020. graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 248, 2024, Art. no. 110495.
[16] J. Zhao, S. Shetty, and J. W. Pan, “Feature-based transfer learning [39] M. B. Anley, A. Genovese, D. Agostinello, and V. Piuri, “Robust DDoS
 for network security,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., 2017, attack detection with adaptive transfer learning,” Comput. Secur., vol. 144,
 pp. 17–22. 2024, Art. no. 103962.
[17] T. V. Khoa et al., “Deep transfer learning: A novel collaborative learning [40] O. Ajayi and A. Gangopadhyay, “DAHID: Domain adaptive host-based
 model for cyberattack detection systems in IoT networks,” IEEE Internet intrusion detection,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Int. Conf. Cyber Secur. Resilience,
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8578–8589, May 2023. 2021, pp. 467–472.
[18] Y. Fan, Y. Li, M. Zhan, H. Cui, and Y. Zhang, “IoTDefender: A federated [41] D. Gao, X. Yao, and Q. Yang, “A survey on heterogeneous federated
 transfer learning intrusion detection framework for 5G IoT,” in Proc. IEEE learning,” 2022, arXiv:2210.04505.
 14th Int. Conf. Big Data Sci. Eng., 2020, pp. 88–95.
[19] Y. Otoum, V. Chamola, and A. Nayak, “Federated and transfer learningempowered intrusion detection IoT applications,” IEEE Internet Things
 Mag., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 50–54, Sep. 2022.
[20] X. Ji, H. Zhang, and X. Ma, “A novel method of intrusion detection based
 on federated transfer learning and convolutional neural network,” in Proc. Li Lin (Member, IEEE) received the BS and MS de-
 IEEE 10th Joint Int. Inf. Technol. Artif. Intell. Conf., 2022, pp. 338–343. grees in mathematics from Guangxi Normal Univer-
[21] Y. Cheng, J. Lu, D. Niyato, B. Lyu, J. Kang, and S. Zhu, “Federated sity, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China,
 transfer learning with client selection for intrusion detection in mobile edge in 2001 and 2004, respectively, and the PhD degree
 computing,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 552–556, Mar. 2022. in computer science from Beihang University, in
[22] Y. Otoum, Y. Wan, and A. Nayak, “Federated transfer learning-based IDS 2009. She is currently an associate professor and a
 for the internet of medical things (IoMT),” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Globecom supervisor of master’s candidates with the College of
 Workshops, 2021, pp. 1–6. Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology,
[23] S. Feng, B. Li, H. Yu, Y. Liu, and Q. Yang, “Semi-supervised federated China. She has under taken research projects funded
 heterogeneous transfer learning,” Knowl.-Based Syst., vol. 252, 2022, by National Natural Science Foundation of China
 Art. no. 109384. and Beijing Natural Science Foundation and has been
[24] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for participating in various research projects supported by the National High-Tech
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in Research and Development Program of China etc. Her current research interests
 Proc. 2015 Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6. include cloud computing and edge computing security, Big Data security and
[25] NSL-KDD dataset, 2009. Accessed: Feb. 08, 2021. [Online]. Available: privacy protection, and artificial intelligence security.
 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/nsl.html
[26] I. Sharafaldin et al., “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset
 and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst.
 ZhenKun Chen received the BS degree from the
 Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
 School of Information, Beijing Wuzi University, Bei-
[27] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemjing, China, in 2022, and the MS degree from the
 ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, arXiv: College of Computer Science, Beijing University of
 1802.09089.
 Technology, Beijing, China, in 2025. His research
[28] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT BotNet
 interests include federated transfer learning and inattacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17, no. 3,
 trusion detection technology. He has participated in
 pp. 12–22, Third Quarter 2018. some research projects funded by National Natural
[29] A. Iscen, G. Tolias, Y. Avrithis, and O. Chum, “Label propagation for deep
 Science Foundation of China and Beijing Natural
 semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 Science Foundation.
 Recognit., 2019, pp. 5070–5079.