2220 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 MT-DEGCL: Multi-Task Encrypted Traffic
 Classification With Dual Embedding and
 Graph Contrastive Learning
 Xiaolan Zhu , Junfeng Wang , Member, IEEE, Wenhan Ge , and Xinbo Han

 Abstract—Although encryption offers strong anonymity, it employed to secure and anonymize network traffic [1]. While
also facilitates the concealment of malicious activities, allowing providing strong anonymity, they also enable malicious actors
adversaries to evade detection, and posing a great challenge to hide their identities and engage in illicit activities, comto cybersecurity surveillance. Many existing encrypted traffic
classification methods struggle to integrate flow- and packet- plicating traffic classification and source tracing. According
level tasks effectively, as they are trained independently, which to Zscaler, threat actors are increasingly exploiting encrypted
is redundancy. Additionally, packet header and payload are channels to deliver malware and conceal malicious activities,
treated equally, leading to the rich information in raw bytes with 32.1 billion threats hidden in encrypted traffic, accounting
remains fully unexplored, particularly in the abundant payload for 87.2% of total threats in 2024 [2]. How to effectively
data. Moreover, they neglect the semantic invariance and common features between data samples, which ultimately results represent encrypted traffic for accurate identification of
in suboptimal performance. To address these challenges, we potential security threats, while preserving privacy propropose an effective Multi-Task model using Dual Embedding tection principles, has become a significant challenge.
and Graph Contrastive Learning (MT-DEGCL). Based on the Many approaches have been put forward to enhance the perbyte-packet-flow structure of network traffic, a parallel dual formance of encrypted traffic classification. Earlier methods,
embedding embeds the header and payload separately, followed
by a cross-gated feature fusion strategy to capture the strong such as port-based classification and Deep Packet Inspection
local packet-level representation. Then, we construct the traffic (DPI) [3], [4], [5], have become less effective due to the
interaction graph and further utilize graph contrastive learning increasing use of dynamic ports and the substantial computo extract the robust global flow-level representation. Finally, tational overhead [6]. Subsequently, statistical feature-based
a multi-task model is trained for joint flow- and packet-level methods extract traffic features, such as packet lengths and
classification, leveraging the complementary learning between
tasks to enhance overall performance. The experimental results inter-arrival times, to enhance classification performance [7],
on four real datasets highlight the effectiveness of MT-DEGCL, [8], [9], [10], [11]. However, they face challenges from
demonstrating superior performance in both tasks. Specifically, advanced traffic obfuscation mechanisms, and the limitations
on the ISCX-Tor dataset, MT-DEGCL achieves F1 scores of of hand-crafted features may lead to failure due to unreliable
98.63% for flow-level classification and 98.10% at the packet flow statistical information in some cases [12]. Additionally,
level, surpassing the state-of-the-art (i.e., DE-GNN) by 2.03%
and 83.21%, respectively. Furthermore, MT-DEGCL maximizes these methods usually rely on observing the entire flow, which
the rich information in raw payload bytes, significantly reducing makes it difficult to perform accurate classification in the early
or even nearly eliminating classification loss when using only stages of the flow.
payload data. The widespread use of deep learning has greatly improved
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, multi-task the performance of encrypted traffic classification [13], [14],
model, dual embedding, graph contrastive learning. [15], [16], [17]. By using raw packet bytes, these methods
 can automatically learn and uncover hidden traffic patterns.
 I. I NTRODUCTION Recently, several methods based on Graph Neural Networks
 have been proposed [18], [20], [21], [22], [23], which can
T O PROTECT user privacy, privacy-enhancing tools
 such as Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) and Tor are uncover underlying relationships and dependencies within the
 traffic, enabling more accurate modeling of complex behaviors.
 Received 21 April 2025; revised 15 December 2025; accepted 3 Febru- While effective, most of them directly use raw bytes, resulting
ary 2026. Date of publication 12 February 2026; date of current version in the underutilization of the rich information in raw bytes,
20 February 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20147; and in part by the especially for the abundant payload data. The meaning of two
Major Science and Technology Special Project of Sichuan Province under bytes with identical values in the header and payload of a
Grant 2025ZDZX0059, Grant 2026YFHZ0121, Grant 2024ZDZX0044, and
Grant 2024ZHCG0195. The associate editor coordinating the review of this
 packet may be completely different [21]. Besides, they often
article and approving it for publication was Prof. Kun Sun. (Corresponding neglect the semantic invariance and common features across
author: Junfeng Wang.) data samples. By effectively mining these invariant common
 Xiaolan Zhu is with the National Key Laboratory of Fundamental Science characteristics, the model can become more resilient to variaon Synthetic Vision, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China.
 Junfeng Wang and Wenhan Ge are with the College of Computer Science, tions in network conditions, ensuring consistent and accurate
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China (e-mail: wangjf@scu.edu.cn). classification even under unstable or fluctuating network envi-
 Xinbo Han is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China.
 ronments. Moreover, they train packet-level and flow-level
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3664007 classification tasks independently, leading to redundancy and
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2221

inadequate exploration of their interrelationships. Therefore, A. Graph Neural Networks
how to effectively integrate the complementary strengths of Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a series of neural
flow- and packet-level tasks into a single model for robust networks designed to process graph-structured data by propclassification at both levels remains a key challenge. agating and aggregating information between nodes for tasks
 In this paper, we propose an effective Multi-Task like node and graph classification. The core process consists
model using Dual Embedding and Graph Contrastive of two steps: message passing and aggregation. During the
Learning (MT-DEGCL) for encrypted traffic classification. message passing phase, nodes exchange information with their
From the perspective of the byte-packet-flow structure of neighbors to gather features, and the formula is given by:
network traffic, MT-DEGCL is composed of four modules: X
packet-level representation, traffic interaction graph construc- v =
 m(k) MP(k) (h(k−1)
 u , euv ) (1)
tion, flow-level representation and multi-task classification. u∈N (v)
Specifically, the packet-level representation module extracts
 where m(k) (k−1)
 v is the message received by node v at layer k, hu
local contextual semantic features using a parallel dual embeddenotes the feature of neighboring node u at the previous layer,
ding sub-module, followed by cross-gated feature fusion
 N (v) is the set of neighbors of node v, euv represents the
strategy to form strong packet-level representation. The traffic
 edge feature between nodes u and v, and MP(k) (·) refers to the
interaction graph construction module is designed to uncover
 message passing function at layer k.
global traffic patterns and dependencies from an unstruc-
 In the aggregation phase, nodes combine the collected
tured graph, which is constructed using the learned packet
 features using aggregation operations to update their reprerepresentations along with their directions. The flow-level
 sentations, as depicted by:
representation module employs graph contrastive learning
 v =σ W
 h(k) (k)
 · AGG {m(k) (k)
  
[24] to identify the invariant common features across data u : u ∈ N (v)} + b (2)
samples and capture the global interaction patterns between
packets. In the multi-task classification module, we train a where AGG(·) is the aggregation function, W (k) and b(k) refer
joint flow- and packet-level multi-task model to fully leverage to the weight matrix and bias term at layer k.
the complementary advantages of both tasks. This unified
model not only effectively captures fine-grained packet-level B. Contrastive Learning
details but also broader flow-level patterns, thereby enhanc- Contrastive Learning is a self-supervised learning approach
ing overall classification performance. Consequently, a series designed to learn effective feature representations by comparof experiments validate the effectiveness and superiority of ing the similarities between samples. Its objective is to bring
MT-DEGCL, demonstrating its robust classification perfor- positive samples closer together in the embedding space while
mance across different scenarios. pushing negative samples farther apart. To achieve this, various
 To sum up, the main contributions of this paper include: data augmentation techniques are applied to each data sample,
 1) We propose MT-DEGCL, a multi-task model that can generating distinct views for comparison. The model is trained
 simultaneously perform flow- and packet-level classi- to maximize the similarity between positive samples while
 fication tasks with almost no additional parameters. minimizing the similarity between negative samples through
 By optimizing both tasks collaboratively, the model’s the contrastive loss function, which is formulated as:
 generalization capability is enhanced. exp(sim(zi , z j )/τ)
 2) We utilize a parallel dual embedding module with L = − log PN (3)
 CNN-LSTM and attention mechanisms to independently k=1 exp(sim(zi , zk )/τ)
 encode packet header and payload, capturing key spa- where zi and z j are the embeddings of augmented views of
 tiotemporal features, which are then fused using a the same instance, which form a positive sample pair, and
 cross-gated strategy to generate a strong local packet- sim(zi , z j ) quantifies their similarity. The temperature paramelevel representation. ter τ controls the sharpness of the similarity distribution, and
 3) We construct a traffic interaction graph based on packet N is the total number of samples in the batch.
 representations and directions to better uncover hidden
 relationships and interaction patterns within the dynamic III. R ELATED W ORK
 network traffic. Further, graph augmentation and con-
 Research on encrypted traffic classification mainly includes
 trastive learning techniques are employed to capture the
 statistical feature-based, deep learning-based, and graph neural
 robust global interaction patterns at the flow level.
 network-based approaches.
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the background, Section III reviews related work,
and Section IV details the MT-DEGCL method. Section V A. Statistical Features-Based Methods
presents the experimental setup and results, and we provide Statistical feature-based methods usually use features like
the discussion and conclusion in Sections VI and VII. packet sizes, inter-arrival times, and flow durations, under the
 assumption that different applications exhibit distinct traffic
 II. BACKGROUND patterns. These features are then utilized to train machine
 In this section, we provide a brief introduction to graph learning classifiers to learn the underlying patterns from differneural networks and Contrastive Learning. ent traffic. Moore and Zuev [8] extract 248 statistical features
2222 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

and use a Bayesian classifier to uncover the probabilistic and byte-label joint attention to capture byte-label correlations,
relationships between these features and traffic categories. and an adversarial traffic generator that enhances robustness by
Taylor et al. [9] propose AppScanner, which uses bidirectional producing adversarial examples. Yao et al. [38] integrate the
flow packet lengths and the Random Forest algorithm to attention mechanism into Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)
classify the 110 most popular Android apps generated by bots. with attention-aided bidirectional LSTM and a hierarchical
Draper-Gil et al. [25] use time-related features along with the attention network, demonstrating improved key feature learn-
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) and C4.5 algorithms to classify ing and significance analysis. Xiao et al. [39] propose EBSNN,
the application categories of VPN traffic. Baris et al. [26] which splits a packet into header and payload segments,
manually select 111 features that are extracted in [8] and apply processes them with attention-based RNN encoders, and learns
KNN for classification. Ede et al. [11] propose FlowPRINT, the packet’s high-level representation through another encoder.
a semi-supervised fingerprinting method that clusters mobile There are a range of models that integrate CNN and RNN
device traffic and classifies unseen TCP and UDP traffic. to capture both spatial and temporal information for enhanced
Panchenko et al. [27] introduce CUMUL, an SVM-based classification. In [40], CNN is used to extract spatial features
method that uses 104 features, including 4 statistical and from the first 784 bytes of each packet, and Bi-LSTM is then
100 interpolation features, to identify website traffic. Shen applied to capture temporal features. Rezaei et al. [41] further
et al. [28] use packet length sequences and apply Random learn the headers and payloads of the first six packets for
Forest, Decision Tree, and KNN for webpage identification. classification. Wang et al. [42] propose App-Net, a hybrid
Al-Fayoumi et al. [29] utilize 8 time-related features from the neural network for mobile app identification that combines
side-channel traffic to identify Tor traffic. Lashkari et al. [10] Bi-LSTM and 1D-CNN in parallel, using the payload of the
further analyze Tor traffic to identify specific application initial packet and packet length for mobile traffic classification.
categories and release a large labeled dataset. These methods Lin et al. [43] introduce TSCRNN, which combines CNN and
rely on manually extracted statistical features and long flow Bi-LSTM to extract features from both spatial and temporal
observation, thus limiting their ability to accurately classify domains. Lin et al. [17] propose PEAN, a multi-modal method
specific traffic, particularly at the packet level. that uses raw byte and packet length sequences, leveraging
 self-attention to model bi-flow relationships, followed by a
B. Deep Learning-Based Methods parallel LSTM model for classification. Lin et al. [44] propose
 Deep learning-based encrypted traffic classification methods TraGe, which employs differentiated pre-training for headers
greatly improve the classification performance by leveraging and payloads, along with a dynamic masking strategy for
the powerful representational capabilities of deep neural net- genetic packet representation, enabling robust classification
works. Wang et al. [15] first propose an end-to-end traffic even with limited samples. These methods directly utilize
classification method with a One-Dimensional Convolutional statistical features or raw bytes for classification and often
Neural Network (1D-CNN), achieving excellent performance treat header and payload bytes equally, leading to the underon the public VPN dataset by converting traffic into images. utilization of the rich information in raw bytes, especially for
Lotfollahi et al. [30] design a framework for automatic feature the abundant payload data.
extraction from network traffic using Stacked Autoencoders
(SAE) and 1D-CNN. Through analyzing the first 1480 bytes of C. Graph Neural Network-Based Methods
each IP packet, it achieves high accuracy and supports packet- Deep learning methods achieve advanced classification perlevel classification. Shapira and Shavitt [31] propose FlowPic, formance but rely on classical signal processing models that
which converts raw traffic byte sequences into 2D grayscale process raw bytes in Euclidean domains, limiting their appliimages using a spatiotemporal coordinate system based on cability to grid-like data structures [45]. GNNs, with their
packet arrival times and payload lengths, and then uses CNN strong capability to process non-Euclidean data and capture
for classification. Lim et al. [32] preprocess packet payloads as complex graph relationships, have been widely applied in
image data, using residual networks to leverage their spatial various fields [46], [47]. Shen et al. [19] propose GraphDApp
features for packet identification. Aceto et al. [33] propose for decentralized application identification, transforming traffic
MIMETIC, a multi-modal deep learning framework for clas- classification into a graph problem by constructing a traffic
sifying mobile encrypted traffic using both payload data and interaction graph based on packet length and direction in
protocol fields. Iliyasu and Deng [34] address the challenge of bidirectional flows. Huoh et al. [48] use a GNN architecture to
labeling large encrypted traffic datasets with a semi-supervised classify encrypted network traffic, modeling raw packet bytes
approach, achieving high accuracy with few labeled sam- and metadata as node features to capture temporal relationples. Liu et al. [35] introduce FS-Net, a bidirectional Gated ships among packets. Hu et al. [20] introduce TCGNN, which
Recurrent Unit (Bi-GRU)-based Autoencoder (AE) that learns models packets as undirected graphs and uses a two-layer
features from raw flow sequences and enhances extraction graph convolutional network with three aggregation strategies
with a reconstruction mechanism. Mao et al. [36] propose for packet identification. Zhang et al. [21] argue that bytes
the Byte-Label Joint Attention Network, which embeds both in packet header and payload have distinct semantics and
the packet’s bytes and labels into a joint embedding space propose TFE-GNN, which separately processes the header and
to capture their implicit correlations. Xiao et al. [37] fur- payload, and constructs a byte-level traffic graph using
ther propose a robust byte-label joint attention network that point-wise mutual information. It then extracts packet features
includes a classifier using header-payload parallel processing with two GNNs and employs Bi-LSTM for classification.
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2223

Han et al. [22] propose DE-GNN, which employs a dual denotes the k-th byte and Nb is the number of bytes in the
embedding layer to encode packet headers and payloads packet. The total number of bytes in a flow is given by:
using one-hot encoding, followed by CNN for separate packet Np
feature extraction. Two traffic interaction graphs are then X (
 Bi = Nb j) (4)
constructed from the header and payload features, respectively,
 j=1
with two GNNs applied to learn flow representations from
 (
each graph, and an adaptive deep feature fusion strategy used where Bi is the total number of bytes in flow Fi , and Nb j)
for flow-level classification. Although effective, most of them denotes the byte length of packet p j .
directly utilize raw bytes or manually crafted features as graph For a test traffic flow ftest , the flow-level classification task
nodes and ignore invariant features across samples, resulting aims to identify its category from C predefined classes using a
in suboptimal performance. Additionally, they train flow- and well-trained flow-level classification model. The classification
packet-level classification tasks independently, which is redun- function is mathematically represented as:
dant since the packet-level information is already encompassed
in flow-level features. ŷ f = F ( ftest ; Θ) (5)
 We summarize recent related works in Table I and list the where ŷ f ∈ {0, 1, . . ., C − 1}, representing the predicted catemain novelties of MT-DEGCL compared with them as follows: gory, F (·) is the classification model, and Θ denotes the model
 (1) Hierarchical learning on raw bytes. Previous studies parameters learned during training.
 often use statistical features or raw bytes directly for Similarly, the packet-level classification task involves clasclassification. Based on the byte–packet–flow structure, sifying each individual packet within a flow into one of
 MT-DEGCL first dual-encodes header and payload bytes the same C categories using another well-trained packet-level
 via a parallel embedding, and further fused for strong classification model. Given a packet ptest from flow ftest , the
 packet-level representation. It then constructs a traffic classification function is:
 interaction graph and applies graph contrastive learning
 to extract invariant features within the same category, ŷ p = P (ptest ; Φ) (6)
 yielding robust global flow-level representation.
 Here, ŷ p ∈ {0, 1, . . ., C − 1} is the predicted category of ptest ,
 (2) Traffic interaction graph construction. Instead of
 P (·) represents the packet-level classification model, and Φ is
 using raw bytes or handcrafted features as graph nodes,
 the parameter of the model.
 MT-DEGCL focuses on client–server packet interactions
 by encoding packet representation and their direction as
 node features for graph learning. B. Framework Overview
 (3) Multi-task classification. The existing methods train The overall framework is shown in Figure 1, which mainly
 flow- and packet-level classification tasks independently. consists of four modules: packet-level representation, traffic
 In contrast, MT-DEGCL leverages the complemen- interaction graph construction, flow-level representation and
 tary advantages of these two tasks through multi-task multi-task classification. The packet-level representation modlearning, enabling joint classification and improved per- ule uses a parallel CNN-LSTM with attention mechanism
 formance within a single unified model. to embed the header and payload separately, capturing key
 spatiotemporal features. These features are then fused via
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY cross-gated strategy to extract strong local contextual semantic
 features within the packet. The traffic interaction graph module
A. Problem Formulation
 captures the intricate interactions between client and server
 Encrypted traffic classification aims to identify and classify packets, enabling deeper insights into network dynamics and
network traffic associated with various service types and spe- traffic behavior. The flow-level representation module uses
cific applications without decrypting the transmitted content. graph contrastive learning with data augmentation to enhance
This is accomplished by analyzing metadata such as packet feature learning, identify invariant common features across
size, transmission time, traffic patterns, and other character- data samples, and capture robust global interaction patterns
istics of the network flow. In this paper, we leverage raw between packets. The multi-task classification module simulbytes and focus on fine-grained classification of in-app traffic taneously performs both flow- and packet-level classification
behavior at both the flow and packet levels, distinguishing tasks in one training, leveraging shared representations and
specific applications from other app-related functions. complementary advantages to enhance overall performance.
 Given a dataset with N f traffic flows and C categories,
where each flow is uniquely identified by the five-tuple
(source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, and C. Packet-Level Representation
protocol), representing a unidirectional session between two 1) Dual Embedding: In this paper, we utilize the raw bytes
endpoints. Each flow consists of a sequence of packets Fi = within network packets for traffic classification, focusing on
{p1 , p2 , . . ., pN p }, where p j is the j-th packet within the flow. both the header and payload. The header contains crucial
N p denotes the number of packets in a flow, which varies metadata that directs routing and processing, while the payload
depending on the communication session. Each packet p j carries the actual transmitted data, which consists of ciphertext
contains a sequence of bytes p j = {b1 , b2 , . . ., bNb }, where bk generated by various encryption mechanisms. By effectively
2224 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 1. MT-DEGCL model architecture.

analyzing both the header and payload, we obtain a com- can effectively integrate the features from Eh and E p by
prehensive understanding of network behavior. The header leveraging dynamic gating mechanisms. Unlike simple feature
aids in classifying traffic based on network characteristics, concatenation or weighted summation, cross-gated feature
while the payload provides deeper insights into application- fusion models feature relationships using gating mechanisms
level interactions and protocol-specific patterns. Though part to control their interaction. This mechanism dynamically
of the same packet, they serve distinct roles, with the meaning adjusts each feature’s contribution, highlighting relevant feaof each byte varying depending on its position. If both the tures while suppressing irrelevant ones and reducing noise.
header and payload bytes are treated equally during training, As is shown in Figure 1, we use two gates for fusion:
the model may struggle to converge to an optimal solution. the header gate and the payload gate, with inputs Eh and
 Therefore, we treat the packet header and payload sepa- E p , respectively. Each gate consists of two linear layers,
rately, employing a parallel dual embedding approach with separated by an activation function of PReLU [49], followed
CNN-LSTM and an attention mechanism to embed the raw by the application of an element-wise sigmoid function for
bytes into independent vectors without parameter sharing. scaling. It is notable that the two gates operate independently,
Specifically, we first use a 1D-CNN with two layers to extract without weights sharing. Assume that Eh0 and E 0p are the scaled
useful spatial features from the header and payload bytes, characteristic vectors of Eh and E p , and this process can be
respectively. These features are then processed by a Bi-LSTM described as follows:
to capture temporal dependencies, followed by an attention    
mechanism to highlight key features. This approach allows the Eh0 = S igmoid Wh(2) · PReLU Wh(1) · Eh + b(1) h + b(2)
 h (7)
model to capture the unique and meaningful traffic character-
 E 0p = S igmoid W p(2) · PReLU W p(1) · E p + b(1) + b(2)
  
istics from both the header and payload, further enhancing the p p (8)
packet representation.
 Given the first Kh and K p bytes selected from the header where Wh(1) , Wh(2) , b(1) (2)
 h and bh are the weight matrices and
and payload, d represents the embedding dimension. Two biases for the header, while W p(1) , W p(2) , b(1) (2)
 p and b p are those
independent embedding matrices, denoted as Eh ∈ RKh ×d and for the payload. The activation functions PReLU and Sigmoid
E p ∈ RK p ×d , are obtained, with each row representing a high- are applied sequentially after each linear transformation.
dimensional embedding vector corresponding to the respective Then, Eh0 is utilized to filter E p , while E 0p is employed to
bytes from the header and payload. enhance Eh in a crosswise manner, and the key features are
 2) Cross-Gated Feature Fusion: After extracting the sepa- extracted from both the packet header and payload. Ultimately,
rate features from both the header and payload, the next step a robust packet-level representation, PR is derived, as demonis to combine them to obtain a comprehensive representation strated in the following equation:
of the entire packet. To achieve a robust packet representation,
we employ the cross-gated feature fusion strategy [21], which PR = CONCAT(Eh0 E p , E 0p Eh ) (9)
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2225

 Here, the symbol denotes element-wise multiplication, To better understand the traffic interaction graph and illusand CONCAT(·) denotes vector concatenation. trate interactions across applications, we randomly select three
 Tor traffic types: Chat, Audio and P2P. Then, one flow is
 randomly selected from each, and the interaction graphs of
D. Traffic Interaction Graph Construction
 the first 10 packets are visualized in Figure 2.
 As is shown, the three applications exhibit distinct packet
Algorithm 1 Traffic Interaction Graph Construction interaction patterns. Specifically, Chat traffic consists of short
 bursts of exchanges followed by idle periods, resulting in intermittent and irregular flows (Fig. 2(a)). Audio traffic follows
 a more continuous and asymmetric pattern, with a steady,
 predominantly download-driven stream of packets (Fig. 2(b)).
 In contrast, P2P traffic exhibits a more complex and distributed
 structure, marked by frequent bidirectional exchanges between
 multiple peers, reflecting its decentralized nature (Fig. 2(c)).

 E. Flow-Level Representation
 1) Traffic Interaction Graph Encoding: Since the traffic
 interaction graph of each flow has been constructed. Next, we
 leverage the powerful unstructured representation capability of
 GNNs to capture and learn complex interaction patterns within
 the graph. Specifically, a four-layer stacked GraphSAGE [51]
 is employed to encode each graph into a high-dimensional
 vector.
 Specifically, for each node v ∈ V, we iteratively sample its
 k-hop neighbors, denoted as NS(k) (v). To ensure computational
 efficiency, a fixed number of neighbors are sampled for each
 node at each hop.
 Next, we aggregate the messages from the sampled neighbors using a mean aggregation function. The aggregated
 message for node v at the k-th layer is computed as:
 1 X
 mv(k) = ˇ ˇ h(k−1)
 u (10)
 ˇ (k) ˇ
 ˇNS (v)ˇ u∈NS(k) (v)
 In network communication, an encrypted bidirectional flow
involves multiple data exchanges between a client and a server, where hu(k−1) denotes the representation of neighbor node u at
comprising numerous packets. To effectively model dynamic the (k−1)-th layer.
interactions within the traffic, each flow can be depicted as Then, the representation of node v at the k-th layer is
an information-rich structure named traffic interaction graph updated by combining its own previous representation with
[19]. In this paper, we construct the traffic interaction graph the aggregated message from its sampled neighbors, which is
based on Algorithm 1 to capture the inherent traffic interaction formulated as:
patterns of each application, where each vertex represents a
 v =σ W
 h(k) , m(k)
 (k)
 · CONCAT h(k−1) + b(k)
  
packet, characterized by its learned representation and direc- v v (11)
tion. Meanwhile, edges represent packet-level interactions,
 where hv(k−1) is the representation of node v at the (k−1)-th
defined by the burst sequence exchanged between a client and
 layer, m(k)
 v denotes the aggregated message from the k-hop
its associated server. Consequently, it preserves the structural
 neighbors of node v, W (k) is a trainable weight matrix, b(k)
and sequential integrity of network traffic while uncovering
 is a bias vector, and σ(·) represents a non-linear activation
intricate packet dependencies, providing a comprehensive and
 function that enables the model to capture more complex and
intuitive framework for modeling network behavior.
 expressive features.
 The constructed traffic graph is denoted as Graph = (V, E),
 Therefore, for each node v, four feature vectors h(1) (2)
 v , hv ,
where V and E are defined as follows: (3) (4)
 hv , and hv are generated from the four stacked layers, and
 V: A set of vertices, representing the first N packets selected
 its final representation hv is obtained by concatenating these
from the bidirectional flow, where each vertex is treated an
 feature vectors.
individual packet. Each packet is defined by its representation
obtained from Section IV-C, along with its direction. hv = CONCAT h(1) v , hv , hv , hv
 (2) (3) (4)
 
 (12)
 E: A set of edges, where each edge denotes either an intraburst or inter-burst connection, capturing relationships between Finally, average pooling is applied over the node represenpackets within the same burst or across different bursts. tations in V to generate a global feature vector for the entire
2226 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 2. Visualization of traffic interaction graph across different applications.

graph, also referred to as the flow-level representation FR, as After dropping nodes and edges, we generate an augmented
follows: view for each original traffic interaction graph. Supervised
 1 X contrastive learning is then applied to train the classification
 FR = hv (13)
 |V| v∈V model, aiming to maximize similarity between the original
 graph and its augmented view within the same class, while
 2) Graph Contrastive Learning: In general, traffic behav- minimizing similarity to graphs from different classes. This
iors from the same application tend to exhibit similarities, encourages similar samples to be closer in the embedding
with invariant common features shared across data samples. space and dissimilar ones to be farther apart. Hence, the graph
However, in real-world network conditions, data packets may contrastive loss can be formulated as follows:
be lost due to factors such as network instability, insuffi- X 1 X exp(gi · gn /τ)
cient bandwidth, or router failures, leading to incomplete Lgcl = − log P (18)
or corrupted information. To simulate these behaviors and
 |N(i)|
 i∈I n∈N(i)m∈M(i) exp(gi · gm /τ)

uncover implicit patterns across samples while enhancing where I represents the mini-batch set of all graphs, g denotes
model’s robustness, we introduce contrastive learning on the the embedding vector of a graph, which can be the original
traffic interaction graph. By effectively preserving semantic graph G, its augmented view Gaug , or a negative sample.
invariance amidst real-world noise, the model becomes more N(i) is the set of augmented views that belong to the same
robust to network fluctuations and achieves better generaliza- class as Gi (positive samples), while M(i) refers to graphs or
tion in dynamic environments. Specifically, we apply graph their views derived from different graphs (negative samples).
data augmentation to generate augmented views of the traffic The temperature parameter τ controls the similarity between
interaction graph through transformations such as node and positive and negative samples, balancing their influence on
edge dropping. contrastive learning. By optimizing this loss, the classification
 a) Node dropping: Given the original traffic interaction model becomes better at inferring the complete graph structure
graph G = (V, E), we perform random node dropping on each from partial information, improving its ability to generalize to
node v ∈ V. The graph after node dropping can be expressed unseen traffic.
as:
 F. Multi-Task Classification
 G0 = (V 0 , E 0 ) (14)
 Since we have flow-level representations of network traffic,
 V 0 = {vi | ρi = 0}, E 0 = {ei j | vi , v j ∈ V 0 } (15)
 and each network flow is composed of a series of individual
 The probability of dropping each node is determined by packets. Intuitively, the packet-level information contained
a Bernoulli distribution, ρi ∼ Bernoulli(Pnd ), where ρi = 0 in the flow-level representation can be further leveraged
indicates that the node is retained, and ρi = 1 means that the to enhance flow-level classification performance. Conversely,
node is dropped. Pnd is a hyperparameter that controls the flow-level features can also be utilized for more fine-grained
proportion of nodes to be dropped. When a node is dropped, classification at the packet level. Multi-task learning bridges
the edges ei j connected to that node are also removed. the gap between flow- and packet-level classification by
 b) Edge dropping: After node dropping, edge dropping performing both tasks within a single model. The key
is further applied to the graph G0 . For each edge ei j ∈ E 0 , we advantage of multi-task learning in this paper lies in the
randomly decide whether to drop the edge with a probability complementary advantages between the two tasks. Packetof ρi j . The graph after edge dropping, denoted as Gaug , it can level classification offers fine-grained insights into packet
be described as: structures, helps the flow-level task better capture internal
 hierarchical relationships. At the same time, the flow-level task
 Gaug = (V 0 , E 00 ) (16) provides higher-level context, guiding packet-level learning for
 E = {ei j | ρi j = 0, ei j ∈ E }
 00 0
 (17) enhanced performance. Moreover, the shared feature space
 and joint optimization of both tasks improve the model’s
 The probability of dropping each edge is determined by a generalization and mitigate overfitting, ultimately leading to
Bernoulli distribution ρi j ∼ Bernoulli(Ped ), which specifies the superior classification performance compared to single-task
fraction of edges removed from the graph. learning.
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2227

 Next, we give the formal description of the flow- and including ISCX-Tor [10], ISCX-VPN [25], USTC-TFC2016
packet-level classification tasks. For flow-level task, a fully [52] and TLS1.3 [53], cover a range of scenarios such as
connected layer with two linear transformations is utilized, Tor, VPNs, and malware traffic, offering valuable insights into
and the process can be expressed as follows: various types of encrypted traffic and enabling comprehensive
 ŷ f ,i = W (2) (1) (1) (2) evaluation under diverse conditions.
 f · PReLU(W f · FRi + b f ) + b f (19)
 The ISCX-Tor dataset contains network traffic over the
 Nf
 X Tor network, where the traffic is encrypted with multiple
 Lf = − y f ,i log(ŷ f ,i ) + (1 − y f ,i ) log(1 − ŷ f ,i ) (20) layers, making it challenging to identify and trace. Similarly,
 i=1
 the ISCX-VPN dataset consists of network traffic transmitted
where ŷ f ,i denotes the predicted output of the i-th flow, and through VPNs, commonly used to access the blocked websites
W (1)
 f , Wf
 (2)
 are the weight matrices for the first and second or servers. It is also difficult to identify specific application
layers, with corresponding biases b(1) (2)
 f and b f . L f is the clastraffic due to the obfuscation techniques employed. The USTCsification loss measuring the discrepancy between predicted TFC2016 dataset includes both malicious and normal traffic,
outputs and true labels, with y f ,i as the true label of the i-th and we focus on malicious traffic, aiming to accurately identify
sample and N f as the total number of flows. specific malware. The TLS1.3 dataset contains encrypted traf-
 Similarly, the packet-level classification process can be fic generated under the TLS1.3 protocol with different cipher
defined as: suites, and we select the traffic from the top 10 domains listed
 on Cloudflare Radar [55] for classification. Note that all of
 ŷ p,i = W p(2) · PReLU(W p(1) · PRi + b(1) (2)
 p ) + bp (21)
 these datasets are in their original Pcap format, and the ISCX
 Np
 X datasets lack specific labels.
 Lp = − y p,i log(ŷ p,i ) + (1 − y p,i ) log(1 − ŷ p,i ) (22) 2) Pre-Processing: For each dataset, we first use SplitCap
 i=1
 [54] to perform bidirectional flow segmentation, separating the
 Here, ŷ p,i represents the predicted label for the i-th packet, traffic into distinct flows based on the five-tuple. Then, empty
whereas W p(1) , W p(2) ,b(1) (2)
 p , b p are the weights and bias terms for flows without payload are removed, as they are primarily
the first and second layers of the model. L p is the classification involved in connection setup and do not contribute meaningful
loss at the packet level, and N p refers to the total number of data for analysis. In addition, the Ethernet header is removed
packets. because it contains link-layer information that is irrelevant to
 Hence, the overall loss of MT-DEGCL can be calculated as: traffic classification purposes. To minimize the risk of sensitive
 L = L f + L p + λ · Lgcl (23) information leakage, the source IP, destination IP, source port,
 and destination port are also removed. Furthermore, padding
where Lgcl is the contrastive loss at the flow level, and and truncation techniques are applied to standardize the length
λ ∈ [0, 1] controls the strength of the contrastive learning of the traffic data, ensuring consistency across data samples.
component. 3) Implementation Details:
 Thus, we can extract the invariant common features across a) Data partitioning: We adopt an 8:1:1 split ratio for
data samples and train a unified classification model for both each category to divide the dataset into training, validation,
flow- and packet-level tasks in one training, enhancing overall and test sets. The datasets are randomly shuffled to ensure
performance. variability, minimize bias, and enhance the robustness and
 generalizability of our findings. We conduct five random tests,
 V. E XPERIMENTS reporting the mean and standard deviation (%) for each, with
 In this section, we introduce the experimental settings, the best result highlighted in bold and the second-best result
including the datasets, pre-processing, implementation details, underlined.
and evaluation metrics. We then conduct a series of experi- b) Model hyperparameters: The hyperparameters are
ments and present the results along with a detailed analysis. listed in Table II. Each is selected from a range of candidates,
These experiments consist of comparison experiments, sensi- with the final choices reflecting the best relative performance.
tivity analysis, ablation study, and model complexity analysis, c) Model training: During training, samples are ranare designed to answer the following questions: domly loaded within each batch, with no constraints on batch
 RQ1: How does MT-DEGCL perform compared to other composition, resulting in a random distribution of positive and
methods? negative classes. No special treatment for class imbalance is
 RQ2: To what extent do changes in key hyperparameters applied, and the standard cross-entropy loss function is used.
impact the effectiveness of MT-DEGCL? Meanwhile, each positive sample is augmented once.
 RQ3: How does each module in MT-DEGCL contribute to d) Experimental environment: All experiments are conits overall classification performance? ducted on a multi-core server with a 20-core 2.20 GHz Intel
 RQ4: What is the complexity of MT-DEGCL? Xeon CPU and an NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPU, providing
 the computational power necessary for efficient training and
A. Experiment Setup evaluation of MT-DEGCL.
 1) Dataset: To validate the effectiveness of MT-DEGCL, e) Evaluation metrics: During evaluation, accuracy
we conduct experiments on three benchmark datasets com- (ACC), precision (PR), recall (RC), and the weighted macro F1
monly used in encrypted traffic classification. These datasets, score (F1) are used as key metrics to assess the effectiveness
2228 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISION W ITH R ECENT R ELATED W ORKS

 TABLE II (4) Attn-LSTM [38]: Treats network traffic as time-series
 H YPERPARAMETERS OF MT-DEGCL data and utilizes an attention-aided Bi-LSTM along
 with a hierarchical attention network for accurate
 classification.
 (5) PEAN [17]: A multi-modal method using raw bytes
 and packet length sequences, where a pre-trained model
 encodes raw bytes, followed by a Transformer for
 flow-level representation and a parallel Bi-LSTM for
 temporal feature extraction.
 (6) GrapDAPP [19]: Constructs a traffic interaction graph
 with packet length and direction as node features, then
 uses GNNs for decentralized application identification.
 (7) TFE-GNN [21]: Constructs byte-level traffic graphs
 using point-wise mutual information from the packet
of MT-DEGCL. Accuracy reflects the model’s overall ability header and payload independently, with GNNs learning
to distinguish and classify traffic across multiple classes. packet representations and Bi-LSTM applied for flow
Precision measures the proportion of correct predictions for a classification.
category, while recall assesses the model’s ability to identify (8) DE-GNN [22]: Designs PacketCNN to extract packet
all instances of that category. Due to the class imbalance in features from the header and payload separately, with
the dataset, the weighted Macro F1 score is employed as a two GNNs capturing flow-level features from each, and
more robust evaluation metric, balancing precision and recall. an adaptive fusion mechanism for flow classification.
Together, these metrics offer a comprehensive assessment of
the model’s performance. The comparison results at the flow and packet levels across
 the four datasets are presented in Tables III, IV, V and
 VI, from which the following conclusions can be drawn:
B. Comparison Experiments (RQ1) (1) Whether for flow- or packet-level classification tasks,
 MT-DEGCL achieves the overall best performance across all
 Below is a summary of the encrypted traffic classification datasets, particularly at the packet level, except for flow-level
methods used to benchmark MT-DEGCL, including five deep classification on the TLS1.3 dataset. (2) Almost all the baseline
learning and three GNN-based models, with brief descriptions models perform poorly at the packet level across all datasets,
of each. For some, we use publicly available code to ensure as they fail to fully leverage the fine-grained information in
accuracy, while others are re-implemented based on the origi- packet classification. This limitation restricts their ability to
nal papers. All methods are evaluated under the same datasets capture intricate patterns and dependencies, further resulting
and experimental conditions for a fair comparison. in suboptimal flow-level performance in turn. (3) Compared to
 (1) FS-Net [35]: Uses packet length sequences as input and traditional deep learning-based methods, GNN-based models
 employs a multi-layer Bi-GRU encoder with a recon- (i.e., TFE-GNN and DE-GNN) achieve superior performance
 struction mechanism to enhance feature representation. at the flow level, with results close to those of MT-DEGCL.
 (2) APP-Net [42]: A multi-modal method that combines GNNs are highly effective at capturing packet interactions
 CNN and Bi-LSTM to simultaneously learn from packet in network traffic, enabling precise modeling of relationlength sequences and the payload bytes of the initial ships and providing deeper insights into the traffic. However,
 packet. MT-DEGCL still surpasses their best flow-level classification
 (3) TSCRNN [43]: Combines CNN and Bi-LSTM to extract result by 1.14% to 5.08% in F1 score across all datasets,
 features from both spatial and temporal domains for with a larger margin at the packet level. (4) GraphDAPP
 fine-grained traffic classification. also utilizes the traffic interaction graph from bidirectional
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2229

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE AT B OTH L EVELS ON ISCX-TOR

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE AT B OTH L EVELS ON ISCX-VPN

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE AT B OTH L EVELS ON USTC-TFC2016

flows and GNNs for classification, but fails to achieve sat- conditions by randomly reordering or dropping packets with a
isfactory results. The main issue lies in its reliance on packet ratio between 0.1 and 0.2, and compared it with other methods.
length and direction as node features. However, the presence As an example, the flow-level performance on the ISCX-Tor
of privacy-enhancing techniques applied in Tor, VPNs, and dataset is shown in Table VII. The results indicate that all modmalware, such as packet splitting and obfuscation, significantly els experience a decline in performance on both the reordered
perturbs packet length sequence, ultimately leading to perfor- and dropped datasets, with FS-net and TRSCRNN showing
mance degradation. (5) As for the TLS1.3 dataset, FS-net, a more significant drop. However, MT-DEGCL remains the
APP-net, and PEAN methods that incorporate packet length most robust, surpassing the SOTA (i.e., DE-GNN) by 1.99%
sequences achieve performance comparable to GNN-based in accuracy and 1.51% in F1 score.
models, primarily due to their ability to capture the distinctive Furthermore, we integrate the multi-task classification algopacket length patterns influenced by TLS1.3’s encryption rithm into all baselines and compare their performance with
and handshake processes. Among them, APP-net achieves MT-DEGCL to demonstrate the complementary advantages of
the best flow-level classification, with all metrics exceeding multi-task learning at both the flow and packet levels. The
MT-DEGCL by less than 1 percentage point, but still struggles results on the ISCX-Tor dataset are shown in Table VIII.
with fine-grained packet classification. As expected, the packet-level classification performance of all
 To further validate the robustness of MT-DEGCL, we baselines shows significant improvement after incorporating
test its performance under intentional obfuscation and noisy multi-task learning. Specifically, the lowest F1 score of FS-Net
2230 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE AT B OTH L EVELS ON TLS1.3

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF ROBUSTNESS ON DATASET W ITH D ROPPED AND R EORDERED PACKETS

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF C LASSIFICATION P ERFORMANCE AT B OTH L EVELS U SING M ULTI -TASK L EARNING

increased from 5.94% to 78.56%, while the highest F1 score of patterns, while too many packets might overwhelm the model
DE-GNN improved from 14.89% to 96.40%. Meanwhile, the or introduce noise. Similarly, the number of payload bytes,
performance of almost all baselines also improves at the flow representing the transmitted data in each packet, is also crulevel. For instance, the multi-modal PEAN model achieves a cial for classification. Larger payloads contain more valuable
5.03% improvement in F1 score, highlighting the effectiveness information but also increase computational complexity. To
of multi-task learning in capturing finer-grained patterns and investigate the impact of these two key hyperparameters on
dependencies, which ultimately benefits overall classification model performance, we conduct a sensitivity analysis at both
performance. Despite these improvements, MT-DEGCL still the flow and packet levels, examining how the number of
maintains the best classification performance at both the flow packets and payload bytes affect the model. By varying these
and packet levels. parameters across different datasets, we use F1 score to
 better understand their impact on the model’s effectiveness,
 as shown in Figure 3. Additionally, we examine the effect of
C. Model Sensitivity Analysis (RQ2) packet truncation under adversarial or noisy conditions on the
 The number of packets in a network flow plays an important ISCX-Tor dataset, where packets are randomly reordered or
role for model classification, as it directly impacts the richness dropped, and the results are shown in Figure 4.
of information for learning traffic characteristics. A small 1) The Impact of the Number of Packets (N): In terms
number of packets may lack sufficient data for meaningful of the number of packets, a smaller number typically yield
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2231

 Fig. 3. Model sensitivity analysis across different datasets.

 Fig. 4. Sensitivity analysis of N under packet reordering and dropping conditions.

a better F1 score, at both the flow and packet levels. As weakens the model’s ability to capture key dependencies,
the number of packets increases, performance reaches an making it more vulnerable to disruptions like reordering or
optimal point, then declines and fluctuates due to the growing packet loss. Overall, considering performance and time-space
complexity of the traffic interaction graph, which introduces overhead, the optimal N is 20 for dropped packets and 25 for
more noise and uncertainty, making it harder for the model reordered packets.
to distinguish patterns. Notably, the ISCX-Tor dataset exhibits
more stable performance with less fluctuation compared to 2) The Impact of the Number of Payload Bytes (M):
the other datasets. The optimal number of packets varies A similar trend is observed with the number of payload
slightly across datasets: 25 for ISCX-Tor, and 20 for both bytes, where the model’s performance first improves, peaks,
ISCX-VPN and USTC-TFC2016. Therefore, we select the fluctuates, and eventually declines. This suggests that a smaller
first 20 packets as the optimal value across all datasets, as it number of bytes is sufficient for classification, while excessive
achieves nearly optimal classification results while maintaining data introduces noise and redundancy, complicating accurate
a balance between accuracy and efficiency. For the dataset pattern extraction and increasing computational complexity.
where packets are randomly reordered or dropped, the F1 When the first 100 bytes are used, the model achieves optimal
score remains relatively stable at both the flow and packet performance on the ISCX dataset at both the flow and packet
levels, particularly under packet dropping conditions. When levels. For the USTC-TFC2016 dataset, the optimal number
the number of packets is very small (e.g., N = 5), performance of payload bytes is 150. However, larger values will increase
drops significantly, with the F1 score falling below 60%, com- model’s complexity and introduce potential noise. Therefore,
pared to that over 90% under normal conditions without noisy we select the first 100 bytes of the payload as the optimal
interference. This indicates that the limited number of packets value to balance the performance and complexity.
2232 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 5. Impact of λ, pnd , ped at flow and packet levels.

 To provide a more comprehensive evaluation, we further (9) W/Max: Aggregating features using the max method.
perform a sensitivity analysis of the key parameters λ, pnd and (10) W/Min: Aggregating features using the min method.
ped within the graph contrastive learning module at both the According to the results presented in Table IX, we can
flow and packet levels. Through variation of these parameters summarize the following key findings: (1) The removal of the
on the ISCX-Tor dataset, we assess their impact on the model’s packet payload results in a significant performance degradation
performance, as shown in Figure 5. compared to removing the packet header. Specifically, the F1
 As is observed, the overall classification performance at score drops by 25.91% and 30.37% for flow- and packetboth flow and packet levels exhibits generally consistent trends level classification, respectively. When the packet header is
under different parameter settings. The impact of each param- excluded, the performance is closest to that of MT-DEGCL,
eter is summarized below: (1) The F1 score improves with achieving second-best results across nearly all metrics. This
increasing λ, reaching best when λ is 0.5, and then declines suggests that the rich information in the payload is effectively
as too small or too large values distort the contribution of utilized and plays a crucial role in enhancing the model’s
the contrastive loss, resulting in suboptimal performance. (2) overall performance. In other words, we can perform classifi-
For pnd , the F1 score initially reaches its maximum at 0.1, cation at both the flow and packet levels without considering
then drops sharply at intermediate values, and subsequently the packet header, relying only on the encrypted payload. (2)
rises and fluctuates. This suggests that a minimal node drop The use of dual embedding also significantly enhances model
ratio preserves most structural information, enabling the model performance, increasing the F1 score by 26.39% at the flow
to maintain key relationships within the graph. (3) Regarding level and 27.48% at the packet level. This highlights the
ped , the F1 score initially increases as it grows, peaks at 0.2, distinct roles of the packet header and payload, as well as the
and then declines with some fluctuations. Small edge drop advantage of learning their features independently. (3) Without
ratio promotes robust graph embedding learning, whereas high packet learning, packet-level classification performance drops
values disrupt the graph structure and degrade performance. by 32.63%, indicating that raw bytes may contain noise and
 redundancy, limiting the model’s ability to perform finer-
D. Ablation Study (RQ3) grained packet identification. (4) Graph contrastive learning
 To better understand the contribution of each module in helps capture the invariant common features within the same
the MT-DEGCL architecture, we perform a comprehensive application and differences across applications, improving the
ablation study on the ISCX-Tor dataset, focusing on the model’s performance by 5.09% at the flow level and 5.29%
following aspects: at the packet level. (5) The incorporation of the cross-gated
 (1) W/o Header: Evaluating classification performance fusion mechanism further enhances classification performance
 without utilizing header information. by effectively integrating informative features from the packet
 (2) W/o Payload: Assessing the impact of excluding payload header and payload. (6) Joint multi-task learning of flowdata on classification performance. and packet-level classification significantly enhances overall
 (3) W/o Dual Embedding: Learning the raw bytes of the performance, while excluding either task leads to a substantial
 header and payload together, without using parallel dual decline in the other, highlighting their complementary nature.
 embedding. (7) The flow-level task contributes more to the packet-level
 (4) W/o Cross-gated Fusion: Connecting the packet header task by offering broader contextual information, enabling more
 and payload features directly after dual embedding. precise packet representations.
 (5) W/o Packet Learning: Using raw packet bytes as the Furthermore, to intuitively assess the effectiveness of
 features of nodes to construct the traffic interaction MT-DEGCL in leveraging the packet header and payload
 graph. information, we visualize the learned embeddings separately
 (6) W/o Graph Contrastive Learning: Evaluating the effect for each, as well as the combined embeddings, to better
 of removing the graph contrastive learning component. understand their contributions to the model’s performance.
 (7) W/o Flow-level Task: Excluding flow-level task and The model is tested by randomly selecting 10 samples from
 focusing only on packet-level classification. different classes in the test set, and the learned embeddings
 (8) W/o Packet-level Task: Omitting the packet-level task of these samples are visualized using t-SNE [56], as shown
 and considering only flow-level classification. in Figure 6.
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2233

 TABLE IX
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS OF MT-DEGCL ON ISCX-T OR DATASET

 Fig. 6. Visualizing of embedding using t-SNE.

 It is evident that the separate payload achieves effective clus- TABLE X
tering at both levels, bringing samples from the same classes M ODEL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS
closer together, while the separate header shows less distinct
clustering and has limited discriminative capability for certain
classes. Incorporating header information further amplifies this
effect, enhancing cohesion among samples from the same class
while increasing separation from those of different classes.
This demonstrates the effectiveness of MT-DEGCL in utilizing
packet information, especially the abundant payload, thereby
enhancing classification performance.

E. Model Complexity Analysis (RQ4)
 them with baseline models, as shown in Table X, with the min-
 To comprehensively evaluate the trade-off between classi- imum value in bold and the second smallest cost underlined.
fication performance and model complexity, we compute the From Table X, we can find that GNN-based models obtain
floating point operations (FLOPs), model parameters (MP), higher classification accuracy compared to other deep learninginference time (IT), GNN graph construction time (GCT), based methods across different datasets, but at the cost of
and memory consumption (MC) of MT-DEGCL, and compare increased graph construction time and inference time. Among
2234 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

them, MT-DEGCL achieves the best overall classification per- but with lower memory overhead, especially when compared
formance, while maintaining the second-lowest FLOPs, model to recent GNN-based models. However, both the inference
parameters, graph construction time, and memory usage. TFE- time and memory usage may limit its suitability for real-
GNN and DE-GNN exhibit higher FLOPs, model parameters, time detection in large-scale backbone networks, and we will
graph construction and memory consumption, With TFE-GNN explore optimization techniques to address this challenge, aimbeing the most computationally and resource-intensive. In ing for a lightweight solution that enables efficient deployment
TFE-GNN, each byte and its point-wise mutual information for real-time detection.
are used to construct the packet graph, resulting in a larger
graph scale and longer graph construction time. Moreover, the VII. C ONCLUSION
packet header and payload are modeled as separate graphs,
 In this paper, we introduce MT-DEGCL, an effective multifurther increasing the model’s complexity. For DE-GNN, the
 task model that use dual embedding and graph contrastive
nodes represent learned packet header or payload embeddings,
 learning for encrypted traffic classification. Building on the
reducing inference time. However, the separate construction
 bytes-packet-flow structure, a parallel dual embedding first
and classification of header and payload graphs result in an
 encodes header and payload separately. Then, they are fused
increase in FLOPs, model size, and memory usage. Whereas
 via a cross-gated strategy to form a strong packet-level rep-
GraphDAPP directly uses only packet length and direction as
 resentation, capturing the fine-grained byte-level semantics
node features, achieving the smallest model parameters and
 within each individual packet. Subsequently, each packet repcomputation overhead, but yielding the poorest classification
 resentation along with its direction is used as node features
performance across all datasets. It is also observed that deep
 to construct the traffic interaction graph, offering a clear and
learning-based models have lower inference times but incur
 intuitive view on traffic interactions. This graph is further
higher FLOPs, model parameters, and memory usage. FS-Net
 embedded using GNNs and contrastive learning to generate
achieves the fastest inference time, but it requires 4.41 times
 a robust global flow-level representation, capturing the flowthe FLOPs, 10 times the model parameters, and approximately
 level interaction patterns between packets at a global level.
twice the memory usage compared to MT-DEGCL. Notably,
 Finally, we perform joint flow- and packet-level classification
Attn-LSTM exhibits the highest memory consumption, at 40
 with a single model in a unified training process, effectimes that of MT-DEGCL, primarily due to its hierarchical
 tively leveraging shared knowledge between tasks to enhance
Bi-LSTM architecture and attention mechanism.
 the model’s overall performance. Experimental results show
 VI. D ISCUSSION that MT-DEGCL achieves the overall best classification performance with relatively small computational and memory
 This paper presents MT-DEGCL, which effectively inte- overhead. Furthermore, the rich information in the payload
grates the complementary strengths of flow- and packet-level is fully exploited, allowing us to perform classification at
tasks into a unified model based on the byte-packet-flow both the flow and packet levels without considering the packet
structure of network traffic, achieving superior classification header, relying only on the encrypted payload.
performance across multiple datasets at both levels. The
ablation study shows that MT-DEGCL significantly improves
 R EFERENCES
packet-level tasks but offers limited gains for flow-level classification. This is likely due to packet-level tasks capturing more [1] E. Ramadhani, “Anonymity communication VPN and tor: A comparative
 study,” J. Phys., Conf. Ser., vol. 983, Mar. 2018, Art. no. 012060.
granular traffic details, which come with increased complexity [2] Zscaler.(2024). ThreatLabz 2024 Encrypted Attacks Report. [Online].
and noise. By integrating complementary flow-level features, Available: https://www.zscaler.com/campaign/threatlabz-encryptedthe model gains additional context, boosting packet-level per- attacks-report
 [3] P. Zejdl, S. Ubik, V. Macek, and A. Oslebo, “Traffic classification for
formance. For flow-level tasks, which focus on global traffic portable applications with hardware support,” in Proc. Int. Workshop
patterns, improvements are more limited due to their lower Intell. Solutions Embedded Syst., Jul. 2008, pp. 1–9.
complexity. Packet-level classification captures fine-grained [4] W. Melo, P. Lopes, R. Antonello, S. Fernandes, and D. Sadok, “On the
 performance of DPI signature matching with dynamic priority,” in Proc.
micro-level features, enabling the early identification of poten- IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
tial malicious behavior through individual packet analysis. It is [5] P. Khandait, N. Hubballi, and B. Mazumdar, “Efficient keyword matchsuitable for scenarios requiring detailed traffic analysis, such ing for deep packet inspection based network traffic classification,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. COMmun. Syst. NETw. (COMSNETS), 2020,
as intrusion detection, anomaly detection, and network per- pp. 567–570.
formance monitoring. Flow-level classification analyzes entire [6] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong,
sessions or connections, emphasizing macro-level flow fea- “MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic
 using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Comput.
tures, and supports global network behavior modeling. Despite Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2021, pp. 1025–1038.
their different focuses, they are often strongly correlated. [7] O. Salman, I. H. Elhajj, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab, “A review on
By jointly training both tasks enables the model to leverage machine learning–based approaches for internet traffic classification,”
 Ann. Telecommun., vol. 75, nos. 11–12, pp. 673–710, Dec. 2020.
complementary advantages, share useful features, and better [8] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using Bayesian
capture intrinsic connections, improving overall performance analysis techniques,” Meas. Model. Comput. Syst., vol. 33, pp. 50–60,
and generalization. In terms of model complexity, MT-DEGCL Jun. 2005.
 [9] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
achieves the second-smallest FLOPs, model parameters, graph Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
construction time, and memory usage. It also exhibits higher traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy (EuroS&P), Mar. 2016,
inference times compared to other deep learning-based models, pp. 439–454.
ZHU et al.: MULTI-TASK ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION WITH DUAL EMBEDDING LEARNING 2235

[10] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Draper Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, [33] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile
 “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput.
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, pp. 253–262. Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944.
[11] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting [34] A. S. Iliyasu and H. Deng, “Semi-supervised encrypted traffic classifion encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., cation with deep convolutional generative adversarial networks,” IEEE
 2020. Access, vol. 8, pp. 118–126, 2020.
[12] H. Wu, Q. Wu, G. Cheng, S. Guo, X. Hu, and S. Yan, “SFIM: Identify [35] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence
 user behavior based on stable features,” Peer-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 14, network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comno. 6, pp. 3674–3687, Nov. 2021. put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
[13] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: [36] K. Mao, X. Xiao, G. Hu, X. Luo, B. Zhang, and S. Xia, “Byte-label
 An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May joint attention learning for packet-grained network traffic classification,”
 2019. in Proc. IEEE/ACM 29th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQOS), Jun. 2021,
[14] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Toward effective pp. 1–10.
 mobile encrypted traffic classification through deep learning,” Neuro- [37] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
 computing, vol. 409, pp. 306–315, Oct. 2020. network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
[15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2161–2178, May 2025.
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural [38] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul. of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term
 2017, pp. 43–48. memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022.
[16] Y. Xu, J. Cao, K. Song, Q. Xiang, and G. Cheng, “FastTraffic: A [39] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia,
 lightweight method for encrypted traffic fast classification,” Comput. “EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic
 Netw., vol. 235, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109965. classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5,
[17] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal pp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022.
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM [40] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023. features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
[18] L. Xu, D. Dou, and H. J. Chao, “ETCNet: Encrypted traffic classification IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
 using Siamese convolutional networks,” in Proc. Workshop Netw. Appl. [41] S. Rezaei, B. Kroencke, and X. Liu, “Large-scale mobile app identifi-
 Integration/CoDesign, Aug. 2020, pp. 51–53. cation using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 348–362, 2020.
[19] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- [42] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural nettralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using work for encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul. 2020,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. pp. 424–429.
[20] G. Hu, X. Xiao, M. Shen, B. Zhang, X. Yan, and Y. Liu, [43] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
 “TCGNN: Packet-grained network traffic classification via graph of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
 neural networks,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, Aug. 2023, management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no.
 Art. no. 106531. 107974.
[21] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph [44] C. Lin, Y. Jiang, W. Zhang, X. Meng, T. Zuo, and Y. Zhang, “TraGe: A
 neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. generic packet representation for traffic classification based on header-
 ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075. payload differences,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 33rd Int. Symp. Quality
[22] X. Han et al., “DE-GNN: Dual embedding with graph neural network for Service (IWQoS), Jul. 2025, pp. 1–6.
 fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, [45] S. Zafeiriou et al., “Guest editorial: Non-Euclidean machine learning,”
 May 2024, Art. no. 110372. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 723–726,
[23] H. Zhang et al., “Revolutionizing encrypted traffic classification with Feb. 2022.
 MH-Net: A multi-view heterogeneous graph model,” in Proc. AAAI [46] W. Fan et al., “Graph neural networks for social recommendation,” in
 Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, 2025, pp. 1048–1056. Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2019, pp. 417–426.
[24] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph [47] S. Rahmani, A. Baghbani, N. Bouguila, and Z. Patterson, “Graph neural
 contrastive learning with augmentations,” 2020, arXiv:2010.13902. networks for intelligent transportation systems: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
[25] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghor- Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, pp. 8846–8885, 2023.
 bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related [48] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 pp. 407–414. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
[26] B. Yamansavascilar, M. A. Guvensan, A. G. Yavuz, and M. E. Karsligil, [49] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into recti-
 “Application identification via network traffic classification,” in Proc. fiers: Surpassing human-level performance on ImageNet classification,”
 Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan. 2017, pp. 843–848. in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015,
[27] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc. pp. 1026–1034.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016. [50] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi-
[28] M. Shen, Y. Liu, L. Zhu, X. Du, and J. Hu, “Fine-grained web- directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
 page fingerprinting using only packet length information of encrypted Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188.
 traffic,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 2046–2059, [51] W. L. Hamilton, R. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
 2021. learning on large graphs,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30,
[29] M. Al-Fayoumi, A. Elayyan, A. Odeh, and Q. A. Al-Haija, “Tor 2017, pp. 1024–1034.
 network traffic classification using machine learning based on time- [52] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 related feature,” in Proc. 6th Smart Cities Symp. (SCS), vol. 2022, 2023, classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 pp. 92–97. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[30] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and [53] N. Wickramasinghe, A. Shaghaghi, G. Tsudik, and S. Jha, “SoK:
 M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traf- Decoding the enigma of encrypted network traffic classifiers,” in Proc.
 fic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1825–1843.
 pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020. [54] NETRESEC. SplitCap. Accessed: Oct. 9, 2024. [Online]. Available:
[31] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for https://www.netresec.com/?
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE [55] Cloudflare Radar Domain Rankings, Cloudflare Radar, San Francisco,
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. CA, USA. Accessed: Nov. 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
[32] H.-K. Lim, J.-B. Kim, J.-S. Heo, K. Kim, Y.-G. Hong, and Y.-H. Han, radar.cloudflare.com/domains
 “Packet-based network traffic classification using deep learning,” in [56] L. V. D. Maaten and G. E. Hinton, “Visualizing data using t-SNE,”
 Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), Feb. 2019, J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 9, no. 86, pp. 2579–2605, 2008. [Online].
 pp. 046–051. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5855042