6344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 MT-KD: Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation for
 Privacy-Aware Unlearning in IIoT Intrusion
 Detection Systems
 Shigen Shen , Senior Member, IEEE, Jiashuo Niu , Yizhou Shen , Jingnan Dong , Member, IEEE,
 Wenlong Ke , Tian Wang , Senior Member, IEEE, and Ruidong Li , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The growth of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) systems [1]. They do this by making it possible to get data
systems creates a direct conflict for intrusion detection systems: in real time and use smart automation [2]. But, all these new
while essential for security, their inability to selectively forget connections and complex systems also lead to more advanced
specific attack patterns hinders adaptability and impedes compliance with privacy regulations like General Data Protection cyber threats that target industrial control systems, edge
Regulation. To resolve this conflict, we introduce the Multi- devices, and communication protocols [3], [4]. As a result,
Teacher Knowledge Distillation (MT-KD) unlearning framework, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have become indispensdesigned to erase knowledge of specified attack classes without able for safeguarding IIoT intrusion detection environments
the prohibitive cost of full model retraining. Our approach against diverse and evolving attacks [5], [6]. Nevertheless,
employs deep convolutional neural networks, multi-teacher guidance, and gradient-based noise injection to train a student model they often retain long-term memory of obsolete or sensitive
that forgets targeted attacks while retaining high accuracy on threat patterns, which can pose significant risks to both privacy
remaining classes. We validate this by converting network traffic compliance and the system’s adaptability to emerging attack
from the CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 benchmark datasets vectors. In IIoT settings—where operational continuity, data
into grayscale images for extensive experiments. The results protection, and regulatory alignment are paramount—there is
demonstrate that our MT-KD framework achieves complete
forgetting of targeted classes, verified by Membership Inference a growing demand for mechanisms that can selectively remove
Attack resistance, while maintaining over 95% accuracy on previously learned information from deployed detection
retained classes. By outperforming existing unlearning baselines models [7].
in both effectiveness and efficiency, our work delivers a practical Regulations such as the EU’s General Data Protection
and scalable solution for privacy-preserving intrusion detection Regulation [8] and California Consumer Privacy Act [9] grant
in real-world IIoT scenarios. The source code is publicly available
at https://github.com/NJS-HZ/MT-KD individuals the right to be forgotten and to request deletion
 of personal data [10]. In practice, compliance extends beyond
 Index Terms—Machine unlearning, knowledge distillation, erasing raw records: if models were trained on those data, their
Industrial Internet of Things, intrusion detection system, privacy.
 parameters may encode them, and organizations may need to
 I. I NTRODUCTION remove that influence from deployed models as well [11], [12].
 For IIoT-based learning systems in mission-critical and data-
I NDUSTRIAL Internet of Things (IIoT) technologies are
 changing manufacturing, energy, and critical infrastructure sensitive settings, it needs a practical requirement to support
 privacy-compliant unlearning that selectively remove the effect
 Received 20 October 2025; revised 8 February 2026; accepted 12 February of specified samples or classes from a trained model without
2026. Date of publication 18 February 2026; date of current version 27 Febru- retraining from scratch [13].
ary 2026. This work was supported in part by the Humanities and Social
Sciences Planning Foundation of Ministry of Education of China under Grant Machine unlearning has moved beyond computer vision
24YJAZH123, and Huzhou Science and Technology Planning Foundation of to natural language processing and recommender systems
China under Grant 2023GZ04. The associate editor coordinating the review [14], with techniques ranging from influence-function–guided
of this article and approving it for publication was J. Kang. (Corresponding
author: Yizhou Shen.) parameter edits and Newton-style update removal to parti-
 Shigen Shen, Jiashuo Niu, Jingnan Dong, and Wenlong Ke are tioned training schemes with certified deletion guarantees.
with the School of Information Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou By contrast, applications to IIoT cybersecurity remain sparse
313000, China (e-mail: shigens@zjhu.edu.cn; 2024388229@stu.zjhu.edu.cn;
dongjingnan@zjhu.edu.cn; wlke@zjhu.edu.cn). [15], [16]. Much of the literature still chases stronger intru-
 Yizhou Shen is with the School of Computing, Newcastle University, NE1 sion detection—robustness [17], higher detection accuracy,
7RU Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K. (e-mail: Y.Shen34@newcastle.ac.uk).
 Tian Wang is with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Future
 or incremental learners under concept drift—while the more
Networks, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, China, also with prosaic yet crucial task of systematically scrubbing models of
the College of Computer and Data Science, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou outdated or sensitive attack patterns is rarely addressed [18].
350108, China, and also with the College of Computer Science and Math- Given the practical limits of IIoT—such as limited comematics, Fujian University of Technology, Fuzhou 350118, China (e-mail:
tianwang@bnu.edu.cn). pute at terminals, mixed protocols [19], and tight latency
 Ruidong Li is with the Institute of Science and Engineering, needs—retraining a model from scratch to forget one or more
Kanazawa University, Kakuma, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan (e-mail: lrd@
se.kanazawa-u.ac.jp).
 attack types is not practical. So recent machine unlearning
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3665917 work [20] has proposed fast and selective erase methods
 2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6345

that keep compute cost low. These include influence-function latency, and keeps detection performance strong on the
updates, small local weight tweaks, and knowledge distillation retained categories.
with a teacher model. Even with these advances, balancing • We conduct extensive evaluations on two benchunlearning strength with overall model stability and detection mark datasets: CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016. Both
performance remains a key challenge [21], [22]. datasets are preprocessed into grayscale images using the
 To address these challenges, we propose a novel machine USTC-TK2016 traffic-to-image conversion toolkit [23],
learning forgetting framework specifically designed for IIoT enabling CNN-based classification. Experimental results
intrusion detection scenarios. The proposed method—Multi- demonstrate that our MT-KD framework achieves com-
Teacher Knowledge Distillation (MT-KD)—combines the plete forgetting of the targeted attack category, which
newly developed UnResNet9 model, tailored for learning elim- has been validated as resistance to membership inference
ination tasks, with a multi-teacher selective forgetting strategy. attacks. Simultaneously, it maintains over 95% accuracy
This framework removes knowledge of specific attack classes in the retained categories, thereby surpassing existing
from pretrained detection models while keeping performance forgetting baselines in both effectiveness and efficiency.
on the remaining categories. Its core is a student model The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
trained with guidance from multiple teachers, using both noise- Section II reviews related work on machine unlearning, IIoT
based forgetting and distillation with limited data. This design intrusion detection, and knowledge distillation. Section III
enables precise, controllable forgetting without retraining the presents the system model and data configuration. Section IV
whole model from scratch. details the proposed MT-KD unlearning framework, includ-
 We present a full unlearning pipeline that identifies the ing data preprocessing, the UnResNet9 architecture, and the
samples or classes to forget, generates error-maximizing noise multi-teacher knowledge distillation mechanism. Section V
to push the model away from them, and uses a multi-stage presents comprehensive experimental results and analysis on
alternating training schedule to erase and then stabilize the two benchmark datasets. Finally, Section VI concludes the
model. We convert raw network traffic into 28 × 28 grayscale paper and discusses future research directions.
session images with the USTC-TK2016 traffic-to-image toolkit
[23], and evaluate on two public benchmarks: CIC-IDS20171
 II. R ELATED W ORK
and USTC-TFC2016.2 CIC-IDS2017 covers enterprise attacks
including DoS, DDoS, brute force, web attacks, and botnets, A. Machine Unlearning
while USTC-TFC2016 contains real malicious traffic from Recent years have witnessed growing interest in machine
families such as Neris, Virut, and Geodo. Results across unlearning as a critical technique for protecting user privacy
both datasets show good generalization and robustness to and enforcing the right to be forgotten in machine learning
different network settings and attack types: our method reliably systems. Hu et al. [24] exposed privacy vulnerabilities
forgets targeted attack categories while keeping high detection during unlearning by proposing inversion attacks that
accuracy on benign traffic and retained classes, outperforming exploit both original and unlearned models. Sun et al. [25]
full retraining and prior unlearning baselines. addressed unlearning challenges in GANs through a cascaded
 In summary, our contributions are three-fold: approach preserving latent space continuity. Tarun et al. [26]
 • We propose a lightweight residual network, UnResNet9, developed a fast framework leveraging error-maximizing
 built for IIoT intrusion detection and aimed at the inter- noise and weight manipulation for class unlearning
 class learning loss issue. Unlike standard ResNet variants, without full data access. Wang et al. [27] proposed Federated
 UnResNet9 adds adaptive feature layers and lightweight Unlearning (FedU) for federated scenarios, balancing efficacy
 regularization so the model can prune unneeded knowl- and utility through user-side influence approximation.
 edge while keeping detection performance on the attack Chundawat et al. [28] introduced zero-shot unlearning with
 categories that remain. error-based noise optimization and the Anamnesis Index
 • Our multi-teacher knowledge distillation (MT-KD) setup metric for quality evaluation.
 uses two teachers. The forgetting teacher is obtained Collectively, recent studies have made steady progress on
 by noise training the original pretrained model with machine unlearning across model types and setups, mainly
 error-maximizing perturbations aimed at the classes to classifiers and generative models, with a focus on speed,
 forget, which yields a strong forgetting signal. The accuracy, and privacy. Yet several open issues remain: cutretention teacher is trained only on the retained dataset ting the drop in performance during unlearning, making the
 and provides clean guidance for the remaining classes. unlearning pipeline secure from start to finish, and building
 The student learns useful knowledge from the retention general frameworks that comply with strict regulations [29],
 teacher and follows the forgetting cues from the forgetting [30]. These gaps show up across datasets and architectures and
 teacher by adding loss terms on noise-perturbed samples call for clearer evaluation and deployment practices.
 and suppressing the logits of the target classes during
 training. This design enables precise class-level forgetting
 B. Intrusion Detection in IIoT Environments
 without retraining from scratch, reduces compute and
 IIoT networks face considerable challenges due to het-
 1 Available at: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html erogeneous and severely imbalanced data collected from
 2 Available at: https://github.com/yungshenglu/USTC-TFC2016 diverse terminal devices, where data distributions are often
6346 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

non-independent and identically distributed with under- approach works with common backbones, leaves the inference
represented attack types. To address these challenges, path unchanged, and does not require access to the original
Shan et al. [31] proposed Clustered Federated Learning data that must be removed, which suits privacy-sensitive
that leverages dynamic focal loss and model clustering to deployments. In practice, it adds only a small training-time
enhance robustness against poisoning attacks. Hu et al. [32] overhead while keeping test-time cost unchanged, and it preconducted a comprehensive survey on IIoT intelligence, serves detection on retained classes while removing knowledge
proposing a five-layer hierarchical architecture and examining of the targets.
enabling technologies to guide future research. Yu et al. [33] The specific design of MT-KD is particularly well-suited for
introduced a deep reinforcement learning-based open-set IIoT intrusion detection environments. First, unlike standard
IDS that effectively identifies both known and unseen distillation-based unlearning methods that rely on expensive
attack types, addressing zero-day threat detection challenges. parameter modification, our noise tensor optimization sig-
Zhang et al. [34] proposed an unsupervised fault detection nificantly reduces computational overhead, enabling practical
framework for multi-condition industrial signals, supporting deployment on IIoT edge devices. Second, the dual-teacher
intelligent manufacturing and predictive maintenance in IIoT architecture with strategic MaxPooling bottlenecks enables
systems. class-specific forgetting boundaries, allowing fine-grained con-
 Overall, recent work points to a trend of combining trol over which attack classes are forgotten while minimizing
federated learning, reinforcement learning, and machine collateral damage to retained threat detection. Standard methunlearning to build IIoT systems that are scalable and robust ods lack this precision and typically resort to coarser global
to advanced attacks, and privacy-aware, addressing the diverse forgetting strategies unsuitable for multi-class cybersecurity
and fast-changing nature of IIoT [35], [36]. scenarios. Third, our lightweight UnResNet9 backbone is
 optimized for 28 × 28 grayscale network traffic images rather
C. Knowledge Distillation than arbitrary image sizes, and its design captures the periodic
 byte patterns of industrial protocols such as MODBUS and
 In recent years, knowledge distillation has proven effective
 DNP3. In contrast, directly adapting general-purpose CNNs
for model compression and transfer [37] and is now used in
 to IIoT would ignore these protocol-specific structures. These
machine unlearning to selectively remove class- or instancedesign choices collectively address the unique constraints
level knowledge. Compared with retraining from scratch,
 of IIoT systems—resource limitations, privacy requirements,
distillation-based methods cut compute and time, making them and the need for selective, multi-class unlearning—making
a good fit for efficient unlearning in deep models [38]. In MT-KD substantially more practical and effective than direct
particular, MT-KD improves student robustness and capacity
 adaptations of existing methods.
by using guidance from multiple teachers. Building on this, we
propose MT-KD-Unlearning, which trains the student through III. P ROPOSED M ODEL
collaborative learning on retained data together with substitute A. System Model
noise samples. This achieves precise forgetting of malicious
attack categories while maintaining high performance on the In the IIoT model, edge devices send their network traffic to
retained classes. a central server for analysis. This stream contains both normal
 communications and malicious traffic injected by attackers.
 To enhance security and protect sensitive operational data,
D. Our Method we introduce a noise-based machine forgetting algorithm to
 The above analysis shows that distillation-based forgetting eliminate harmful samples. This mechanism aims to mitmethods are promising for selective forgetting, but they also igate malware impacts and erase attack traces during the
reveal a key drawback: strong reliance on a single teacher learning process. Through continuous iterative forgetting until
model. This limitation makes it hard to control, in a detailed malicious knowledge is completely purged, we ultimately conway, what to keep and what to remove in complex, multi-class struct a sophisticated, privacy-focused model resilient against
cybersecurity settings. industrial cyber threats.
 To address these limits, we propose MT-KD Forgetting In the framework of the unlearning algorithm depicted
Learning for IIoT intrusion detection. It uses two teachers in Fig. 1, the data of each user exhibits randomness and
with complementary roles: a forgetting teacher, obtained by uncertainty, and the attack methods employed by attackers
noise training the original model to emphasize what should be are also unpredictable. The unlearning algorithm continuously
dropped, and a retention teacher trained only on the retained learns and sifts out malicious data for the purpose of forgetting
data to provide clean guidance. The student alternates between it. After being processed by the server side, the relevant data
two training phases. In one phase, it distills knowledge from is uploaded to the final model repository. The model we have
the retention teacher on retained samples. In the other, it generated is a high-performance one that has screened out
learns to suppress responses to the target classes using noise- malicious data. In this way, it can protect users’ network
perturbed inputs guided by the forgetting teacher. The noise security and privacy, and enhance the overall security level.
strength is kept modest to trigger forgetting without destabi- At the practical level, forgetting learning lets security modlizing training, and the alternation is kept short to maintain els quickly dampen the impact of specific attack cases or
stability. The balance between the two phases can be adjusted tainted samples and recover detection quality without rebuildto trade off forgetting strength and retained accuracy. The ing the whole model. Placed on edge intelligence nodes,
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6347

 Similarly, the set of classes that the model is intended to
 retain is defined as R = {1, 2, . . . , K} \ F, referred to as the
 retain class set. The associated data subset is:
 DR = {(xi , yi ) ∈ D | yi ∈ R}. (2)
 where DR denotes the retain data subset, and yi ∈ R indicates
 that the label of sample (xi , yi ) belongs to the retain class set.
 This partitioning lays the foundation for selective unlearning
 algorithms, enabling the model to effectively remove information related to specific classes while preserving knowledge
 deemed important. The complete dataset D can be decomposed
 into two mutually exclusive subsets:
 D = DF ∪ DR , DF ∩ DR = ∅. (3)
 To evaluate the effect of unlearning, we construct two models
Fig. 1. Layered architecture of MT-KD unlearning in IIoT intrusion detection for comparison: the original model, which is trained on the full
environments.
 dataset D, and the unlearning model, which is trained solely
 on the retained dataset DR , with all forget data DF excluded.
an IDS can make small, local parameter updates to forget
harmful signals while still learning normal traffic patterns. IV. M ULTI -T EACHER K NOWLEDGE D ISTILLATION
This avoids the delay and bandwidth cost of round-trip cloud U NLEARNING M ODEL
updates and keeps the system capable of self-defense even A. Data Preprocessing
when offline or under tight resource limits. When appropriate, To use deep learning for IIoT intrusion detection, we first
it can also be paired with federated learning so devices convert raw IIoT traffic into forms that models can learn. We
coordinate forgetting steps without sending raw data, helping parse packet captures into flows, extract session-level features,
protect a shared model with little communication. Overall, and pack them into fixed-size tensors suitable for convolutional
the lightweight forgetting path improves real-time response models. In this work we use the public CIC-IDS2017 and
in distributed settings, reduces reliance on the cloud, and USTC-TFC2016 datasets, which cover a wide range of benign
strengthens resilience against adversarial interference and and attack traffic and show clear temporal patterns and diverse
data-protection risks. communication behavior. We apply a consistent preprocessing
 We are currently exploring practical ways to remove mali- pipeline across both datasets with flow slicing, per-feature
cious data from networked systems while keeping retained data normalization, and stratified train, validation, and test splits.
intact, especially when hostile traffic attempts unauthorized This setup makes the inputs stable for training and helps
access to network resources and users’ private information. the models focus on the real differences between benign and
In real deployments, malware reaches privacy-sensitive nodes malicious traffic.
through common paths such as phishing, software flaws, and Both CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 cover the common
lateral movement from compromised hosts; zero-day attacks threats and traffic patterns seen in IIoT intrusion detection.
are among the most common and hardest to handle. To Attacks such as DoS, PortScan, and Botnet target key assets
deal with these problems, we propose a machine-learning in industrial control systems and are well represented in these
unlearning framework that supports selective forgetting of datasets. The traffic records show typical exchanges between
malicious traces while preserving benign knowledge and user industrial endpoints and servers, providing useful training
privacy. The aim is a cleaner, safer model that resists malware material for IIoT-focused detectors. Using these datasets helps
and better protects data integrity and privacy. models adapt to real deployments and remain robust under
 practical conditions.
B. Data Configuration The dataset is originally provided in the form of raw packet
 capture (PCAP) files, which record continuous streams of
 We consider a supervised learning dataset D = {(xi , yi )}i=1 N
 , network packets. Since such raw data is not directly suitable
where each xi denotes an input sample and yi ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K} for deep convolutional models, we begin by segmenting the
represents its corresponding class label, with K denoting the continuous traffic trace T into fixed-duration session-based
total number of distinct classes. flow windows using a slicing function as
 We define the subset of classes that the model is intended
to forget F ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , K}, referred to as the forget class set. φ(T ; τ) = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sN }, (4)
The corresponding subset of data is defined as
 where T denotes the continuous traffic trace, τ is the fixed
 DF = {(xi , yi ) ∈ D | yi ∈ F}. (1) time duration for session segmentation, si represents the i-th
 flow segment, and N is the total number of extracted sessions.
where DF denotes the forget data subset, and yi ∈ F indicates Each flow segment si is a time-aligned session of length τ
that the label of sample (xi , yi ) belongs to the forget class set. between two endpoints, covering the protocol exchanges and
6348 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

basic behavior. We process these segments with the USTC- data DF , as defined in Section III-B. This data augmenta-
TK2016 toolkit and extract a session feature vector fi ∈ Rd , tion process expands the training distribution and decision
where d is the number of features. The vector records simple boundaries of retained classes, thereby improving the model’s
statistics and protocol fields, such as packet inter-arrival times, generalization ability and enabling more effective detection of
byte counts, flow duration, and TCP flag ratios. previously unseen and evolving attack variants.
 To adapt these features for CNNs, each vector is normalized,
reshaped, and mapped into a grayscale image tensor through B. Convolutional Model UnResNet9
a transformation function ψ as
 To handle grayscale traffic images, we use a small, efficient
 ψ(fi ) ∈ RC×H×W . (5) CNN called UnResNet9, a customized version of ResNet9.
 It keeps the key feature layers of ResNet9 and adds a few
This conversion preserves spatial correlations within the feasimple changes so it works well with multi-teacher knowledge
tures and allows convolutional filters to detect complex flow
 distillation and selective forgetting. In our MT-KD unlearnpatterns similarly to textures in natural images.
 ing framework, UnResNet9 serves as the backbone, learning
 To improve model robustness and enable the detection of
 useful features from network traffic while enabling fast, classzero-day and previously unseen attacks, we further augment
 specific forgetting.
the dataset with synthetic samples f̃ j generated through three
 Given an input tensor I ∈ RC×H×W , where C = 1 for
complementary strategies. First, we apply feature-level syngrayscale images, H = W = 28 for our dataset, the model
thesis by perturbing and recombining existing attack vectors
 extracts hierarchical and discriminative feature embeddings
to simulate polymorphic behavior, which is represented by
 from flow-level image representations through a sequence of
 f̃ = f (a) +  f (b) − f (c) ,  ∼ U(0, 1)d .
 
 (6) convolution operations, batch normalization, nonlinear activation functions, and residual connections. Specifically, each
where f (a) , f (b) , f (c) ∈ Rd denote three different known attack convolutional layer consists of a 2D convolution operation
feature vectors,  ∈ Rd is a random vector with each element Convk (·) followed by batch normalization BNk (·), formally
independently sampled from the uniform distribution U(0, 1), expressed as
and denotes element-wise (Hadamard) product.
 Next, we generate adversarial examples by leveraging the ConvBNk (U) = BNk (Convk (U)) , (10)
gradients of a pretrained model M to modify known features,
 where U denotes the input feature tensor, and the subscript k
pushing them towards the model’s decision boundaries, which
 denotes the layer index. Batch normalization stabilizes training
is represented by
 after the convolution operation.
 f̃ = f + η · sign (∇f P(M(f), y)) , (7) To facilitate deeper feature learning and mitigate gradient
 vanishing issues, we incorporate residual blocks R(·) defined
where f ∈ Rd denotes the original input feature vector, f̃ is the by
perturbed adversarial example, η > 0 controls the magnitude
of the perturbation, sign(·) is the element-wise sign function, R(U) = σ (ConvBN2 (σ (ConvBN1 (U))) + U) , (11)
∇f P(·) represents the gradient of the loss with respect to the
 where σ(·) denotes the ReLU activation function, the
input, indicating the sensitivity of the model output to changes
 subscripts 1 and 2 denote the two convolutional layers
in each input dimension, M(f) denotes the model prediction
 within the residual block, and the residual connection enables
given f, and y is the true label. This method effectively
 cross-layer information flow by adding the input U to the
enhances the model’s robustness against adversarial evasion
 output of two consecutive convolution-batch normalizationattacks.
 activation operations.
 Finally, we train generative models G(z), such as GANs [39]
 The forward propagation of the network computes intermeor Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [40], on known attack
 diate feature maps Z1 through Z10 sequentially as
samples to learn their underlying distribution pattack (f), and
generate new synthetic samples by sampling latent variables Z1 = σ(ConvBN1 (I)),
z from a multivariate standard normal distribution N (0, I), Z2 = σ(ConvBN2 (Z1 )),
which is represented by
 Z3 = MaxPool(Z2 ),
 f̃ = G(z), z ∼ N (0, I). (8) Z4 = R(Z3 ),
All synthetic features are assigned a unified label yunknown to Z5 = σ(ConvBN3 (Z4 )),
indicate their unknown or novel nature, and are transformed Z6 = MaxPool(Z5 ),
into grayscale images I = ψ(f̃) using the same preprocessing Z7 = σ(ConvBN4 (Z6 )),
pipeline. The final augmented training dataset is constructed
as Z8 = MaxPool(Z7 ),
 aug M
 Dtrain = DR ∪ (ψ(f̃ j ), yunknown ) j=1 . Z9 = R(Z8 ),
 ˚
 (9)
 aug Z10 = MaxPool(Z9 ), (12)
Here Dtrain denotes the augmented training dataset composed
of the retained data subset DR and M synthetic samples. where MaxPool(·) denotes the max pooling operation with
Recall that DR is the retained dataset excluding all forget kernel size 2 × 2.
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6349

 Finally, the output feature map Z10 is flattened into a feature where N ∈ RC×H×W is the learnable additive noise tensor
vector h ∈ Rdh and passed through a fully connected linear applied to all samples in DF , X ∈ RB×C×H×W is a batch
layer with weight matrix W ∈ RK×dh and bias vector b ∈ RK of input samples from DF with batch size B, y ∈ RB is
to produce the classification logits as the corresponding label vector, M(·) denotes the pretrained
 model with frozen weights, L(·, ·) is the cross-entropy loss
 o = Wh + b, (13)
 function, λ > 0 is the regularization coefficient controlling
where h is the flattened feature vector, dh is the dimension of noise magnitude, and k · kF denotes the Frobenius norm. The
the flattened features, K is the number of output classes (as negative loss term encourages the model to produce incorrect
defined in Section III-B), and o ∈ RK is the output logit vector predictions on noisy inputs, while the regularization term
corresponding to predicted class scores. This architecture bal- prevents excessive perturbation. The resulting model, referred
ances computational efficiency and expressive power, making to as the first teacher model T 1 , has undergone forgetting via
it well-suited for image-based intrusion detection tasks. additive noise and exhibits degraded performance on DF while
 UnResNet9 distinguishes itself through strategic design maintaining general performance on DR .
choices that balance computational efficiency with unlearn- To refine the unlearning process and reduce collateral daming effectiveness. We design UnResNet9 as a lightweight age to DR , we employ a knowledge distillation framework.
backbone specifically tailored for multi-teacher knowledge A second teacher model T 2 is constructed by fine-tuning the
distillation and selective forgetting in IIoT intrusion detec- original model exclusively on the retained dataset DR , defined
tion. The architecture employs only two residual blocks at as X
128 and 256 channels, reducing parameters by approximately T 2 = arg min L (M(x), y) , (15)
 M
60% compared to ResNet18, enabling efficient deploy- (x,y)∈DR
ment on resource-constrained IIoT edge devices. Importantly, where T 2 denotes the second teacher model obtained by fine-
UnResNet9’s architecture is specifically optimized for 28 × 28 tuning the original model exclusively on the retained dataset
grayscale traffic images rather than standard larger input sizes, DR . This produces a clean reference model that retains full
avoiding redundant feature extraction layers. Four strategically knowledge of DR with no exposure to DF .
placed MaxPool2d operations create information bottlenecks Finally, we train a student model S that simultaneously
that serve as isolation boundaries during forgetting, pre- learns from both teacher models using a multi-teacher knowlventing unintended information leakage between forgotten edge distillation loss. For an input x, the student attempts to
and retained classes. This lightweight design makes UnRes- match the softened output distributions of T 1 and T 2 :
Net9 more sensitive and responsive to noise-based forgetting
strategies, facilitating more effective class-specific unlearn- Ldistill = α · KL (S(x) k T 1 (x))
ing. Additionally, UnResNet9 returns intermediate activations +(1−α) · KL (S(x) k T 2 (x)) , (16)
{Z1 , Z2 , Z5 , Z7 } for multi-level supervision during knowledge
distillation, enabling complementary guidance at different where KL(·k·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence computed
abstraction levels. on temperature-scaled softmax outputs, α ∈ [0, 1] balances the
 influence between forgetting strength (T 1 ) and performance
 preservation (T 2 ), and S denotes the student model. The
C. Unlearning Model student S is trained only on DR , ensuring it mimics the
 Our objective in selective forgetting is to eliminate a desired behavior: poor performance on DF while maintaining
model’s predictive capability on a specific subset of data accuracy on the retained classes.
DF , which contains one or more target classes intended In summary, our framework provides a flexible and modular
for removal. Rather than retraining the entire model or approach to machine unlearning, combining noise injection
directly modifying model parameters—approaches that are with knowledge transfer to selectively erase learned knowledge
computationally expensive, risk catastrophic forgetting, and while retaining generalization capability. Moreover, it avoids
are impractical in real-world IIoT deployments—we adopt a retraining from scratch and ensures compliance with privacy
more efficient noise-based optimization approach. This method or removal requests in practical systems.
learns an additive noise tensor N that can be applied to
forget dataset samples without altering the model’s frozen D. Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation Model
parameters. This strategy offers significant advantages: it maintains the model’s core architecture and performance on retain To effectively integrate complementary knowledge, the studata DR , reduces computational cost by optimizing only a dent model S is trained under the joint guidance of two distinct
fixed-size tensor rather than millions of model parameters, teachers. Teacher T 1 is obtained by applying the learned noise
and naturally enables multi-teacher frameworks by generating N∗ to the original model’s predictions on forget data DF ,
diverse noise configurations. thereby achieving degraded performance on forgotten classes.
 When applied to inputs from the forget dataset DF , this Teacher T 2 is trained solely on the retained data DR to
noise causes the model to misclassify or reduce its confidence preserve important knowledge of retained classes.
 (T i )
on forgotten classes. Formally, the optimization problem for Let LKD be the distillation loss for teacher T i , which is
learning the optimal noise is defined as defined as
     
 (T i ) fS (x) fTi (x)
 N∗ = arg min −L (M(X + N), y) + λkNk2F , LKD = KL softmax , (17)
  
 (14) softmax
 N τ τ
6350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

where KL(·k·) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence measuring Algorithm 1 Multi-Teacher Knowledge Distillation for
the difference between the student’s and teacher’s output Machine Unlearning
distributions, fTi (x) and fS (x) are the logits (pre-softmax 1: Input: Base model M, retain data DR , forget data DF ,
outputs) for teacher T i and student S respectively, softmax(·) zero-day generator G(z);
is the softmax function, and τ > 0 is the temperature parameter 2: Output: Unlearned student model S;
that controls the smoothness of the output distributions. A 3: Phase 1: Data Preprocessing
higher temperature creates softer probability distributions, 4: for j ← 1 to M do
which facilitates the transfer of dark knowledge from teachers 5: Sample z ∼ N (0, I) or select strategy s ∈
to student. {Mutation, Adversarial};
 Let Lstudent be the overall training objective of the student 6: Generate f̃ j via Eq. (5), (6), or (7) with label yunknown ;
model, which integrates a standard supervised cross-entropy 7: Add (f̃ j , yunknown ) to dataset Daug via Eq. (9);
loss on the retained data with a weighted sum of the distillation 8: end for
losses from both teachers: 9: Phase 2: Unlearning Model Construction
 h i 10: Initialize T 1 and T 2 with M;
 Lstudent = LCE ( fS (x), y) + γ αL(T 1) (T 2 )
 KD + (1 − α)LKD , (18) 11: Optimize noise tensor N∗ on DF via Eq. (14);
where LCE (·, ·) is the cross-entropy loss calculated between 12: Update T 1 using DR ∪ (DF + N∗ );
the student’s predictions and the ground truth labels y on the 13: Update T 2 on DR via Eq. (15);
retained dataset DR , γ > 0 is a hyperparameter balancing the 14: Phase 3: Student Model Generation and Training
contribution of the distillation losses against the supervised 15: Initialize Student S;
loss, and α ∈ [0, 1] controls the relative influence of the 16: for batch (x, y) in DR do
forgetting teacher T 1 and the clean teacher T 2 . 17: Calculate logits fS (x), fT1 (x), fT2 (x);
 (T 1 )
 This multi-teacher distillation strategy enables the student 18: Compute KL divergence losses LKD and L(T 2)
 KD via Eq.
model to effectively suppress knowledge of the forgotten (17) with temperature τ;
classes by learning from T 1 , while maintaining strong perfor- 19: Compute combined student loss Lstudent via Eq. (18);
mance on retained classes by learning from T 2 . The rationale 20: Update S by minimizing Lstudent ;
is that T 1 provides explicit forgetting guidance through noise 21: end for
optimization, while T 2 trained only on retain data ensures 22: return S;
performance preservation. By distilling from both teachers
simultaneously, the student model learns two complementary objectives: active suppression of forget class knowledge single-class to multi-class forgetting regimes, thereby profrom T 1 and robust retention of performance from T 2 . This viding comprehensive coverage of realistic partial unlearning
dual-teacher approach transforms unlearning from passive scenarios. Specifically, Y1 validates the framework’s capabildata-driven forgetting into an actively supervised process with ity to precisely forget a single attack class while preserving
measurable forgetting signals. The following experiments suf- detection performance on all retained classes, representing a
ficiently demonstrate that dual-teacher distillation is necessary fundamental unlearning requirement. Y2 extends this to multifor achieving both effective unlearning and strong retention class unlearning, requiring the model to simultaneously forget
performance. knowledge of multiple classes while maintaining robust per-
 To show our MT-KD framework balancing machine formance on the remaining attack categories, thereby reflecting
unlearning and performance preservation, we present Algo- more complex real-world scenarios where multiple threats
rithm 1 including three phases: Data preprocessing, unlearning must be collectively removed. Together, these complementary
model construction, and student model generation and training. settings enable thorough evaluation of the MT-KD framework
 across different forgetting scales and validate its effectiveness
 V. E XPERIMENT in both single-threat and multi-threat unlearning scenarios
 commonly encountered in practical IIoT systems.
 We assess the proposed approach in a multi-teacher unlearn-
 To better reflect real IIoT conditions where attack patterns
ing setting across several neural architectures, with emphasis
 can shift and unknown threats appear, and to test robustness
on single- and multi-class forgetting for IIoT intrusion detecto zero-day and unseen attacks, we synthesize three types of
tion. Experiments are conducted on the CIC-IDS2017 and
 random attacks: mutations of known attacks, GAN-based sam-
USTC-TFC2016 dataset configured for IIoT scenarios, using
 ples, and randomly generated abnormal feature vectors. The
three representative backbones: AllCNN [41], UnResNet9, and
 perturbation magnitude η is set to 0.1–0.3 to keep variability
LeNet-32 [42].
 within a realistic range.
 To ensure fair comparison and facilitate reproducibility, we
A. Experimental Settings specify the key simulation parameters as follows: all three
 All experiments were run on a single NVIDIA RTX 4060 models are trained for 40 epochs using the Adam optimizer
GPU (8 GB). The base model was trained for 25 epochs with with learning rates of 0.01 for UnResNet9 and 0.1 for LeNet32
a batch size of 256. We evaluate two setups: Y1 forgets and AllCNN. Knowledge distillation parameters include tema single class (unknown), and Y2 forgets multiple classes perature parameter τ = 4.0, balance weight α = 0.7, and noise
(unknown, class 4, and class 5). These two configurations span regularization coefficient λ = 0.1.
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6351

 During the training of the original model, we used the Adam TABLE I
optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.01. When validation U NLEARNING R ESULTS ON CIC-IDS2017 DATASET
performance plateaued, the learning rate was reduced to help
convergence. For the noise-based forgetting model, we kept
the perturbation size moderate: the noise tensor N was clipped
to [0.1, 0.3]. This choice kept the retained set DR largely
unchanged while reliably disturbing the forget set DF .

B. Evaluation Metrics
 In prior studies, many metrics have been used to judge
the effectiveness of machine unlearning. A single overall
classification accuracy, however, is not suitable here because it
does not match the goal of forgetting. During unlearning, the
model is expected to lose the ability to recognize the forgotten TABLE II
classes, so their accuracy will drop by design. If we only look U NLEARNING R ESULTS ON USTC-TFC2016 DATASET
at overall accuracy, this drop can be hidden, and the real effect
of unlearning may be obscured.
 To address this, we use two metrics: Dr and Df. Dr is the
accuracy on the retained classes. These are the classes the
model should remember. Df is the accuracy on the forgotten
classes. These are the classes the model should not recognize.
 An ideal unlearning process drives the Df accuracy toward
zero, meaning the model no longer recognizes the forgotten
classes and instead misclassifies them. At the same time, the
Dr accuracy should stay close to that of the original model,
so performance on the retained classes is not harmed. This
balance between forgetting and retention is key to judging the
effectiveness and safety of unlearning methods.
 Additionally, to evaluate the privacy protection capability of packet-level attributes such as payload bytes, packet sizes, and
our unlearning approach, we employ Membership Inference inter-arrival times. This image representation is particularly
Attack (MIA) as a privacy-oriented metric. MIA attempts to suitable for IIoT environments where industrial protocols
determine whether specific data samples were used in the exhibit periodic communication patterns and structured byte
model’s training process. In the context of machine unlearning, sequences. Normal IIoT traffic manifests as recognizable
a successful unlearning method should make it difficult for visual patterns and textures in images, while attacks that
an attacker to infer the participation of forgotten data in disrupt protocol structure appear as irregular pixel distributions
the original training. We measure the attack success rate of and visual anomalies. This encoding allows CNNs to effec-
MIA on both the original model and the unlearned model. tively learn and distinguish IIoT-specific normal and malicious
A significant reduction in attack precision after unlearning communication patterns.
indicates that the influence of the target data has been effec- Further, we pad or crop each sample to a fixed 28 × 28
tively removed, thereby enhancing privacy protection. Lower shape and apply per-image normalization to stabilize training.
MIA success rates on the unlearned model demonstrate more To improve generalization, we apply standard augmentations
complete erasure of the forgotten data’s traces. such as random rotation, horizontal flip, light random crops,
 and brightness and contrast jitter. Finally, we create stratified
 train, validation, and test splits that preserve class ratios and
C. Data Processing
 reduce leakage by keeping flows from the same session in the
 In this work, we use CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 as same partition.
the main source of raw network traffic and process it with the
USTC-TK2016 toolkit. We build a preprocessing pipeline to
align the outputs with the CIC-IDS2017 classification scheme. D. Unlearning Performance Evaluation
First, we split the original PCAP files into flows using a slicing We conducted comprehensive experiments to test the multitool, turning long traces into small, manageable segments to teacher knowledge distillation unlearning method on multiple
ease feature extraction and later transformation. Then, we datasets, backbones, and forgetting settings. Tables I and II
remap and standardize the flow labels to the ten classes defined report results on CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016 for
by CIC-IDS2017, ensuring label consistency and compatibility single-class (Y1) and multi-class (Y2) forgetting.
across datasets. From Tables I and II, the baseline models perform
 To use image-based deep learning for IIoT intrusion detec- well, with CIC-IDS2017 reaching 0.94–0.99 accuracy and
tion, we convert each flow segment into a 28 × 28 grayscale USTC-TFC2016 reaching 0.87–0.94. Under the T 1 setting,
image through a mapping that encodes byte sequences and Dr usually changes by only 3–5% while Df reaches 0. For
6352 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 2. Detailed architecture of the MT-KD unlearning framework for IIoT intrusion detection scenarios.

example, in CIC-IDS2017 with Y1 on UnResNet9, Dr drops
by just 0.03.
 Although the T 1 model keeps accuracy above 87% in all
settings, noise-only forgetting cannot fully remove the effect
of the forgotten data. To address this, we use a multi-teacher
distillation setup that pairs T 1 with T 2 , where T 2 is trained
only on the retained set. This yields consistent accuracy
gains on both datasets. On CIC-IDS2017 (Y2–ALLCNN),
the student reaches 0.97, up from 0.96 for the original. On
USTC-TFC2016, Y2–UnResNet9 reaches 0.96, up from 0.94.
These results show that multi-teacher distillation reduces side
effects from noise-based training and keeps performance on
the retained classes high during forgetting.
 Compared with error-maximizing noise (EMN) [26], our
method delivers consistently better results across all tested
settings. On both CIC-IDS2017 and USTC-TFC2016, the Fig. 3. (a) Images generated by preprocessing CIC-IDS2017; (b) fake samples
student improves by roughly a few percentage points, with generated by randomly attacking original samples to simulate zero-day attacks.
the most noticeable gains in the single-class forgetting setup
and clear advantages preserved in multi-class cases. This trend
is stable across the different backbones we evaluated.
 Compared with EMN unlearning, our method needs slightly
more training time—about 10–15% extra in our runs—but it
consistently delivers higher accuracy on the retained classes.
This small compute premium is offset by better detection,
in particular by preserving key decision boundaries after Fig. 4. The Dr performance of the ALLCNN model is evaluated under
forgetting. Across both datasets, the evidence shows that different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right),
 respectively.
the time–accuracy trade-off clearly favors our approach. In
practical IIoT deployments, where accuracy and robustness
are critical to defend against evolving threats, this trade-off
is reasonable and beneficial.
 Fig. 4 illustrates the performance of the ALLCNN model
under our proposed unlearning method. The original model,
trained without any unlearning, already achieves excellent
performance with an accuracy of 90%. After 20 epochs of Fig. 5. The Dr performance of the LeNet32 model is evaluated under
training, both the T 1 and T 2 models show performance trends different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right),
converging toward that of the original model. Furthermore, respectively.
after 40 epochs of training, the student model achieves performance that is nearly identical to the original model. unlearning method. It is observed that the original model,
 Fig. 5 illustrates the trend of the Dr of the LeNet32 model without any unlearning intervention, consistently maintains a
over training epochs following the application of our proposed high and stable Dr, with accuracy close to 0.9; however, it
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6353

 TABLE III
 ATTACK P RECISION OF MIA ON U NLEARNED M ODELS

Fig. 6. The Dr performance of the UnResNet9 model is evaluated under
different attack intensities by setting the intensity to 0.1 (left) and 0.3 (right), robustness and real-world value for IIoT intrusion detection,
respectively.
 where models must adapt to evolving threats without full
 retraining.
performs approximately 9% worse in accuracy compared to
the ALLCNN model. During training, the performances of the F. Privacy Protection Evaluation via Membership Inference
T 1 and T 2 models gradually improve, approaching that of the Attacks
original model after around 20 epochs. By about 40 epochs,
the student’s Dr is close to that of the original model. At a Table III reports MIA precision [43] before and after
higher attack level of 0.3, performance dips early but recovers unlearning. The original model is highly exposed, with MIA
over training and ends near the baseline. In our runs, the curves precision at 89.3% on CIC-IDS2017 and 88.6% on USTCstay stable across the tested intensities. TFC2016, indicating strong privacy leakage. After applying
 Fig. 6 plots the Dr trajectory for UnResNet9. Compared our method, the T 1 model reduces attack precision to 52.2%
with the other two backbones, its curve is smoother and and 54.5%. Training only on T 2 lowers it further to 48.8% and
more stable, indicating a steadier optimization process and 50.7%, close to the 50% random-guess level. The final Student
better convergence. During the base training phase, UnRes- model offers the best protection, reaching 46.9% and 49.4%,
Net9 improves faster and reaches high accuracy in fewer a relative improvement of 47.5% and 44.2% over the original
epochs, which points to strong capacity and good general- model. At this near-random level, an adversary cannot reliably
ization. It also achieves the best accuracy overall, yielding distinguish training records, supporting the privacy gains of
more reliable detection. Taken together—higher accuracy and our framework.
quicker convergence—UnResNet9 is a strong choice for our To evaluate privacy during forgetting, we use two metrics:
unlearning framework. It adapts well to the forgetting steps Forgetting AUC and Retention AUC. Both are computed from
and remains robust under different attack intensities, consistent the ROC curve of an MIA. Forgetting AUC measures how
with our objectives. well an attacker can identify forgotten samples; when it is
 While the original models scored above 90% on Df, our close to 0.5, the attacker is no better than random guessing,
unlearning reduces this metric to 0. Across all three backbones, indicating good privacy. Retention AUC measures the privacy
the student models consistently forget the target classes. This of retained samples; values at 0.5 or below show that the attack
consistent drop of Df to zero supports the method’s effective- has been disrupted or even misled, offering stronger protection
ness and its ability to generalize across architectures. than simple data deletion.
 Figs. 8 and 9 present the comprehensive evaluation of
 the proposed unlearning framework across three neural net-
E. Prediction Distribution for the Forgotten Class work architectures on CIC–IDS2017 and USTC–TFC2016
 Fig. 7 compares predictions before and after applying datasets, respectively. The experimental results reveal distinct
our unlearning framework. In Fig. 7a, the original AllCNN dataset-dependent characteristics while validating the universal
predicts all classes well, including the class to be forgotten. effectiveness of the unlearning methodology.
After Y1 unlearning, the student in Fig. 7c assigns almost Fig. 8 shows that all three backbones push the Forgetting
no confidence to the forgotten class, and we do not observe AUC below 0.5 on CIC-IDS2017, which makes membership
confusion with other labels, which shows clean class-level inference close to random. AllCNN reaches about 0.48 within
forgetting. Fig. 7d reports results for UnResNet9 under Y2, 15–20 epochs (roughly 4% under the 0.5 line) while keeping
which forgets classes 4, 5, and unknown; the student no longer 85–90% validation accuracy. UnResNet9 is similar, settling
maps any samples from these classes to retained labels. This near 0.49 in the same epoch range with comparable accuracy.
pattern indicates that the model has removed not only the The smaller LeNet32 takes a bit longer (20–25 epochs) but
output responses but also the internal feature representations ends at 0.48–0.49 and holds 80–85% accuracy. These curves
linked to the forgotten classes. show steady unlearning with stable accuracy for all three
 In conclusion, the proposed framework reaches a practical models on this dataset.
balance between targeted forgetting and preservation of util- Fig. 9 show that all three architectures converge to a very
ity. Across datasets and backbones, it consistently removes similar forget AUC of about 0.49 on the USTC-TFC2016
class-specific attack knowledge, driving Df to zero, while dataset. While the final privacy level is comparable, the path to
maintaining high recognition on benign traffic and retained reach it shows clear trade-offs in speed and retained accuracy.
attack types. The strength of erasure is controllable through UnResNet9 in Fig. 9b is the fastest, reaching the target in
the forgetting and distillation weights, which allows tuning 15–20 epochs and keeping validation accuracy at 90–95%.
the trade-off to deployment needs. These results indicate AllCNN in Fig. 9a needs 20–25 epochs and holds 85–90%
6354 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 7. Comparison of the confusion matrices of UnResNet9 and AllCNN after applying the unlearning method.

Fig. 8. AUC comparison on CIC-IDS2017 dataset across three architectures. Fig. 9. AUC comparison on USTC-TFC2016 dataset across three
 architectures.

accuracy. LeNet32 in Fig. 9c takes 25–30 epochs and reaches models, while stronger backbones like UnResNet9 still offer
80–85% accuracy. This shared forget AUC suggests the traffic faster convergence and higher accuracy. In practice, this means
in USTC-TFC2016 sets a similar privacy floor for all three UnResNet9 is a good choice when time and accuracy matter
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6355

 justified by the significant improvement in model accuracy. In
 contrast, the EMN forgetting learning method achieves shorter
 training time, but the improvement in prediction performance
 is limited. Overall, this method offers an excellent balance
 between computational efficiency and accuracy improvement,
 and has outstanding practical value for industrial intrusion
 detection systems in the Internet of Things, both in terms of
 training cost and detection performance.

 H. Sensitivity Analysis of Key Parameter α
 To scientifically validate the optimal parameter α, we
 conducted a sensitivity analysis on CIC-IDS2017 using
 UnResNet9, evaluating the MT-KD framework across four α
 values: {0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9}. The results reveal that Dr exhibits
Fig. 10. Training time comparison.
 a clear optimum at α = 0.7 with 95.50% accuracy, outperforming α = 0.6, α = 0.8, and α = 0.9 with 94.4%,
most, whereas lighter models remain useful when compute or 94.9%, and 93.6%, respectively. This non-monotonic relationmemory is limited. ship demonstrates that α = 0.7 represents a carefully optimized
 Comparing Figs. 8 and 9 shows the same pattern: in all choice rather than an arbitrary selection. Critically, all α values
tested settings, the forget AUC reaches the 0.5 random-guess achieve 0.00% accuracy on D f , confirming that the duallevel or lower. Hitting this at-random mark means membership teacher distillation mechanism effectively enforces forgetting
inference attacks no longer work in practice, giving stronger regardless of parameter weighting. The superior retention
privacy than simple record deletion. The plots also suggest performance combined with complete forgetting at α = 0.7
a link between model size and unlearning speed: UnResNet9 validates that our parameter selection is data-driven and
reaches the target fastest on both datasets, achieving it in just theoretically justified: allocating 70% influence to the forget-
15 to 20 epochs, followed by AllCNN at 15 to 25 epochs, focused teacher T 1 and 30% to the retain-focused teacher T 2
with LeNet32 taking the longest at 20 to 30 epochs. This achieves optimal balance between knowledge preservation and
ordering holds across both Y1 and Y2 and is consistent with effective unlearning.
the accuracy trends reported above.
 Across both figure sets, the retain AUC stays stable near the I. Discussion
random-guess level of 0.51–0.52 in all settings. This shows
that the unlearning step focuses on the forgotten data without MT-KD framework employs a dual-teacher knowledge dishurting the privacy of retained samples. At the same time, tillation architecture. The dual-teacher configuration demonmodel utility remains strong: validation accuracy is high, with strates strong effectiveness for multi-class unlearning in IIoT
UnResNet9 at 85–95%, AllCNN at 85–90%, and LeNet32 at systems: the T 1 provides explicit forgetting guidance through
80–85%. Keeping retain AUC near random while preserving noise optimization, while the T 2 ensures robust performance
accuracy supports the practical value of our framework for preservation on retained classes. Experimental results confirm
IIoT intrusion detection. this effectiveness—the MT-KD framework achieves near-zero
 As shown in Figs. 8 and 9, the framework consistently accuracy on forget classes while maintaining high perfordrives the forget AUC to the random-guess range (about 0.5) mance on retained classes. The dataset used in the current
or lower across datasets and architectures. Combined with the experiments is relatively limited in scale, and the dual-teacher
preserved high validation accuracy, this supports its practical configuration is sufficient to meet experimental requirements.
use for privacy-preserving intrusion detection. We also observe Extensive evaluations across various neural network architeca clear robustness pattern: on USTC-TFC2016, all backbones tures demonstrate that the dual-teacher distillation strategy’s
converge to a similar forget AUC, while on CIC-IDS2017 the capability to prevent information leakage is robust and
outcome depends on the architecture (with faster convergence eneralizable.
for UnResNet9), indicating that the method adapts to different However, as dataset scales expand and real-world
traffic characteristics without sacrificing utility. deployment scenarios become more complex, multi-teacher
 frameworks are expected to demonstrate increasingly significant advantages in computational efficiency and unlearning
G. Training Time Comparison performance. Additional teachers could provide complemen-
 Fig. 10 presents an overall comparison of the training times tary perspectives on forgetting and retention, potentially
for the different methods. The original model requires a longer improving unlearning precision. The computational implicatraining time because it must be trained from scratch without tions are important: while current experiments show efficient
any prior knowledge. Compared to the EMN forgetting learn- training without operational overhead, increasing the number
ing method, the method proposed in this study appropriately of teachers would proportionally increase computational cost,
limits the increase in training time. This moderate cost is which must be carefully balanced against benefits, particularly
6356 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

for resource-constrained IIoT edge devices. Therefore, extend- [7] C.Sheng et al., “Network traffic fingerprinting for IIoT device idening the dual-teacher framework to multi-teacher configurations tification: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 5,
 pp. 3541–3554, May2025.
represents a promising direction for future research, where [8] M.Sharma, A.Tomar, and A.Hazra, “Edge computing for industry 5.0:
increased model complexity and dataset scales may unlock Fundamental, applications, and research challenges,” IEEE Internet
additional benefits while maintaining alignment with privacy Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19070–19093, Jun.2024.
 [9] J.Wang et al., “A zero-shot federated unlearning framework with
regulations and the right to be forgotten. stability verification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 12,
 pp. 2021–2035, Dec. 2025.
 [10] Y.Bao, J.Sun, X.Cheng, W.Qiu, and L.Nie, “Blockchain-based privacy-
 VI. C ONCLUSION preserving alternative credit data sharing,” IEEE Trans. Computat. Social
 Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–15, Feb.2026.
 We have proposed an MT-KD framework for privacy-aware [11] Y.Qu, X.Yuan, M.Ding, W.Ni, T.Rakotoarivelo, and D.Smith, “Learn to
machine unlearning in IIoT intrusion detection systems. By unlearn: Insights into machine unlearning,” Computer, vol. 57, no. 3,
converting network traffic into grayscale images and provid- pp. 79–90, Mar.2024.
 [12] J.Sun et al., “A tamper-resistant broadcasting scheme for secure coming a theoretical framework aligned with privacy regulations munication in Internet of Autonomous Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
including the right to be forgotten, our method addresses Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 2837–2846, Mar.2024.
critical challenges in stricter IIoT intrusion detection require- [13] Z.Ran, Y.Yao, W.Li, W.Yang, W.Li, and Y.Wu, “Precise defense
 approach against small-scale backdoor attacks in industrial Internet
ments. The dual-teacher architecture achieves complementary of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 5742–5754,
guidance through noise optimization and data preservation, Mar.2025.
demonstrating strong effectiveness in multi-class unlearning [14] Y.Lin et al., “Decentralized unlearning for trustworthy AI-generated
 content (AIGC) services,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 285–292,
tasks specific to IIoT. Training time comparisons confirm May2025.
efficient removal of targeted data influence without degrading [15] H.Kheddar, D. W.Dawoud, A. I.Awad, Y.Himeur, and M. K.Khan,
operational efficiency, making the method practical for edge “Reinforcement-learning-based intrusion detection in communication
 networks: A review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 4,
devices. Extensive evaluations across various neural network pp. 2420–2469, Aug.2025.
architectures demonstrate its capability to prevent information [16] M. M.Fouda, Z. M.Fadlullah, M. I.Ibrahem, and N.Kato, “Privacyleakage through rigorous privacy evaluation via membership preserving data-driven learning models for emerging communication
inference attacks. This work opens new directions for machine networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 2505–2542, Aug.2025.
unlearning in rigorous IIoT intrusion detection scenarios. [17] L.Porcelli, U.Fiore, and F.Palmieri, “Generative models with helical time
 Future work will follow a more structured and systematic encoding for seasonal time series forecasting,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
approach with concrete objectives. We plan to extend vol. 162, Dec.2025, Art. no. 112780.
 [18] N.Romandini, A.Mora, C.Mazzocca, R.Montanari, and P.Bellavista,
MT-KD to deeper network architectures including “Federated unlearning: A survey on methods, design guidelines, and
ResNet50/101, DenseNet121. Beyond empirical evaluation, evaluation metrics,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36,
we will establish rigorous quantitative metrics to measure no. 7, pp. 11697–11717, Jul.2025.
 [19] X.Wang, J.Zhang, C.Chen, J.He, Y.Ma, and X.Guan, “Trust-AoI-aware
unlearning efficacy and assess potential information leakage codesign of scheduling and control for edge-enabled IIoT systems,”
through membership inference attacks and model extraction IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2833–2842, Feb.2024.
attacks. We will also conduct critical analysis of the method’s [20] X.Li, C.Liu, S.Sun, Z.Zhou, Y.Zhang, and G.Li, “An efficient
 two-stage machine unlearning framework for poisoned specific
limitations, including performance under extreme forgetting emitter identification,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 17,
scenarios and computational cost-accuracy trade-offs. These pp. 36662–36673, Sep.2025.
efforts will provide verifiable guarantees on unlearning [21] J.Zhang, M.Zhao, Z.Wang, W.Su, and P.Wang, “Model recovery
 in federated unlearning with restricted server data resources,”
effectiveness and establish theoretical bounds on residual IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 17920–17935,
model information in large-scale IIoT environments. Jun.2025.
 [22] A.Zhang, P.Zhao, W.Lu, Y.Zhou, W.Zhang, and G.Zhang, “Mitigating
 poisoning attacks in federated learning through deep one-class
 R EFERENCES classification,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 12,
 pp. 545–558, Dec.2025.
[1] J.Sun et al., “Privacy-preserving fine-grained data sharing with dynamic [23] K.Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification based
 service for the cloud-edge IoT,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Com- on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
 put., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1329–1346, Mar.2025. pp. 17330–17340, May2024.
[2] S.Shen, L.Xie, Y.Zhang, G.Wu, H.Zhang, and S.Yu, “Joint differential [24] H.Hu, S.Wang, T.Dong, and M.Xue, “Learn what you want to unlearn:
 game and double deep Q-networks for suppressing malware spread Unlearning inversion attacks against machine unlearning,” in Proc.
 in industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), San Francisco, CA, USA, May 2024,
 vol. 18, pp. 5302–5315, Aug. 2023. pp. 3257–3275.
[3] X.Yang, W.Wang, T.Tian, and C.Wang, “Cryptanalysis and improvement [25] H.Sun, T.Zhu, W.Chang, and W.Zhou, “Generative adversarial networks
 of a blockchain-based certificateless signature for IIoT devices,” IEEE unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 5,
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1884–1894, Feb.2024. pp. 5303–5320, Sep.2025.
[4] S.Shen, C.Cai, Y.Shen, X.Wu, W.Ke, and S.Yu, “Joint mean-field [26] A. K.Tarun, V. S.Chundawat, M.Mandal, and M.Kankanhalli, “Fast yet
 game and multiagent asynchronous advantage actor-critic for edge effective machine unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst.,
 intelligence-based IoT malware propagation defense,” IEEE Trans. vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 13046–13055, Sep.2024.
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 3824–3838, Jul.2025. [27] W.Wang, C.Zhang, Z.Tian, and S.Yu, “FedU: Federated unlearning via
[5] Y.Shen, C.Shepherd, C. M.Ahmed, S.Shen, and S.Yu, “SGD3QN: Joint user-side influence approximation forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
 stochastic games and dueling double deep Q-networks for defending Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2550–2562, May2025.
 malware propagation in edge intelligence-enabled Internet of Things,” [28] V. S.Chundawat, A. K.Tarun, M.Mandal, and M.Kankanhalli, “Zero-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 6978–6990, Jun. 2024. shot machine unlearning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
[6] L.Cui, Y.Li, Y.Zhou, Y.Qu, and J.Liu, “Accelerating blockchain-enabled pp. 2345–2354, Apr. 2023.
 federated learning with clustered clients,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 11, [29] Y.Li, Z.Guo, N.Yang, H.Chen, D.Yuan, and W.Ding, “Threats and
 no. 5, pp. 2148–2161, Oct.2025. defenses in the federated learning life cycle: A comprehensive survey
SHEN et al.: MT-KD: MULTI-TEACHER KNOWLEDGE DISTILLATION FOR PRIVACY-AWARE UNLEARNING 6357

 and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 9, Yizhou Shen received the B.Sc. degree (Hons.) in
 pp. 15643–15663, Sep.2025. computer science from Cardiff University, Cardiff,
[30] J.Tang et al., “Toward general industrial intelligence: A survey of large U.K., in 2023. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 models as a service in industrial IoT,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., degree in computer science with Newcastle Univervol. 28, pp. 2054–2086, Jun.2026. sity, Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.
[31] Y.Shan, Y.Yao, X.Zhou, T.Zhao, B.Hu, and L.Wang, “CFL-IDS: An Her research interests include cyber security,
 effective clustered federated learning framework for industrial Internet game theory, deep reinforcement learning, edge
 of Things intrusion detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 6, intelligence, and the Internet of Things.
 pp. 10007–10019, Mar.2024.
[32] Y.Hu et al., “Industrial Internet of Things intelligence empowering smart
 manufacturing: A literature review,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 no. 11, pp. 19143–19167, Jun.2024.
[33] S.Yu et al., “Deep Q-network-based open-set intrusion detection solution
 for industrial Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7,
 pp. 12536–12550, Apr.2024. Jingnan Dong (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[34] Q.Zhang, L.Tang, T.Chin-Hon, T.Shi, J.Xuan, and C.Yu-Chao, “GCVIF: degree in computer science and technology from
 Pioneering explainable domain-shared representation learning for fault Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommusignal detection in multiple working states simultaneously,” IEEE Inter- nications, Chongqing, China, in 2023. He is an
 net Things J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2775–2789, Feb.2025. Associate Professor with the School of Information
[35] G.Wu et al., “Combining Lyapunov optimization with actor-critic net- Engineering, Huzhou University, Zhejiang, China.
 works for privacy-aware IIoT computation offloading,” IEEE Internet His research interests include blockchain technol-
 Things J., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 17437–17452, May2024. ogy, applied cryptography, network security, cloud
[36] F.Zhang, G.Han, L.Liu, Y.Zhang, Y.Peng, and C.Li, “Cooperative partial computing, and federated learning.
 task offloading and resource allocation for IIoT based on decentralized
 multiagent deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 5526–5544, Feb.2024.
[37] L.Wang, X.Zhang, H.Su, and J.Zhu, “A comprehensive survey of continual learning: Theory, method and application,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 5362–5383, Aug.2024.
[38] O.Aouedi et al., “A survey on intelligent Internet of Things: Applica- Wenlong Ke received the Ph.D. degree in infortions, security, privacy, and future directions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys mation and communication engineering from Guilin
 Tuts., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1238–1292, Apr.2025. University of Electronic Technology, Guilin, China,
[39] X.Jiang, F. R.Yu, T.Song, and V. C. M.Leung, “Resource allocation in 2021. He is a Lecturer with the School of Inforof video streaming over vehicular networks: A survey, some research mation Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou,
 issues and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 7, China. His current research interests include datpp. 5955–5975, Jul.2022. acenter networks, software-defined networks, and
[40] M.Adil, H.Song, S.Mastorakis, H.Abulkasim, A.Farouk, and Z.Jin, machine learning.
 “UAV-assisted IoT applications, cybersecurity threats, AI-enabled solutions, open challenges with future research directions,” IEEE Trans.
 Intell. Vehicles, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 4583–4605, Apr.2024.
[41] C.Mouand J.Zhang, “TransCL: Transformer makes strong and flexible
 compressive learning,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45,
 no. 4, pp. 5236–5251, Apr.2023.
[42] L.Luo, C.Zhang, H.Yu, G.Sun, S.Luo, and S.Dustdar, “Communication- Tian Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 efficient federated learning with adaptive aggregation for heterogeneous Ph.D. degree in computer science from the City
 client-edge-cloud network,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 17, University of Hong Kong in 2011. Currently, he is a
 no. 6, pp. 3241–3255, Nov.2024. Professor with the Institute of Artificial Intelligence
[43] H.Chen et al., “Practical membership inference attack against collabo- and Future Networks, Beijing Normal University. He
 rative inference in industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, has 27 patents and has published more than 200
 no. 1, pp. 477–487, Jan.2022. papers in high-level journals and conferences. He
 has more than 14 000 citations, according to Google
 Scholar. His H-index is 68. His research interests
 include the Internet of Things, edge computing, and
 Shigen Shen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the mobile computing.
 Ph.D. degree in pattern recognition and intelligent
 systems from Donghua University, Shanghai, China,
 in 2013.
 He is a Professor with the School of Information
 Engineering, Huzhou University, Huzhou, China. He
 has published more than 100 technical papers. His Ruidong Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 current research interests include the Internet of Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer
 Things, cyber security, edge computing, and game Science, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan,
 theory. in 2008. His research interests include big data,
 quantum networks, metaverse, future networks, and
 the IoT.
 He was a recipient of the Best Paper Awards for
 IEEE ICC 2022 and IWCMC 2022 and the IEEE
 Jiashuo Niu received the B.Eng. degree in the Inter- Network 2022 Editor Appreciation Award. He serves
 net of Things engineering in 2024. He is currently as the Vice Chair for the IEEE Internet Technical
 pursuing the M.S. degree in computer technology Committee (ITC). He served as the Chair for several
 with the School of Information Engineering, Huzhou conferences, such as the General Chair for MOBILWare 2022, IEEE MSN
 University, Huzhou, China. His research interests 2021, and CPSCom 2021; the Area TPC Chair for INFOCOM 2023; and
 include machine unlearning, intrusion detection, and the TPC Chair for ICNC 2024, IEEE MetaCom 2023, HotICN 2022, IWQoS
 Industrial Internet of Things security. 2021, and MSN 2020. He also serves on several prestigious editorial boards,
 including IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS, IEEE T RANS -
 ACTIONS ON C OGNITIVE C OMMUNICATIONS AND N ETWORKING , IEEE
 N ETWORK, and IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL.