3988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

Multi-Agent Federated Edge Learning for UAV-IDS
 in Smart City IoT Environment
 Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah , Senior Member, IEEE, Shakila Basheer , Muhammad Ehsan ,
 and Ala Saleh Alluhaidan

 Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have become inte- because of their mobility, the ability to deploy flexibly, and
gral to modern consumer electronics (CE) ecosystem-based smart cover a wide area [1].
city infrastructures, providing dynamic connectivity, environmen- In the context of this study’s scenario as illustrated in
tal monitoring, and situational awareness through distributed
consumer Internet of Things (IoT) networks. However, their Fig. 1, the UAV-assisted smart city network comprises
reliance on wireless communication links exposes them to a UAVs equipped with cameras and environmental sensors
wide range of cyber and physical-layer attacks, demanding that communicate with CE edge nodes, such as wearable
intelligent yet lightweight defense mechanisms. This paper health monitors, smartwatches, and residential gateways,
presents a Multi-Agent Federated Edge Intrusion Detection System via secure wireless links. The collected data are relayed to
(UAV-IDS) designed to ensure privacy-preserving, real-time protection for UAV-enabled smart city IoT environments. The the smart city control center through a direct data channel,
proposed framework integrates a hybrid Autoencoder–LSTM while anomalous events trigger immediate alerts for mission
architecture deployed across edge nodes, where multiple intelli- adaptation and intrusion analysis. This makes UAV-assisted
gent agents collaboratively perform feature extraction, anomaly systems increasingly integral to next generation Smart City
detection, and policy adaptation. A UAV-based coordinator man- IoT ecosystems [2].
ages federated learning rounds, aggregating model updates from
distributed edge nodes without sharing raw data. Extensive However, the adoption of UAVs introduces significant secuexperiments conducted on the T-ITS dataset demonstrate that rity challenges, especially at the wireless physical and network
the proposed system achieves 99.44% accuracy, 99.31% pre- communication layers. Communication links between UAVs,
cision, and a 46.8 ms average detection latency, outperforming IoT devices, and ground infrastructure are vulnerable to jamexisting deep and federated IDS frameworks. Moreover, the ming, spoofing, replay manipulation, route hijacking, botnet
lightweight deployment (8.42 MB) and low communication cost
confirm the feasibility of the proposed design for embedded UAV infiltration, and malicious telemetry modification attacks [3].
operations. The results validate the framework’s potential as When compromised, the adversaries can manipulate sensor
an adaptive, scalable, and privacy-conscious solution for next- readings, confuse navigation paths, or intercept surveillance
generation smart city security infrastructures. streams, which can directly compromise the safety of people
 Index Terms—IDS, UAV, agentic AI, federated learning, cyber- and essential city functions. Thus, it is necessary to design
physical security. a powerful and smart Intrusion Detection System (IDS) that
 I. I NTRODUCTION will be able to detect cyber-physical anomalies in UAV-IoT
 networks.

T HE intensive use of interconnected consumer IoT
 devices, intelligent sensing infrastructures, and datadriven decision systems enables the rapid development of
 Conventional IDS systems do not work well in UAV-based
 smart cities due to a number of reasons. The network topology
 is very dynamic because the UAV mobility and heterogeneous
smart cities when applied to traffic monitoring, environmental
 IoT connectivity complicates the modeling of traffic patterns
quality evaluation, and emergency response and the
 with the help of the fixed detection schemes. In addition, UAVs
management of public safety. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
 and edge nodes possess limited processing and energy capa-
(UAVs) have emerged as one of the enabling technologies
 bilities, which limit the use of computationally expensive IDS
 Received 15 December 2025; revised 19 January 2026; accepted models. Lastly, centralized data collection is a privacy threat
19 February 2026. Date of publication 23 February 2026; date of cur- and a heavy communication overhead in case of aggregating
rent version 2 June 2026. This work was supported by the Deanship of data across city zones. These limitations render traditional IDS
Scientific Research and Libraries in Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University through the Supporting Publication in Top-Impact Journals Initiative solutions inadequate to real-time, scalable UAV-IoT security.
(SPTIF–2026). (Corresponding author: Shakila Basheer.) To overcome these issues, this paper suggests a Multi-
 Hafiz Muhammad Attaullah is with the Faculty of Computing and Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS, in which several autonomous
Informatics, Multimedia University, Cyberjaya 63100, Malaysia (e-mail:
attaullah@ieee.org). detection agents are deployed at distributed edge nodes as
 Shakila Basheer and Ala Saleh Alluhaidan are with the Department of part of a broader consumer electronics, and UAVs coordinate
Information Systems, College of Computer and Information Science, Princess the model aggregation across regions without exchanging raw
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, P.O. BOX 84428, Riyadh 11671,
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: sbbasheer@pnu.edu.sa; ASALiuhaidan@pnu.edu.sa). data. Federated learning provides privacy of the data, edge
 Muhammad Ehsan is with the Centre of AI and Cyber Security, ICT Global, computing reduces latency, and the multi-agent paradigm facil-
Cyberjaya 63000, Malaysia (e-mail: m.ehsanbhutto@gmail.com). itates dedicated detection roles, enhancing detection accuracy
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCE.2026.3667039, provided by the authors. and flexibility to changing threats in real-time smart city
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2026.3667039 tasks.
 1558-4127 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS 3989

 may hamper the execution of the missions and interfere
 with safety. The available studies have been on how to
 enhance the reliability of communication, trajectory as well
 as coverage optimization such as MILP-based multi-mission
 UAV coordination [4], genetic optimization models of stable
 UAV navigation in urban airflows [6] as well as edge-driven
 perception frameworks of UAV surveillance imagery [6].
 Although these approaches increase the quality of the work
 of UAVs, they are mainly aimed at efficiency and control, not
 security and threat resistance.
 IDS are still a critical part of protecting the UAV networks
 against network-layer threats, including DoS, botnet traffic,
 spoofing, and manipulation of adversarial routing. Long Short-
 Term Memory (LSTM)-driven anomaly detector (IDS) based
 on deep learning [10], intrusion detectors using GNNS in case
 of IoT clusters [11], and distributed cooperative CNN-based
Fig. 1. System architecture of UAV-assisted multi-agent Fed-Edge IDS in UAV-IDS [14] have promising detection rates. Nonetheless,
Smart City Consumer IoT environment. such IDS models usually presuppose centralized availability
 of data, can be computationally intensive due to the nature
 of the UAV hardware, or cannot be adjusted to changing
 The major contributions of the work are as follows:
 threats. Federated learning has become a high contender to
 • A multi-agent IDS is designed for UAV-enabled Smart UAV security since it does not presuppose the exchange of raw
 City IoT networks to perform traffic analysis and attack data between the urban zones. Distributed model refinement
 detection at the edge. is made possible by Federated Resource Management of
 • A federated edge learning approach is used to train UAV-enabled agriculture [12], gradient-clipped UAV-IDS
 IDS models across regions without sharing raw data, through weighted aggregation [13], and federated GNN optipreserving privacy. mization of IoT monitoring. Nevertheless, these architectures
 • UAVs act as model aggregators, collecting and distribut- typically make use of single-agent learning models, which
 ing model updates efficiently among edge nodes. result in slow contextual reasoning, slow adaptation, and poor
 • A low-latency intrusion response mechanism enables responses in dynamic threat environments.
 quick threat isolation and alerting in real-time. Recent UAV-based intrusion detection advancements have
 • Evaluation results show improved detection accuracy, explored diverse deep learning and optimization strategies
 reduced communication overhead, and better adaptability to enhance detection accuracy and adaptability. DRL-BWO
 to new attacks. [17] demonstrated by reinforcement learning techniques like
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: DRL-BWO is shown to be highly efficient in detecting
 Section II reviews related work in UAV security, federated attacks based on behavior-weighted optimization of traffic
learning, and intelligent IDS systems. Section III presents the flows on UAV, whereas multi-channel deep neural models like
proposed Multi-Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS architecture MC-DNN [18] can be used to extract RF-signal features
and operational workflow. Section IV describes the dataset, that can detect the UAV. Cooperative IDS frameworks based
preprocessing, model training process, and evaluation metrics. on CNN, like FFCNN [14] enhance the security of swarm
Section V provides experimental results and performance communication of UAVs by detecting cooperatively. On the
analysis. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and outlines same note, AMOA-DLID [19] uses adaptive metaheuristic
future research directions. tuning in UAV based IoT settings to optimize accuracy and
 recall.
 II. R ELATED W ORK Classical monitored schemes, like the SVM-based hierar-
 The recent developments on the Smart City infrastructures chical IDS schemes [20], offer baseline anomaly detection but
have increasingly incorporated the UAV-assisted communica- are not scalable or distributed intelligence to large-scale smart
tion and sensing systems to aid applications. UAVs have very city UAV networks.
high mobility, line of sight and can be easily deployed, which In summary of the results in Table I, the literature provides
makes its presence valuable in large scale IoT. The benefits, useful contributions to UAV communication, authentication,
however, come with a number of security threats on the layers and intrusion detection in smart city settings. Nevertheless,
of wireless communication channels and network operations there are three major limitations:
that would demand effective lightweight defense mechanisms. • Most solutions rely on centralized or single-agent learn-
 UAVs are based on wireless communication as a means ing, which limits adaptability under dynamic UAV
of telemetry, control indication, and payload exchange mobility and heterogeneous IoT connectivity.
with ground IoT networks and edge controllers. These • Federated UAV security schemes often incur high comwireless networks are susceptible to jamming, spoofing, munication latency and depend on dense edge node
signal manipulation, channel interference and routing, which availability for effective collaboration.
3990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF UAV-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION W ITH C OMMUNICATION O PTIMIZATION S TUDIES FOR S MART C ITY I OT

 • Existing UAV-IDS approaches generally lack collabo- before forwarding outputs to the UAV aggregator. UAVs serve
 rative, context-aware multi-agent intelligence, which is as mobile aggregators that periodically collect local model
 essential for real-time threat interpretation and rapid intru- weights from these edges and perform global model fusion.
 sion response. Let Xi ∈ Rm× f represent the local dataset of node Ei , where
 Unlike single-agent FL-IDS approaches that process data m denotes the number of samples and f the feature dimension.
monolithically, the proposed multi-agent pipeline enables par- The local feature matrix after normalization is expressed as
allel extraction of PHY-level and temporal features, reducing Xi − µi
decision latency and improving class-level separability. These X̃i = , (1)
 σi
limitations motivate the development of the proposed Multi-
Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS framework, which enables Each edge node trains its local intrusion detection model
distributed intelligence, privacy-preserving model training, and fi (·; Wi ) on X̂i with parameters Wi , minimizing the local loss
low-latency anomaly response for large-scale Smart City con- Li (Wi ) defined as
sumer IoT networks. 1 X
 Li (Wi ) = L( fi (x; Wi ), y), (2)
 |Bi |
 (x,y)∈Bi
 III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
 where L(·) denotes the cross-entropy loss and Bi represents a
 The proposed Multi-Agent Federated Edge UAV-IDS framemini-batch of training samples.
work aims to provide intelligent, distributed, and privacy-
 At each edge node, multiple agents operate collaboratively,
preserving intrusion detection across UAV-assisted smart city
 forming a cooperative intelligence layer. These components
IoT environments. The complete system workflow is illustrated
 exhibit agentic AI capabilities by autonomously adapting
in Fig. 2, and comprises five core phases, ranging from data
 detection thresholds locally based on environmental feedpreprocessing and hybrid model construction to federated
 back. The traffic analysis agent extracts key raw telemetry,
aggregation and intrusion response. This section details each
 specifically Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) and
phase along with its mathematical formulation.
 Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), from incoming flows:
 Firstly, the smart city IoT environment is partitioned into
N regional clusters, each containing a set of CE-driven IoT φt = {prate , RS S I, S NR, ttl, len, f lag}.
devices (e.g., personal wearables and smart home sensors)
Di = {di1 , di2 , . . . , din } connected to an edge node Ei . Each edge These 6 primary streams are expanded via statistical windownode hosts a multi-agent IDS comprising four autonomous ing (calculating mean, variance, and jitter) into a comprehenagents: traffic analysis, anomaly detection, threat classifica- sive 53-dimensional feature vector to capture temporal flow
tion, and policy adaptation. These agents follow a sequential dynamics. These features are fed into the anomaly detection
workflow: the Traffic Agent filters inputs, the Detection Agent agent built upon a hybrid CNN–GRU encoder Fθ that captures
performs inference, and the Policy Agent adjusts sensitivity both spatial and temporal dependencies. The encoded latent
ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS 3991

Fig. 2. Overall workflow of the proposed framework.

representation zt is computed via the GRU encoder, utilizing Algorithm 1 Multi-Agent Federated Edge IDS Training
Tanh activations for temporal state regulation. Require: Dataset partitions {D1 , . . . , DN }, UAV aggregator A,
 The anomaly score for a sample xt is derived using a learning rate η, rounds R
 (0) (0)
reconstruction-based error function 0: Initialize local weights Wi and global weights WG
 0: for r = 1 to R do
 A(xt ) = kxt − x̂t k22 , (3) 0: for each edge node Ei in parallel do
where x̂t is the reconstructed input from the decoder. A 0: Train local IDS agents on Di
detection threshold τ dynamically updates through the policy 0: Update weights: Wi(r) = Wi(r−1) − η∇Li (Wi(r−1) )
adaptation agent as 0: end for
 UAV aggregates: WG(r) = i P|D|D i|
 Wi(r)
 P
 0:
 j|
 τt+1 = ατt + (1 − α) A(xt ), (4) j

 0: UAV broadcasts global weights WG(r) to all Ei
with α being the smoothing factor (0 < α < 1). Any A(xt ) > 0: end for
τt+1 is flagged as an intrusion. 0: return Final optimized global model WG(R)
 Crucially, this threshold adapts independently for each client
using local reliability weights (wi ). This allows heterogeneous
nodes with varying link qualities to contribute proportionally control agent, ensuring secure parameter transfer and adaptive
without destabilizing the global model. synchronization between distributed IDS agents.
 After local training, the UAV coordinates the federated Once an intrusion is detected, the UAV triggers an alert to
update among N edge nodes. Each node transmits only its the GCS through a secure control link. The GCS coordinates
model weights Wi to the UAV aggregator, preserving data with the Smart City Control Center to isolate compromised IoT
privacy. The global weight update WG(r+1) at round r+1 follows clusters and initiate countermeasures such as route reconfigthe standard Federated Averaging rule: uration, traffic rerouting, or UAV redeployment for localized
 N verification. The adaptive feedback loop ensures continuous
 X |Di |
 WG(r+1) = PN Wi(r) . (5) learning and improvement across future federated training
 i=1 j=1 |D j | rounds.
 The communication overhead per federated round is pro-
The UAV then disseminates WG(r+1) back to all edge nodes portional to the aggregated model size S and number of
for the next training iteration. The convergence of the global participating nodes N. The total UAV bandwidth consumption
model is defined when B can be approximated as
 kWG(r+1) − WG(r) k2 < , (6) B = 2S Nr , (8)
where  is a small threshold denoting stable convergence. where the factor of 2 accounts for both upload and download
 The complete training objective combines the local anomaly transmissions and Nr denotes the average active edge nodes per
loss, global federated aggregation consistency, and an adver- round. The computational complexity for each edge training
sarial regularization term Radv to enhance model robustness: cycle is O(m f h), where h is the number of hidden units in the
 N
 X encoder–decoder layers. The proposed design thus balances
 J = ωi Li (Wi ) + λ1 kWi − WG k22 + λ2 Radv , (7) detection performance with lightweight deployability across
 i=1 UAV-assisted edge infrastructures.
where ωi is the weighting coefficient proportional to dataset
size, and λ1 , λ2 are regularization constants. IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
 The overall UAV-coordinated federated edge learning work- All experiments were conducted using a hybrid simulationflow is summarized in Algorithm 1. The UAV serves as a emulation setup representing a smart city UAV network under
3992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

realistic network variability (see Fig. S2 in Supplementary TABLE II
Material). The environment includes multiple edge nodes H YPERPARAMETER C ONFIGURATION FOR P ROPOSED M ODEL
connected to UAVs acting as federated aggregators and a
virtual GCS managing telemetry and coordination. The software implementation was developed in Python 3.11 using
PyTorch 2.2 and Scikit-learn libraries. For a detailed
breakdown of the federated execution metrics, including global
versus local accuracy gains and operational efficiency parameters, please refer to Table S1 in the Supplementary Material.
 The local training of multi-agent IDS models was executed on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core
i7-12700K (3.6 GHz), 32 GB RAM, and an NVIDIA
RTX 3080 GPU (4 GB VRAM).
 Federated rounds were coordinated by an asynchronous
UAV coordinator that operated at every communication cycle
of 5 s/edge node, which simulates real-time coordination
between distributed clusters of IoT. Each client trained on a
non-IID local data partition, and the global model was updated
over twelve communication rounds using the weighted FedAvg
routine. The global model aggregation and synchronization
was implemented through the FedAvg procedure as outlined
in Section III.
 The proposed UAV-IDS was tested on the publicly available
UAV-IDS dataset (commonly cited as T-ITS [21]), which is a
collection of cyber and physical telemetry of unmanned aerial
vehicles in benign and adversarial conditions. The dataset
includes four large categories of cyber-attacks, such as De- between detection accuracy, convergence stability, and comauthentication DoS, Replay, False Data Injection (FDI), and putational cost. Table II summarizes the selected hyperparam-
Evil-Twin, and normal flight traces. Every sample is a com- eters and federated training setup used during experimentation.
bination of network-level characteristics (e.g., packet length, The model integrates a 4-layer autoencoder for feature
inter-arrival time, TCP flags) and physical-layer characteristics reconstruction and compression, followed by an LSTM
(e.g., altitude, velocity, roll, and pitch). module with 128 recurrent units for temporal feature learn-
 To train, the dataset was preprocessed with the removal of ing. A dense fusion layer with 256 neurons combines the
missing values, z-score scaling of continuous variables, and autoencoder’s latent representation and the temporal states,
minority attack classes balanced with the SMOTE algorithm. producing a unified embedding for anomaly detection. ReLU
The feature set is combined with a set of attributes that have and Tanh activations were adopted to ensure stable gradient
been selected using correlation-based selection and has a total propagation. Specifically, ReLU is used for sparse encoding to
of 53 attributes. Stratified 5-fold cross-validation was used to mitigate vanishing gradients, while Tanh is employed in LSTM
ensure robustness. Within each fold, the data was partitioned cells to regulate information flow within the [−1, 1] range. To
into a 70% training, 15% validation, and 15% testing ratio to prevent overfitting, a dropout rate of 0.2 and L2 regularization
provide a fair comparison and resistance to overfitting. The (1 × 10−5 ) were applied.
cities were partitioned independently (edge node) to simulate The local model training was conducted on each edge
non-IID data distribution in federated environments. node with AdamW optimizer and learning rate of 1.5 × 10−4
 The effectiveness of the proposed model was assessed using and the UAV aggregator updated the global model with the
standard classification metrics derived from the confusion weighted FedAvg rule with a federated rate of 1.0 × 10−4 .
matrix, including Accuracy (ACC), Precision (PR), Recall The local clients were trained on 50 epochs per round, and
(RE), and the F1-score (F1) along with true positives, true 12 aggregation cycles. The batch size was set to 64 samples,
negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respectively. and sequences were cut to 10 timesteps per feature stream to
Additionally, the Area Under the Receiver Operating Char- obtain short-term traffic dynamics.
acteristic (AUROC) and Matthews Correlation Coefficient The federated learning system consisted of five edge clients
(MCC) were computed to measure robustness under class and a UAV aggregator. Edge nodes were proportionally
imbalance. updated based on their dataset size and link reliability (wi ).
 The overall model performance was compared against base- Privacy was ensured through encrypted gradient exchange
line IDS methods that discussed in the literature to demonstrate with masking. In the inference phase, the IDS sensitivity was
the advantages of the proposed multi-agent federated approach controlled by adaptive thresholding on a 50-sample sliding
in terms of accuracy, latency, and communication cost. window, and a dynamic coefficient, k = 1.4, was used to
 Further, the proposed model was fine-tuned through exten- balance the recall of detections. The SHAP (SHapley Addisive parameter exploration to achieve an optimal balance tive exPlanations) analysis and reconstruction-error attribution
ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS 3993

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE VALIDATION OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL P REDICTED V S . ACTUAL M ATRIX FOR AE–LSTM
 F EDERATED UAV-IDS

were used to explain the model, and the final student model
was exported to TensorFlow Lite.

 V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 This section presents the evaluation of the proposed
UAV-IDS framework. The results are compared based on
intrusion detection performance, computational efficiency, Fig. 3. Validation Accuracy and Loss Convergence per Epoch over 50
communication overhead, and model interpretability. Training Epochs.
 Table III summarizes the overall performance of the proposed hybrid AE-LSTM model. The model demonstrated an
extremely high accuracy of 99.44 percent, which proves that stability measure of the consistency of the temporal prediction
the learned federated representations are effective in captur- indicates that the model maintains consistent decision confiing both cyber and physical-layer attack characteristics in dence over several rounds of federated learning.
UAV-IoT traffic. The accuracy of 99.31 percent means that Table IV shows the confusion matrix of five traffic classes.
the model generates minimal false alarms, which is essential The high diagonal values indicate high classification accuracy
in UAV settings where unjustified countermeasures can cause with a low overlap between categories. Benign and DoS
mission disruption or energy wastage. Equally, a recall rate samples were identified with almost perfect accuracy, and there
of 99.27% indicates that the framework has a high capability was a slight confusion between Replay and Evil Twin attacks
of detecting various attack events accurately, and thus, very because of the similarity in the transmission pattern (see Fig.
few intrusions are not detected. Moreover, The corresponding S1 in Supplementary Material for detailed class-wise error
F1-score of 99.28 percent indicates a balanced trade-off analysis). The FDI class was also recognized at more than 99%
between sensitivity and reliability in all classes. The high indicating that the model is capable of capturing minor data-
ROC-AUC of 99.71% is also another indicator that the clas- signal inconsistencies. In general, the suggested framework
sifier has a high discrimination ability at different decision is stable and reliable in detecting various types of UAV-IoT
thresholds. attacks.
 The Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC = 0.992) and Further, Fig. 3 shows the validation accuracy and loss
Cohen Kappa (0.989) show that there is a strong linear convergence of the model during 50 training epochs. The accurelationship between predicted and actual labels, and that there racy curve indicates a gradual increase in accuracy between
is consistency in performance between heterogeneous UAV 86% and 99.44%, whereas the validation loss reduces rapidly
data partitions. between 0.48 and 0.03, which indicates rapid and consistent
 This stability is also supported by error-based metrics. The convergence. Both metrics are level after about 30 epochs,
model had a very low False Positive Rate (0.34%), and False which means that learning is successful and there is not much
Negative Rate (0.21%), which indicates high robustness even overfitting.
in dynamic network conditions and non-IID distributions. The And, Fig. 4 shows the convergence behavior of the fedmean detection latency of 46.8 ms per sample indicates that the erated learning process with the FedAdam optimizer in 12
system can be used in near real-time, which meets the timing aggregation rounds. The validation accuracy of all edge nodes
requirements of UAV communication and edge inference. is steadily increasing, reaching about 94% and then above
Regression-based indicators such as the Mean Squared Error 99%. The global UAV model is always better than single
(0.0063) and R2 score (0.992) confirm the high stability of clients with the highest accuracy of 99.42%, which is the
prediction and low reconstruction loss in the autoencoder part. advantage of aggregating parameters and learning together.
Finally, the Prediction Deviation Index (0.015), which is a The small distance between client curves implies that there
3994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 2, MAY 2026

 TABLE V
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE AND L IGHTWEIGHT C APACITY M ETRICS OF THE
 P ROPOSED M ODEL

Fig. 4. FL Convergence under FedAdam Optimization across 12 Federated
Aggregation Rounds.

Fig. 5. Explainable AI (SHAP) Analysis on T-ITS Dataset.
 Fig. 6. Comparison of the proposed framework with baseline IDS models
 from recent studies across performance metrics.
is a stable synchronization and the non-IID effect is minimal,
which proves that the FedAdam-based aggregation provides
quick and accurate convergence in the framework. convergence. During inference, the model achieves a low
 The Explainable AI (SHAP) feature impact analysis of the latency of 46.8 ms per sample with a throughput of 126.7 samproposed model on the T-ITS dataset is shown in Fig. 5. ples per second, enabling real-time intrusion detection. The
 The top contributing attributes include ip.ttl_x, GPU memory utilization remains modest at 512 MB, and the
tcp.window_size_x, and wlan.fc.subtype_x, energy consumption per inference is only 1.32 J, confirming
which strongly influence anomaly classification its efficiency for embedded platforms. A granular componentdecisions. Regarding directionality, high values of wise breakdown of this energy profile, which identifies the
tcp.window_size_x generally correlate with benign Fusion Layer as the primary consumer, is illustrated in
control traffic, whereas sudden drops in Signal Strength (RSSI) Fig. S3 of the Supplementary Material.
increase the likelihood of physical-layer intrusion predictions. An edge-deployed ONNX version occupies just 9.1 MB,
The increase in SHAP values shows that changes in these with an average CPU load of 73.5% and minimal commuparameters have a significant influence on the output of the nication overhead of 214.5 KB per round. This significant
model, especially in the detection of replay and FDI attacks. reduction from the full model size (8.42 MB) is achieved by
 Physical-layer features such as udp.length_x and transmitting only masked, high-magnitude gradient updates
wlan.duration_x also show notable contribution, which rather than the complete weight matrix, optimizing bandwidth
highlights that network and PHY-level indicators are both for constrained UAV links. Consequently, the high Energy
significant in defining UAV intrusion patterns. Overall, the Efficiency Index (0.984) indicates that the framework delivers
SHAP analysis proves that the proposed IDS is not only a strong balance between performance, power, and resource
accurate but also interpretable, providing clear information utilization, validating its feasibility for continuous UAV-based
about what traffic and signal features contribute to its detection smart city operations. These lightweight metrics ensure that
results. the proposed IDS can run efficiently on consumer electronic
 Table V summarizes the performance and lightweight capac- devices such as smart gateways, CE-grade UAV controllers,
ity metrics, the model maintains a compact footprint of and embedded Wi-Fi sensing modules.
8.42 MB with approximately 1.26 million trainable parameters, And finally Fig. 6 compares the performance of the
making it suitable for UAV and edge deployment. Each edge proposed UAV-IDS framework with several recent intrunode requires about 37.5 minutes of local training per cycle, sion detection approaches, including SVM, AMOA-DLID,
followed by 12 global aggregation rounds, resulting in stable FFCNN, MC-DNN, and DRL-BWO models. The proposed
ATTAULLAH et al.: MULTI-AGENT FEDERATED EDGE LEARNING FOR UAV-IDS 3995

AE-LSTM-based federated IDS is better than the current [2] X. Chen et al., “Vehicle as a service (VaaS): Leverage vehicles
baselines in all key evaluation metrics, including accuracy, to build service networks and capabilities for smart cities,” IEEE
 Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 2048–2081, 3rd Quart.,
precision, recall, and F1-score, with 99.44% and 99.28% 2024.
respectively. Although traditional models like SVM and [3] S. Racherla, P. Sripathi, N. Faruqui, M. Alamgir Kabir, M. Whaiduz-
AMOA-DLID demonstrate moderate performance, federated zaman, and S. Aziz Shah, “Deep-IDS: A real-time intrusion detector for IoT nodes using deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
deep architectures (MC-DNN and DRL-BWO) demonstrate pp. 63584–63597, 2024.
competitive performance, yet they are still inferior in terms [4] N. R. Zema, E. Natalizio, L. Di Puglia Pugliese, and F. Guerriero,
of precision and recall. The high performance of the proposed “3D trajectory optimization for multimission UAVs in smart city
 scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1–11,
model is due to its multi-agent learning approach and adaptive Jan. 2024.
federated training, which improves the feature representation [5] P. Du, Y. Shi, H. Cao, S. Garg, M. Alrashoud, and P. K. Shukla,
and reduces overfitting in non-IID UAV data distributions. “AI-enabled trajectory optimization of logistics UAVs with wind
 impacts in smart cities,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1,
These results indicate that the suggested framework provides pp. 3885–3897, Feb. 2024.
the state-of-the-art detection accuracy at lightweight compu- [6] Y. Wu, Y. Chen, Z. Tan, F. Ma, and J. Liu, “DAE-YOLO: An IoTtation, which makes it very effective in real-time smart city optimized UAV edge network for real-time small target detection in
 smart city surveillance,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 21,
UAV security. pp. 45453–45464, Aug. 2025.
 [7] J. Huang, J. Zeng, R. J. C. Vos, and S. Vos, “A privacy-preserving
 VI. C ONCLUSION cross-domain authentication and key agreement scheme via multi-
 This paper presented a Multi-Agent Federated Edge blockchains for smart cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 23,
UAV-IDS tailored for UAV-assisted smart city IoT environ- pp. 49915–49931, Dec. 2025.
 [8] R. Abdelfattah, K. Abdelfatah, M. M. Fouda, Z. M. Fadlullah,
ment. The framework integrates a hybrid Autoencoder–LSTM M. Abouyoussef, and M. I. Ibrahem, “Bayesian optimization-aided
architecture with distributed intelligence, enabling collab- hybrid deep learning model for lightweight UAV-based smoke
orative anomaly detection without sharing raw data. By detection,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 16, pp. 33506–33519,
 Aug. 2025.
employing UAVs as mobile aggregators, the system enhances [9] S. Liu, Z. Wan, Y. Yuan, Q. Dong, B. Yang, and F. Hao, “Efficient
learning efficiency while preserving data privacy across het- certificateless blind signature scheme with conditional revocation for
erogeneous edge nodes. Comprehensive experiments on the mobile crowdsensing within smart city,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
 vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 15985–15997, May 2024.
T-ITS dataset validated the framework’s capability to achieve [10] C. Hazman, A. Guezzaz, S. Benkirane, and M. Azrour, “Enhanced IDS
99.44% detection accuracy with minimal false alarms and with deep learning for IoT-based smart cities security,” Tsinghua Sci.
a low inference latency of 46.8 ms. The proposed model Technol., vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 929–947, Aug. 2024.
 [11] M. M. Aborokbah, “A novel intrusion detection model for enhancing
also demonstrated strong resource efficiency, maintaining a security in smart city,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 107431–107444, 2024.
lightweight 8.42 MB deployment footprint suitable for real- [12] N. Alasbali et al., “IoT-UAV-enabled intelligent resource management
time UAV operations. These findings confirm that the system in low-carbon smart agriculture using federated reinforcement learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 6933–6941, May
can effectively safeguard large-scale UAV–IoT networks while 2025.
maintaining scalability, reliability, and privacy preservation. [13] M. Fahim-Ul-Islam, A. Chakrabarty, H. S. Hakimi, and S. S. Maidin,
In essence, the proposed model contributes directly to the “Fedwgca: A federated learning based uav intrusion detection with
 gradient clipping and attention-based neural networks,” IEEE Open
security of consumer electronics and emerging CE platforms J. Comput. Soc., vol. 6, pp. 1799–1809, 2025.
by enabling robust anomaly detection across many CE-driven [14] H. Jalil Hadi, Y. Cao, S. Li, Y. Hu, J. Wang, and S. Wang, “Real-time
IoT devices deployed in smart city environments. collaborative intrusion detection system in UAV networks using deep
 learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 20, pp. 33371–33391,
 Future research will focus on extending the framework Oct. 2024.
toward fully autonomous federated coordination among UAV [15] N. Sehito et al., “Optimizing user association, power control, and beamswarms, where edge nodes dynamically join and leave learning forming for 6G multi-IRS multi-UAV NOMA communications in smart
 cities,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5702–5710,
sessions, directly addressing the centralized bottleneck of the Aug. 2024.
current UAV coordinator model detailed in Section III. Incor- [16] X. He et al., “Federated continuous learning based on stacked
porating reinforcement-driven policy optimization will further broad learning system assisted by digital twin networks: An
 incremental learning approach for intrusion detection in UAV
enable adaptive model aggregation based on communication networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 22, pp. 19825–19838,
reliability and environmental conditions. Moreover, integrat- Nov. 2023.
ing lightweight adversarial defense strategies will strengthen [17] V. Praveena et al., “Optimal deep reinforcement learning for intrusion detection in UAVs,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 70, no. 2,
resilience against model poisoning and spoofing attacks. pp. 2639–2653, 2022.
Finally, real-world deployment and evaluation on live UAV [18] S. Yang, Y. Luo, W. Miao, C. Ge, W. Sun, and C. Luo, “RF signal-based
testbeds within urban smart infrastructures will be pursued to UAV detection and mode classification: A joint feature engineering
 generator and multi-channel deep neural network approach,” Entropy,
assess long-term robustness, energy efficiency, and interoper- vol. 23, no. 12, p. 1678, Dec. 2021.
ability with next-generation wireless networks such as 6G. The [19] S. S. Alotaibi, A. Sayed, E. Samir Abd Elhameed, O. Alghushairy,
proposed work lays the foundation for secure, distributed, and M. Assiri, and S. Saadeldeen Ibrahim, “Enhancing security in IoTassisted UAV networks using adaptive mongoose optimization algorithm
trustworthy UAV-based intelligence in future cyber–physical with deep learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 63768–63776, 2024.
ecosystems. [20] H. Sedjelmaci, S. M. Senouci, and N. Ansari, “A hierarchical detection
 and response system to enhance security against lethal cyber-attacks in
 UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 48, no. 9,
 R EFERENCES pp. 1594–1606, Sep. 2018.
[1] H. Liao et al., “A survey of deep learning technologies for intrusion [21] S. C. Hassler, U. A. Mughal, and M. Ismail, “Cyber-physical intrusion
 detection in Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 4745–4761, detection system for unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 2024. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 6106–6117, Jun. 2024.