4632 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Multi-Dimensional Cross-Granularity Open-Set
 Network Intrusion Detection
 Minh-Thuyen Thi and Mohan Gurusamy , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (NIDSs) face categories, which creates an expensive and time-consuming
critical challenges from continuously evolving cyber-attacks. data collection [4]. Moreover, network security data involve
Traditional machine learning methods, while requiring extensive privacy constraints and proprietary concerns, leading to limited
labeled training data, still often fail against unknown and out- dataset diversity [5]. Attack data also remain incomplete,
of-distribution (OOD) attacks. Furthermore, new sophisticated
adversaries are exploiting the detection blind spots inherent as they inevitably contain noise from misclassified activities
in traditional feature representation approaches that do not and adversarial evasion techniques [6]. Second, even with
provide adequate comprehensive traffic analysis. In this paper, we labeled datasets, the closed-set classification paradigm often
propose MDCG-IDS, an NIDS framework that introduces multi- fails when faced with unknown attacks (i.e., new attack types)
dimensional cross-granularity (MDCG) feature representation for and out-of-distribution (OOD) class categories (i.e., categories
open-set detection, in which network traffic is analyzed thor- that were not covered by the distribution of the training
oughly across three complementary dimensions (traffic statistics,
 data) [7], [8]. This is particularly problematic when zerotemporal, spatial), each at multiple granularity levels. These
dimensions and granularities jointly capture the structures of day attacks represent critical threats without prior training
sophisticated attacks that may be invisible from single analytical examples. Finally, since adversaries can bypass the NIDSs
perspectives. We design a tensor structure that provides a unified that use traditional feature representations [6], [9], we need
encoding for the MDCG features while supporting the use of a comprehensive feature analysis approach to capture more
optimal transport theory to measure the distance between benign diverse aspects of network traffic. Such an approach must
traffic and known or unknown attacks. MDCG-IDS uses a effectively learn the network traffic distribution to precisely
semi-supervised learning model that is trained exclusively on
benign traffic and validated on a small set of labeled data, measure the distances between benign samples and known or
significantly reducing the effort of data labeling. Experiments unknown attacks.
on various datasets achieve AUC-ROC scores of more than To deal with the problem of limited labeled data, this
0.948, exceeding the best competing state-of-the-art methods by paper introduces MDCG-IDS, a distance-based anomaly detecup to 7%. Regarding the amount of labeled validating data, tion framework within an open-set setting. Unlike supervised
MDCG-IDS obtains an AUC-ROC score of over 0.94 with only approaches that require comprehensive labeled attack datasets,
3% of entire validating samples, outperforming the baseline our semi-supervised methodology builds reference models
models.
 from benign traffic samples—similar to one-class classification
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection, open-set intrusion but enhanced with a small labeled validating set for hyperpadetection, semi-supervised learning, optimal transport, multi- rameter tuning. This approach aligns with binary detection in
granularity analysis.
 open-set NIDS, where the objective is to distinguish between
 I. I NTRODUCTION benign and unknown/OOD malicious traffic [10].
 To address the requirements for an efficient feature rep-
T HE continuous evolution of cyber-attacks has made traditional network intrusion detection systems (NIDSs)
inadequate for contemporary security challenges [1], [2].
 resentation in a data-limited open-set NIDS, we propose
 a feature analysis approach that takes into account multiple analytical dimensions and granularities. On the one
Every second, three to four new malware variants are hand, multi-dimensional methods have demonstrated their
discovered [3], creating an inherent open-set problem in effectiveness in capturing the complex inter-dependencies of
which possible attacks remain unbounded and are constantly network traffic [11], [12], [13], [14] (i.e., spatial and tempoexpanding. Conventional supervised NIDS approaches suffer ral dimensions). This is because single-dimensional methods
from critical limitations. First, they require extensive labeled may miss attacks that appear benign from one perspecdatasets containing representative samples from all attack tive while exhibiting anomalous behavior from another. For
 Received 13 November 2025; revised 19 March 2026 and 30 April 2026; example, an Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) may appear
accepted 8 May 2026. Date of publication 13 May 2026; date of current benign at the packet level while exhibiting suspicious crossversion 19 May 2026. This research is supported by A*STAR, CISCO Systems flow patterns at the session level and anomalous protocol
(USA) Pte. Ltd and the National University of Singapore under its Cisco-NUS sequences in the temporal dimension. On the other hand,
Accelerated Digital Economy Corporate Laboratory (Award I21001E0002).
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it multi-granularity feature analysis has shown its advantages
for publication was K. Hammar. (Corresponding author: Minh-Thuyen Thi.) over single-granularity approaches in [15] (multi-instance
 The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi- learning that combines bag-level and instance-level granuneering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119077 (e-mail:
tmthuyen@gmail.com). larities), [16] (host-level intrusion detection that combines
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3693141 system call-level and behavior-level granularities), and [17]
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4633

(auto-encoder that can learn multiple granularities of feature facilitate real-time processing suitable for production netabstraction). As a result, we develop a multi-dimensional work environments.
cross-granularity (MDCG) architecture which examines both • We design a practical framework that achieves strong
benign and known/unknown attacks through three complemen- OOD detection performance while being trained exclutary perspectives: (i) the traffic dimension, which captures sively on benign traffic with minimal labeled validating
numerical patterns across packet, flow, and session-levels; data. Extensive evaluations demonstrate effective cross-
(ii) the temporal dimension, which analyzes symbolic feature dataset performance, robustness against data contaminasequences across multiple time-scales; and (iii) the spatial tion, and real-time processing capability. These results
dimension, which examines symbolic attributes across session further validate the framework’s deployability in operaand host-level granularities. This comprehensive decomposi- tional environments.
tion enables the analysis of attacks on different statistical, The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
temporal, and spatial scales. To encode these multi-perspective Section II discusses related works; Section III presents
features, we introduce a unified MDCG tensor structure MDCG feature representation; Section IV describes the optithat enables vectorized computations across granularity levels mal transport-based OOD detection methodology; Section V
simultaneously. This representation preserves the relationships provides experimental evaluations; Section VI presents disacross dimensions and simultaneously supports efficient batch cussions and future works; finally, Section VII concludes with
processing and parallel computation. future directions.
 We use optimal transport [18] to quantify the distributional
deviations between attack samples and benign traffic. Given II. R ELATED W ORK
that there exist several studies employing optimal transport for
 This section presents related work across three key areas:
detecting outlier/anomalous data in other research fields (e.g.,
 closed-set, open-set, and multi-granular intrusion detection.
image processing, audio processing), MDCG-IDS is, to the
best of our knowledge, the first application of optimal transport
in network intrusion detection. This framework allows us to A. Closed-Set Intrusion Detection
compare probability distributions that capture both the magni- Early intrusion detection systems relied on rule-based
tude and geometric structure of the multi-dimensional shifts signatures and statistical anomaly detection, while modern
between traffic samples. For example, when benign traffic approaches leverage deep learning architectures based on
and an attack have similar average packet sizes, traditional popular frameworks such as Convolutional Neural Networks
statistical measures (mean, variance) might consider them (CNN) [20], Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [21], [22],
equivalent, whereas optimal transport can reveal the difference Graph Neural Networks (GNN) [23], [24], [25], autoencoders
in how the probability mass is distributed across packet sizes. [26], and Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [27]. The
The design of MDCG tensor structure also allows optimal study [22] proposed to combine attention mechanisms, Long
transport to quantify such difference for each individual gran- Short-Term Memory (LSTM), and Gated Recurrent Unit
ularity level, then combine features across dimensions and (GRU) for early flow classification in NIDSs (LS-GRU),
granularities. Distance measurement is performed using the leveraging the sequential nature of packets and allowing
Wasserstein metric through Sinkhorn-Knopp algorithms [19] prompt attack detection without requiring flow termination.
to reduce complexity and enable real-time intrusion detection. The authors in [24] proposed TCG-IDS, a self-supervised
This framework accommodates both numerical and symbolic learning model designed based on a temporal contrastive
features through specialized formulations: sliced Wasserstein GNN. This model integrates temporal, asymmetric, and
distances for numerical features and Gromov-Wasserstein dis- masked contrasting strategies to learn the network by masking
tances for symbolic features. some data during training. Wei et al. [26] proposed AHDM,
 The main contributions of this paper are summarized as an autoencoder-based hybrid detection model with a dualfollows: classifier scheme. In AHDM, autoencoder-enhanced features
 target small-sample malicious traffic, while a complementary
 classifier on raw features addresses normal and large-sample
 • We model a novel multi-dimensional cross-granularity
 traffic. This methodology translates into superior performance
 framework that decomposes network traffic into three
 on standard benchmarks, notably improving small-sample and
 complementary analytical perspectives and multiple gran-
 DDoS detection over advanced baselines (e.g., Deep Neural
 ularity levels, enabling comprehensive analysis and
 Networks). These closed-set approaches do not provide the
 comparison between benign and known/unknown/OOD
 capability to reject new attack categories that are not seen durattacks. These dimensions are unified through tensor reping training. Instead, they force classification into predefined
 resentations that support vectorized computations across
 categories, even for novel attacks.
 heterogeneous feature types.
 • To the authors’ knowledge, this study is the first
 application of optimal transport theory to network intru- B. Open-Set Intrusion Detection
 sion detection, providing a mathematical foundation Traditional approaches for open-set NIDS include Onefor cross-granularity anomaly scoring through Wasser- class Support Vector Machine (OSVM) [28] and Isolation
 stein distances. We define specialized formulations of Forest [29]. Recent deep learning advances have introduced
 sliced Wasserstein distances for numerical features and new methodologies based on architectures such as Isolation
 Gromov-Wasserstein distances for symbolic features. Trees [30], CNN [31], auto-encoders/variational auto-encoders
 The Sinkhorn-Knopp approximations are proposed to [32], [33], and extreme value theory [32], [33]. The study in
4634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[30] introduced FOSS, a fine-grained unknown class detection
model against variable attack spectra, incorporating adaptive
contamination modeling. FOSS leverages an isolation-tree
backbone with hyperplane splitting, isolation-based discrimination, and incremental updates to obtain accurate fine-grained
detection of previously unseen DDoS attacks. In [31], the
authors propose a scalable IDS for detecting unknown attacks
by combining a CNN with a nearest class mean (NCM)
classifier, jointly optimized by Fisher and maximum mean discrepancy losses. They further introduce semantic-embedding
clustering to reveal latent unknown classes and an incremental nearest cluster centroid method to assimilate them by
updating the NCM classifier. The study [32] formulates fine-
 Fig. 1. Open-set scenario showing OOD and unknown traffics from Attacker
grained known/unknown intrusion detection as a two-stage 2, and in-distribution (ID) traffic from Attacker 1. The diagram on the right
problem using class-conditioned autoencoders. They model depicts a conceptual illustration of attack categories, in which the ID-yetreconstruction-error tails via extreme value theory and benign unknown attacks are the samples that coincidentally have similar structures
clustering to boost unknown-attack detection. Other open- with attacks that have been learned; while the OOD-yet-known attacks are
 the threats that have been known in the cybersecurity literature but were not
set approaches include MinMax auto-encoder with pseudo covered by the training dataset due to limited coverage.
extreme value [33], deep reinforcement learning with selfevolving moving targets [34], Mahalanobis distancing [35],
Dandelion Network [36], and image-based representations of detection framework that employs multi-granularity feature
packet-level data [37]. extraction to address the challenges of sparsity in hostbased detection. Jiang et al. [15] introduced multi-granularity
 abnormal traffic detection based on multi-instance learning,
C. Multi-Dimensional and Cross-Granularity Feature
 capturing traffic patterns at various temporal resolutions. In
Analysis
 these studies, the multi-granularity approach helps to avoid
 Recent research has leveraged multi-dimensional models premature decisions under insufficient information [17], and
for intrusion detection by applying spatio-temporal feature allows multi-instance learning to flexibly analyze the traffic at
analysis. Wang et al. [11] developed an attention-weighted either bag-level or instance-level, providing adaptive anomaly
spatial-temporal graph model to extract features in parallel detection [15]. However, existing multi-granularity approaches
using a message-passing mechanism and a Bi-LSTM, then primarily focus on the temporal aspects of the closed-set
fuse them for the final classification of intrusions. The authors problem, and lack comprehensive multi-dimensional analysis
showed that a comprehensive spatial-temporal correlation across multiple perspectives simultaneously. Unlike our frameapproach helps to compensate when single-dimensional extrac- work, those approaches do not utilize a multi-dimensional
tion yields weak representations. The authors in [12] proposed cross-granularity representation to model the open-set NIDS
an attention-based Spatial Temporal Graph Convolutional Net- and support the quantification of OOD levels.
work (ST-GCN) to model normal link states in networks.
Extreme Value Theory (EVT) is used to identify Link Flooding D. Summary and Comparisons
Attacks (LFA) as extreme performance degradation events.
 Current approaches suffer from several limitations:
The authors demonstrated that modeling network states as a
 (1) both multi-dimensional and cross-granularity approaches
spatio-temporal graph is more efficient than modeling with
 are applied only to closed-set detection; hence, open-set
solely temporal (LSTM) or spatial (GCN) dimension. The
 methods lack comprehensive multi-dimensional crossstudy [13] introduced an anomaly detection framework for
 granular representations that integrate traffic, temporal,
5G that captures anomalous patterns across multiple spatioand spatial perspectives simultaneously, and (2) traditional
temporal perspectives using a Multi-Scale Fuzzy Contrastive
 distance metrics typically rely on single-dimensional deviation
Learning approach. It performs anomaly detection explicitly
 without capturing multi-dimensional geometric relationships
in the latent space by measuring the distance to normal data
 between traffic samples. In this paper, we measure that
prototypes. Yang et al. [14] used spatio-temporal contextrelationship by designing a multi-dimensional distance metric
aware graph embedding to learn representations of normal
 based on optimal transport theory.
behavior, from which an anomaly score is generated for
 Table I compares MDCG-IDS with existing methods across
outlier detection. Similar to [11], the authors in [13] and [14]
 key criteria. Our MDCG framework uniquely addresses the
showed that spatio-temporal approach allows to extract more
 criteria of open-set recognition capacity, multi-dimensional
comprehensive traffic patterns; especially when combining
 cross-granularity analysis, and optimal transport-based diswith multi-scale feature analysis [13].
 tance computation.
 Several studies have explored multi-granularity approaches
to capture network behavior with different feature scales. III. M ULTI -D IMENSIONAL C ROSS -G RANULARITY
Geng et al. [17] proposed S3WD-MG, a multi-granularity (MDCG) F EATURE R EPRESENTATION
intrusion detection algorithm based on sequential three-way
decisions. This algorithm incorporates autoencoder-based fea- A. OOD and Unknown Attacks Detection
ture learning across different granularity levels. The authors The open-set intrusion detection of OOD and unknown
in [16] developed BR-HIDF, an anti-sparsity host intrusion attacks is illustrated in Fig. 1. The figure depicts an example of
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4635

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF N ETWORK I NTRUSION D ETECTION A PPROACHES ON O PEN -S ET D ETECTION C APABILITY, F EATURE
 R EPRESENTATION , D ISCRIMINATION M ETHOD , AND L EARNING PARADIGM

Fig. 2. Illustration of the dimension-specific encoding, showing data extraction to construct MDCG features. The illustration shows an example of two network
sessions between two hosts, one of the sessions includes two network flows, each has two packets. The network packets have attributes of TCP flag, transport
protocol, destination port, and packet size. Only a selected list of feature examples in Table III are illustrated.

benign traffic from a legitimate user and attack traffic from two TABLE II
attackers: Attacker 1 generates in-distribution (ID) samples, M AIN M ATHEMATICAL N OTATIONS
while Attacker 2 creates OOD and unknown samples. The
diagram on the right provides a conceptual illustration of four
attack categories: ID-and-known, ID-yet-unknown, OOD-yetknown, and OOD-and-unknown. ID attacks share structural
similarities with learned patterns, whereas OOD attacks fall
outside the training coverage, with some being completely
novel (unknown).
B. Feature Granularity Definitions
 We define the granularity levels for traffic, temporal, and
spatial dimensions as G F = {gF 1 , g2 , g3 }, G
 F F T
 = {gT1 , gT2 , . . .},
and G S = {gS1 , gS2 }, respectively. The summary of the main
mathematical symbols is given in Table II. The following
sections describe in detail these dimensions and granularities,
which are also illustrated in Fig. 2. The figure describes
an example of the dimension-specific encoding of network
traffic between two hosts. In the example, the flat features are
extracted to construct MDCG features at different dimensions
and granularities.
 1) Traffic Dimension: The traffic dimension F focuses
exclusively on numeric statistical features that characterize
quantitative patterns across three granularity levels: packet,
flow, and session. In Fig. 2, those features are mean packet mean inter-arrival time. This granularity level helps to
size, flow duration, and inter-flow time variance. The three detect attacks that exhibit abnormal packet sizes, such as
granularities are defined as: the Ping of Death (PoD).
 • Packet-level (gF 1 ): extracts first-order statistical features • Flow-level (gF2 ): aggregates packet statistics within netfrom individual packets, such as mean packet size and work flows, creating features such as per-flow total bytes
4636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE III patterns, such as accessing unexpected application services
 S UMMARY OF MDCG F EATURES , S HOWING T HEIR D IMENSION , (service exploit).
 G RANULARITY, DATA T YPES AND E XAMPLES Table III summarizes the MDCG features, including their
 dimensions, granularities, data types, and examples.

 C. MDCG Feature Tensor Structure
 We introduce a new tensor structure to encode the MDCG
 features, preserving the relationships between different dimensions and granularity levels, while adapting to the computation
 of optimal transport-based distances. By using vectorized
 operations, the representation supports batch processing of
 distance computations across multiple granularities simultaneously. These tensors can be processed with GPU acceleration
 to improve scalability with respect to the number of dimensions and granularity.
 1) Unified Tensor Structure: In this paper, each flat data
 sample xi , i = 1, 2, . . . (i.e., either training, validating, or
 testing sample) typically corresponds to a network session. We
 note that training samples include only benign traffic records,
 while validating samples are small quantity of labeled records,
 and testing samples are labeled records used for inference.
 For each sample, we define a unified tensor representation
 zi ∈ RD×Gmax ×Fmax where D is the number of dimensions,
 Gmax = max{|G F |, |G T |, |G S |} represents the maximum number
 of granularity levels across all dimensions, and Fmax is the
 and flow duration. This granularity level targets attacks maximum number of features (Fig. 3). Each tensor element
 such as DoS, which have an unusual traffic volume. contains the features of a specific granularity level g within a
 • Session-level (gF 3 ): captures statistical relationships dimension D. This tensor is extracted through the dimensionacross multiple flows within sessions, for example, vari- specific encoding function as zi = φ(xi ). Fig. 3 corresponds to
 ance of flow durations and ratio of forward-backward the examples in Table III, in which D = 3 and Gmax = 3
 packets. This granularity level aims to identify attacks with unused tensor positions are zero-padded to maintain
 such as APTs that exhibit suspicious cross-flow patterns. consistency, and Fmax = 2 since no granularity in the examples
 of Table III has more than 2 features.
 2) Temporal Dimension: The temporal dimension T rep- 2) Dimension-Specific Encoding Functions: The encoding
resents sequences of symbolic features across multiple functions are designed to handle the heterogeneous features
configurable timescales, capturing procedural and sequential across different dimensions while ensuring compatibility with
patterns. The MDCG framework defines flexible multi-level optimal transport computations. For the traffic dimension
timescales gTi ∈ G T to cover different temporal characteristics: with exclusively numeric features, the function φ(xi ) applies
short granularity captures sequential patterns within small normalization using the mean and standard deviation comtime windows, such as symbolic sequence of TCP flags puted from the training data, followed by zero-padding to
and sequence of transport protocols, while long granularity achieve uniform dimensionality Fmax . Before normalization,
aggregates occurrences of those sequences in larger time the granularity-specific numeric features are extracted from
windows, e.g., variance of lower-level granularity TCP flag the flat data sample xi using a projection operator.
counts/transport protocol counts (Fig. 2). This multi-scale Temporal and spatial dimensions contain symbolic features,
approach provides coarse-grained granularities to identify per- with temporal features being sequential while spatial features
sistent threats (APTs), as well as fine-grained granularities are unordered. For the temporal dimension, we combine
to detect fast-moving attacks, such as port scans. The exact positional embeddings with learned categorical embeddings to
number of timescales can be decided during deployment to maintain sequential relationships. The encoding function φ(·)
suit different network environments. aggregates all embeddings at the granularity level g, preserving
 3) Spatial Dimension: The spatial dimension S represents sequential order through weighted averaging based on temponon-sequential sets of symbolic features that characterize the ral proximity. For the spatial dimension, we employ standard
data exchange at the session and host-levels. These two gran- categorical embeddings without positional constraints, and the
ularities are detailed as follows. Session-level (gS1 ) contains encoding function uses uniform averaging.
symbolic features that characterize individual sessions, such
as set of per-session TCP flags (Fig. 2). This level facilitates
the detection of attacks such as abnormal connection resets. IV. MDCG OOD D ETECTION
Host-level (gS2 ) aggregates session-level features into per-host Our framework learns reference distributions from benign
attributes, such as set of per-host destination ports and set training data, along with a small amount of labeled validatof per-host application protocols (Fig. 2). This level helps to ing traffic. During training, the MDCG anomaly scores are
detect compromised hosts that exhibit unusual communication computed using optimal transport. Based on these scores, the
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4637

 To handle the discrete features, we incorporate regularization into the optimal transport formulation. The regularization
 and distance computation are adapted with respect to dimension: the traffic dimension (i.e., numeric features) uses
 the Sinkhorn-Wasserstein (SW) distance, while the temporal and spatial dimensions (i.e., symbolic features) employ
 the Gromov-Wasserstein (GW) distance. This is because the
 formulation of SW distance requires direct cost (distance)
 between points, as shown in below formulas; hence it is
 suitable for numeric traffic features where pairwise distances
 are directly quantifiable. This distance measures how much
 numeric mass must be shifted to match two feature distributions. In contrast, the formulation of GW distance relies on
 the internal relational structures of two distributions rather than
Fig. 3. Unified tensor structure corresponding to the examples in Table III. requiring direct point-to-point comparison. As a result, to mea-
In those examples, Gmax = 3 (as there are 3 dimensions) and Fmax = 2 (as
no granularity has more than 2 features). The tensor elements that have less sure the distance between two symbolic values (e.g., HTTP
than 3 dimensions or 2 features are zero-padded. and FTP protocols), we use GW distance to compare how these
 categories relate to each other through their co-occurrence
 patterns. Both distances are computed using iterative algo-
OOD detector estimates the Area Under the Curve of the rithms: Sinkhorn–Knopp for SW, and alternating minimization
Receiver Operating Characteristic (AUROC), and then per- for GW. The matrix-scaling algorithm Sinkhorn–Knopp can
forms parameter optimization using the labeled validating data provide closed-form iterative updates for SW, while GW’s
by maximizing this AUROC. During inference, the detector quadratic structure requires alternating minimization for iterapplies the optimized parameters and thresholded scores for ative optimization.
binary OOD detection. For an incoming sample ẑ, the Sinkhorn-Wasserstein distance ρFSW,g (ẑg , Zg ) corresponding to traffic dimension F is
 F F

 computed as:
A. MDCG-Decomposed Optimal Transport Distance n
 X
 In this paper, we define an incoming sample as either SW,g (ẑg , Zg ) = min
 ρF F F
 γiCi,g
 F
 + gF H(γ), (1)
 γ∈∆n
a validating or testing sample. The distance metric quan- i=1
tifies the dissimilarity between an incoming sample ẑ and pF
the benign training distribution. We propose to use optimal
 F
 where Ci,g = kẑF F g
 g − zi,g k MgF is the cost (distance) between the
transport (OT) [18] to leverage MDCG decomposition and incoming sample ẑ and the i-th training sample at granularity
Wasserstein distances. Optimal transport is a mathematical g, with the metric tensor k · k MgF being calculated as:
framework for measuring the minimum cost of transforming
one probability distribution into another, where the cost reflects kuk2MgF = uT MgF u, (2)
how much probability mass must be moved and how far. F F
In the context of intrusion detection, OT quantifies how much where MgF ∈ Rdg ×dg is learned from the training data
the distribution of an incoming traffic sample differs from to capture the relational structure of the features; pF g ≥ 1

 P pg = 2 for
 F
the benign reference distribution. The Wasserstein distance, is the order of the distance, typically set to
derived from OT theory, provides a principled metric for this computational efficiency. The term H(γ) = − ni=1 γi log γi is
distributional comparison. Unlike statistical measures such as the regularization, with γ = (γ˚1 , . . . , γn )P ∈ ∆n representing the
Euclidean distance, which use the mean and variance, OT and transport plan, where ∆n = γ ∈ Rn : ni=1 γi = 1, γi ≥ 0 is
Wasserstein distance capture both the magnitude and geomet- the probability simplex, and gF > 0 controls the regularization
ric structure of distribution differences, aligning with MDCG strength.
traffic analysis. For instance, two traffic samples with similar The Gromov-Wasserstein distances [38] of temporal and
mean packet sizes but different distributions are distinguished spatial dimensions ρD GW,g (ẑg , Zg ), D ∈ {T , S} are computed
 D D

by how their probability masses are spatially arranged. In the as
following, we present the OT distance computation that is X n
decomposed into different dimensions. min g − zi,g k MgD · kẑg − z j,g k MgD + g H(γ).
 γi γ j kẑD D D D D
 (3)
 γ∈∆n
 The Wasserstein distance is extended to operate across i, j=1
multiple granularity levels simultaneously. Let Z = {zi , i =
1, 2, . . . , n} represent the benign samples of the training dataset, B. OOD Score Computation
where zi corresponds to a feature tensor. For each dimension
D ∈ {F, T , S} and granularity level g ∈ G D , we define the The MDCG framework computes OOD scores by analyzing
projection operator ΠD D×Gmax ×Fmax D
 → Rdg that extracts anomaly levels across all dimensions and granularity scales.
 g : R
features with dimensionality dgD at the granularity level g of For an incoming sample ẑ, the MDCG-specific OOD score
dimension D. For the training set Z, its projections are denoted corresponding to dimension D is computed as:
as ZgD = {zD i,g }, i = 1, . . . , n, where zi,g = Πg (zi ). Similarly, for
 D D X
 ψD (ẑ) = g · fg (ρg (ẑg , Zg )),
 αD D D D D
 (4)
an incoming sample ẑ, its projections are ẑD g = Πg (ẑ).
 D
 g∈G D
4638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 the validating tensors. The optimization objective maximizes
 the AUROC on the validating sample ẑval
 i :
 val val
 i )}i=1 , {yi }i=1 ),
 Θ∗ = arg max AUROC({ψfinal (ẑval n n
 (7)
 Θ
 val
 where {ψfinal (ẑval n
 i )}i=1 are the anomaly scores of the validating
 val
 val
 samples, n is the size of the validating set, and {yi }ni=1 are
 the ground truth labels, with yi ∈ {0, 1} indicating normal (0)
 or anomalous (1) traffic. This optimization is subject to these
 constraints:
 X
 αDg = 1, ∀D ∈ {F, T , S}, (8)
 g∈G D

 αg , τg , pD
 D D
 g ≥ 0, ∀g ∈ G D , D ∈ {F, T , S}, (9)
 β , β , β ≥ 0,
 F T S
 (10)
 βF + βT + βS = 1, (11)
 g , g > 0,
 λD D
 ∀g ∈ G , D ∈ {F, T , S}.
 D
 (12)
 This optimization is performed offline, and during inference,
 the framework applies Θ∗ directly for computing the score of
 the testing sample ẑtest (Fig. 4). The AUROC maximization
 objective provides a threshold-independent evaluation that
 accounts for both true positive and false positive rates.

 D. Computational Complexity
 The framework’s computational cost comprises two phases:
 (1) MDCG tensor construction operates in O(D×Gmax × Fmax )
 per sample, which is linear in the input size; (2) OT distance
Fig. 4. Workflow of MDCG-IDS from training to inference. Flat data computation using Sinkhorn-Knopp approximation scales as
samples, including both training and incoming samples, are first encoded O(n2 × k × D × Gmax ), where n is the training set size, k
and represented as MDCG tensors. Then Wasserstein distances quantify the
deviation of the incoming tensor from the benign distribution of training is the number of Sinkhorn iterations, and D × Gmax accounts
tensors, followed by OOD score calculation for the incoming tensors (i.e., for parallel computation across all dimension-granularity pairs.
validating and testing tensors which have labels yi ). Parameters are optimized The Sinkhorn-Knopp approximation has reduced computausing labeled validating tensors, after that the framework performs inference tional complexity of exact optimal transport from O(n3 log n)
on the testing sample ẑtest .
 [19] to O(n2 × k). In practice n represents a manageable
 reference set (e.g., 103 − 104 benign samples), and k typically
where αD ranges from 10 to 20.
 g ≥ 0 represents the granularity-specific weight,
ρD
 g (·, ·) is SW or GW distance, and fgD (·) is the sigmoid
function: V. E XPERIMENTS
 1 A. Experiment Setup
 fgD (u) = , (5)
 g (u − τg ))
 1 + exp(−λD D
 1) Datasets: The proposed model is evaluated on four
 datasets: CIC-IDS-2017 (CIC17) [5], UNSW-NB15 (NB15)
 g > 0 controls the steepness, and τg ≥ 0 determines
where λD D
 [39], TON-IoT (TON) [40], and 5GAD [41]. These datasets
the midpoint of the sigmoid curve. The final OOD score is
 are chosen to cover both generic conventional enterprise
computed as:
 networks (CIC17 and NB15) and specialized networks: IoT
 ψfinal (ẑ) = βF · ψF (ẑ) + βT · ψT (ẑ) + βS · ψS (ẑ), (6) (TON) and 5G. Especially since 5G has specialized controlplane call flows generated sequentially, we can evaluate
where {βF , βT , βS } are non-negative weights satisfying βF + MDCG-IDS by capturing the temporal patterns of network
βT + βS = 1. traffic. This dataset contains specific attacks in 5G, such as
 GetUserData, GetAllNFs, and FakeAMFInsert (Table IV). The
 CIC17 dataset provides divert attack coverage, such as DDoS,
C. Optimization Framework several types of DoS, and Web attacks; while NB15 comprises
 Let Θ = {{αD g }, {β , β , β }, {λg , τg }, {Mg , g , pg } : g ∈
 F T S D D D D D
 9 modern network attacks including DoS, Reconnaissance, and
G , D ∈ {F, T , S}} represent the complete parameter set.
 D
 Worms. TON targets IoT environments with heterogeneous
The proposed optimization framework can be seen in Fig. 4, telemetry data from smart devices and sensors, containing
which summarizes the complete workflow of MDCG-IDS. In attacks such as dos, injection, and backdoor.
the figure, after the tensor encoding, distance measurement, We define two levels of OOD by selecting different attacks
and OOD score computation, an optimization framework is for hold-out, as described in Table IV. While the first level
introduced to calculate optimized values of Θ with respect to (OOD-1) simply holds out some attack classes, the second
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4639

 TABLE IV TABLE V
C LASS L ABELS OF T RAINING , VALIDATING , AND T ESTING S ETS . T WO L IST OF MDCG F EATURES U SED IN E XPERIMENTS
 L EVELS OF OOD I NSIDE THE T ESTING S ETS : OOD-1 S IMPLY H OLDS
 O UT S OME ATTACK C LASSES , W HILE OOD-2 H OLDS O UT E NTIRE
 ATTACK FAMILIES AND P ROTOCOLS , AS W ELL AS THE ATTACKS
 G ENERATED BY A S PECIFIC T OOL

 hence, this feature is excluded from all datasets (Table V)
 to maintain consistency.
 The session level is built as bidirectional flows separated by
 TCP connection states (FIN/RST flags). For non-TCP traffic
 (UDP, ICMP), sessions are approximated using unidirectional
 flow segments grouped by common endpoints and protocol;
 these segments are aggregated if they are separated by no
 more than 60 seconds of inactivity. The experiments use
 default temporal granularity of three levels: subflow (0.5 s
level (OOD-2) holds out entire attack families and protocols windows), flow (10 s windows), and session levels (60 s
(e.g., the Heartbleed exploit in CIC17 is for OpenSSL) or windows). These time windows are defined by referring to the
attacks generated by specific tools. In this way, the testing standard flow-timeout conventions employed in NetFlow [45]
samples will contain patterns that are less likely to be seen and IPFIX implementations [46], [47], in which active timeout
during training. Aligned with the attack categories in Fig. 1, ranges from 120 seconds to 30 minutes and idle timeout
an example of ID-yet-unknown attack in CIC17 could be is from 15 seconds to 5 minutes. After this reconstruction,
a new variant of DoS that exhibits traffic patterns similar the final datasets comprise 1.38 million sessions (CIC17),
to the trained DoS classes (DoS Hulk, DoS slowloris, DoS 1.04 million sessions (NB15), 1.18 million sessions (TON),
Slowhttptest); while an OOD-yet-known attack could be Heart- and 23621 sessions (5GAD). Table V lists the features of all
bleed, which is a known attack type in cybersecurity literature dimensions and granularities; these features are used by all
but was not covered by the training and validating sets of baseline models.
CIC17. 3) Model Implementation: The proposed framework is
 2) Preprocessing: To extract MDCG features from the developed in Python using PyTorch 2.1, with the POT library
datasets, we need their sample records at the flow and session for optimal transport computations. Parameters including
 granularity weights {αD g }, dimensional weights {β , β , β },
 F T S
level. The publicly available version of these labeled records
mostly misses information on source and destination IPs regularization {g }, and sigmoid parameters {λg , τg } are
 D D D

(except for NB15). Therefore, we reconstruct their flow and jointly optimized using gradient-based methods to maxisession-level records from the raw capture version, to which mize AUROC on the validating set. To deal with the
we add IP addresses. The flow level is created based on non-differentiability in optimization exact form, a common
the 5-tuples {source IP, destination IP, source port, destina- approach is to use surrogate-based methods [48], [49]. Our
tion port, protocol} with a 10-second inactive timeout and non-differentiable AUROC is optimized through a surrogate
 nval
a 30-second active timeout. CIC17 labels are re-assigned computed from the validation scores {ψfinal (ẑvali )}i=1 and labels
 nval
using the published attack-period information, assisted by the {yi }i=1 . Specifically, the objective can be viewed as maxi-
CICFlowMeter tool [42]. For NB15 and TON, we re-label mizing a differentiable approximation of AUROC(Θ). Since
entries based on the released ground-truth tables, using the all components of the MDCG scoring function ψfinal (ẑ) (i.e.,
Payload-Byte tool [43] for NB15 and nProbe [44] for ToN. For including the SW distances ρF SW,g , the GW distances ρGW,g ,
 D

5GAD, we reconstruct flow-level records from raw captures D ∈ {T , S}, the sigmoid mappings fg (·), and the convex
 D

that were already labeled by grouping. The feature application aggregation weights αD g , β ) are differentiable with respect
 D

protocol in 5GAD is unavailable due to TLS encryption; to Θ, we compute the gradients of AUROC(Θ) approximation
4640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

via backpropagation. Then optimization is performed using b) Open-set baselines: We evaluate the following trastandard first-order gradient-based methods (Adam, learning ditional open-set baselines: Isolation Forest, which utilizes
rate 0.001) with early stopping based on validation AUROC. ensemble-based anomaly scoring through random data parti-
 We run experiments on an Intel i9 3.2 GHz CPU, 64 GB tioning, and One-Class SVM (OSVM), which learns a decision
RAM, and an Nvidia LS40 GPU. Each dataset uses a split boundary around benign samples for novelty detection. The
60%/20%/20% where (1) the training set contains only benign state-of-the-art baselines include FOSS [30], Scalable-NIDS
traffic, and (2) the validating and testing sets contain stratified (S-NIDS) [31], and CVAE-EVT [32]. The model FOSS
samples of both normal and anomalous traffic to maintain employs adaptive isolation mechanisms and multi-scale feature
attack-type proportions. Hyperparameters are selected via analysis to handle unknown attack patterns. We implement
5-fold cross-validation within the validating set. FOSS with a feature dimensionality of 64, while its vari-
 4) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate the MDCG-IDS ant, FOSS-128, is enhanced with a dimensionality of 128.
framework using both threshold-independent and threshold- We also evaluate FOSS-mg, a variant that equips MDCG
dependent metrics. The primary metric is AUROC, which feature processing to validate whether MDCG decomposimeasures the model’s ability to discriminate between normal tion enhances isolation-based OOD detection. The baseline
and anomalous traffic across all possible decision thresholds, S-NIDS utilizes clustering and soft-boundary classification
making it robust to the class imbalance issue. At the optimal for hybrid novelty detection. S-NIDS is implemented with
operating points that are determined by Youden’s index, we a feature dimensionality of 128, while S-NIDS-256 is
report the threshold-dependent metrics, including the False enhanced with a dimensionality of 256. Similarly to FOSS-mg,
Positive Rate (FPR) and F1-score. The FPR is particularly we also implement the S-NIDS-mg variant for validating
critical because it quantifies benign traffic misclassified as the MDCG decomposition. The baseline CVAE-EVT comattacks, which directly impacts operational feasibility. The bines the Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) with
experimental results reported in the following sections are Extreme Value Theory for tail-based uncertainty modeling. We
computed over the entire testing set in Table IV (i.e., com- implement CVAE-EVT with 64 and 128 latent dimensions,
bining ID, OOD-1, and OOD-2 samples), with the exception named CVAE-EVT-64 and CVAE-EVT-128, respectively.
of the attack-specific performance results which provide a per- CVAE-EVT-ot is the variant that is integrated with the optimal
category breakdown. All experimental results are reported as transport module to assess whether the Wasserstein distance
mean ± standard deviation across 5 independent runs with can enhance VAE-based anomaly detection.
different random seeds.
 5) Baselines: MDCG-IDS is compared against various B. Experimental Results
baselines, including both closed-set K-class and open-set
 1) Separability of Feature Representation: To evaluate the
methods. For K-class baselines, models are trained on a
 quality of MDCG features, Fig. 5 shows their t-SNE visualizastandard K-class dataset and, at inference, assign every testing
 tion on the CIC17 dataset (Fig. 5b) compared to flat features
sample to one of the K classes, even if the sample comes from
 selected by mutual information (Fig. 5a). In Fig. 5a, we select
an unknown category. For open-set baselines, the models are
 28 flat features that produce the highest mutual information
designed to detect inputs that do not belong to the K known
 between the NetFlow records and their class labels. To mitigate
classes (i.e., rejecting them as unknown/OOD). We note that
 the class imbalance issue in CIC17, each class is capped at
the K-class baselines are trained on the combination of the
 10,000 samples; consequently, these t-SNE visualizations plot
training and validating sets (Table IV).
 a total of 73,901 samples. Fig. 5a shows considerable overlaps
 a) Closed-set k-class baselines: We evaluate various among attack classes, particularly between OOD-2 attacks
closed-set baselines, including (i) traditional supervised learn- and ID classes. In contrast, Fig. 5b demonstrates substantially
ing methods: Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Random improved class separability, where individual attack types form
Forest, and (ii) state-of-the-art models: TCG-IDS [24], more compact and distinguishable clusters. In particular, the
LS-GRU [22], and AHDM [26]. TCG-IDS is a temporal benign and OOD classes exhibit a clear separation from other
contrastive graph learning approach that constructs dynamic categories.
graphs from network flows and distinguishes attack patterns Fig. 5c illustrates the feature importance analysis that
through temporal dependencies and graph structural informa- quantifies the contribution of each MDCG component to
tion. We evaluate TCG-IDS with temporal window sizes of 30 class separation. Traffic-level features (packet, flow, and sess (TCG-IDS) and 60 s (TCG-IDS-60s) to assess the impact sion granularities) demonstrate high importance scores, while
of temporal granularity on graph-based attack detection. The temporal and spatial dimensions provide complementary disbaseline model LS-GRU combines attention mechanisms with criminative power. The cluster separation metrics (Fig. 5d)
GRU for early network intrusion detection, enabling focused compare inter-cluster separation (i.e., the distance between
learning on critical features in traffic sequences. To eval- different attack classes) and intra-cluster compactness (i.e., the
uate the effects of attention mechanism in LS-GRU, we tightness within each attack class) across three feature repreimplement it with 64 and 128 hidden dimensions, named LS- sentations. The flatten features (28 features selected by mutual
GRU and LS-GRU-128, respectively. The AHDM approach information) achieve a separation score and a compactness
is an autoencoder-based hybrid model specifically designed score of 0.342 and 0.289, respectively, while the singlefor small-sample intrusion detection. This model combines dimensional representation (using only traffic dimension)
reconstruction-based anomaly detection with supervised clas- shows moderate improvements to 0.456 and 0.378, respecsification components. tively. MDCG representation achieves significantly higher
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4641

Fig. 5. t-SNE visualization of CIC17 using (a) Flat features selected by mutual information and (b) MDCG features. The MDCG representation is further
analyzed on (c) Feature importance and (d) Separability score.

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF MDCG-IDS F RAMEWORK AGAINST
 BASELINE M ETHODS ON : AUROC, F1-S CORE , AND FALSE P OSITIVE
 R ATE ACROSS F OUR DATASETS

Fig. 6. Convergence and stability of optimization process over epochs across
all datasets: (a) Average validation AUROC over 5 independent runs, and
(b) Average OT distance over 5 independent runs for benign and attack
samples.

scores (0.738 and 0.692), suggesting that the MDCG approach
creates a more separable feature space. FOSS-128 shows modest improvements over base FOSS
 2) Optimization Convergence: In Fig. 6, we illustrate (1.6-2.0% average gain), and S-NIDS-256 also achieves
the change of validation AUROC and OT distance during limited gains (1.3-1.8% improvement) across datasets. To
the optimization process. Fig. 6a shows that the validation benchmark our OT-based distance, we compare its perfor-
AUROC increases rapidly in the early epochs and stabilizes mance with MDCG-IDS-KL, which uses Kullback-Leibler
after approximately 15–20 epochs across all datasets, with (KL) divergence for distance measurement, and MDCG-IDSminor fluctuations. Consistently, Fig. 6b demonstrates that JS, which utilizes Jensen-Shannon divergence. Table VI shows
the average OT distances for benign and attack samples both that MDCG-IDS-KL suffers significant performance degradadecrease sharply in the initial phase and stabilize thereafter, tion (0.907-0.923 AUROC), while MDCG-IDS-JS achieves
with attack samples maintain a higher transport distance since slightly higher performance (0.923-0.934 AUROC) but still
they are structurally separated from benign embedding space. falls substantially short of MDCG-IDS.
The convergence of AUROC and OT distance indicates that 4) Attack-Specific Performance: Fig. 7 illustrates the breaktransport-based optimization helps the model learn stable and down of performance across two levels of OOD defined
well-separated representations. in Table IV. The figure shows that MDCG-IDS consis-
 3) Overall Performance Comparison: To ensure a fair tently outperforms all baseline methods in both OOD-1 and
comparison, this experiment assesses all methods for binary OOD-2. Especially, the proposed model shows significant
intrusion detection instead of multi-class detection. In this way, improvements for OOD-2 scenarios, such as with Worms
each closed-set classifier outputs class predictions and then in NB15, MITM in TON, and automatedRedirectWithTimer
converts them to binary decisions, where predictions other than in 5GAD. Traditional open-set methods (i.e., Isolation For-
Benign are labeled as attacks. Unlike closed-set classifiers, est and OSVM) demonstrate low performance across all
open-set methods directly output anomaly scores for threshold- attack categories, particularly struggling with OOD-2 attacks.
based binary classification. CVAE-EVT represents the strongest baseline, showing com-
 Table VI presents the experimental results of all baselines petitive performance in OOD-1 but still exhibits significant
across four datasets. MDCG-IDS consistently achieves supe- degradation in OOD-2 scenarios. The baseline variants reveal
rior performance in open-set detection, with AUROC scores limited enhancements: FOSS-128 obtains an average improveof 0.948 (CIC17), 0.962 (NB15), 0.954 (TON), and 0.956 ment of 3.1% over base FOSS, while S-NIDS-256 achieves a
(5GAD). Our method outperforms all baselines, demonstrat- gain of 3.2% over S-NIDS.
ing a 3-7% improvement over the best competing methods. 5) Ablation Study Results: Table VII presents the abla-
Among open-set baselines, CVAE-EVT shows competitive tion studies that evaluate the contributions of the MDCG
performance, while FOSS performs well on traditional datasets dimensions and their distance metric. Among the variants
but exhibits degraded performance on IoT traffic (TON) and of MDCG-IDS, Equal Weighting is the variant that assigns
 uniform weights (αD g = 1/|G |, β = 1/3) instead of learning
 D D
5G traffic (5GAD). In terms of parameter-varying variants,
4642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE VII
 A BLATION S TUDY R ESULTS S HOWING THE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT D ESIGN
 C OMPONENTS OF MDCG-IDS. R EPORTED VALUES A RE AUROC
 ON CIC17, NB15, TON, AND 5GAD DATASETS U NDER
 VARIOUS C ONFIGURATIONS : S INGLE -D IMENSION O NLY,
 PAIRWISE D IMENSIONS , R EMOVAL OF S PECIFIC
 M ODULES , AND F EATURE A PPROXIMATION

 TABLE VIII
 A BLATION S TUDY S HOWING THE I MPACT OF D IFFERENT T EMPORAL
 W INDOW S IZES W HEN OTHER D IMENSIONS AND C OMPONENTS OF
 MDCG-IDS A RE K EPT U NCHANGED

 sequential control-plane call flows. Two-dimensional combinations show incremental improvements, with the F+T
 combination generally achieving the best pairwise performance across 4 datasets. Regarding the feature approximation,
 Table VII shows minimal impact on CIC17 when application
 protocol is unavailable (AUROC degraded from 0.949 to
 0.948), while NB15 and TON show no degradation.
 To assess the sensitivity to temporal window sizes, we evaluate the performances of alternative window configurations:
 short-only (0.5s), medium-only (10s), and long-only (60s),
 as well as alternative multi-scale combinations (1s/20s/120s
Fig. 7. Attack-specific performance comparison, showing F1-scores of and 0.25s/5s/30s) (Table VIII). This experiment shows the
OOD-1 and OOD-2 attacks for (a) CIC17, (b) NB15, (c) TON, and (d) 5GAD impacts of the alternative window configurations when all
dataset. other components of MDCG-IDS are kept unchanged. Results
 of CIC17 show that single-window configurations achieve
 0.889-0.926 AUROC, while multi-scale approaches consisthem through parameter optimization. Feature Proxy is the tently exceed 0.933 AUROC regardless of specific window
MDCG-IDS version that approximates application protocol by values. The alternative combinations (1s/20s/120s: 0.941
destination port, while Full Feature uses complete application AUROC; 0.25s/5s/30s: 0.933 AUROC) perform comparably
protocol when this information is available (i.e., in CIC17, to our default configuration (0.948 AUROC), with variations
NB15 and TON). The table shows that MDCG-IDS, Full within 2%. Table VIII also reveals dataset-specific pReferences
Feature and Feature Proxy outperform their variants, including for temporal scales: CIC17, NB15 and TON favor longer
single- and pairwise-dimensional configurations (i.e., F-only, windows while 5GAD favors shorter windows; yet multi-
T-only, S-only, F+T, F+S, and T+S) and various other scale configurations consistently achieve superior performance
configurations (i.e., without MDCG, without OT, Euclidean regardless of dataset type.
Distance, and Equal Weighting). On 5GAD, the temporal The cross-paradigm analysis (Table IX) presents the perdimension alone (that is, T-only) provides a strong result formance of baseline models with and without a MDCG
(0.928 AUROC), reflecting the importance of modeling the module (-mg) and an optimal transport module (-ot). FOSS-mg
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4643

Fig. 8. AUROC performance with respect to the percentage of labeled validating data for (a) CIC17, (b) NB15, (c) TON, and (d) 5GAD datasets.

 TABLE IX challenging transition: transferring from enterprise networks
 AUROC C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ODELS W ITH AND to 5G service-based environments, which leads to the lowest
 W ITHOUT M ULTI -G RANULAR (−M G ) AND O PTIMAL performance (0.859).
 T RANSPORT (−OT ) M ODULE
 7) Performance Over Amount of Validating Data: Figure 8
 illustrates the performance of all models against the percentage
 of the complete validating datasets. These validating data
 consist of 350,000 sessions for CIC17, 400,000 sessions each
 for NB15 and TON, and 23,621 sessions for 5GAD, which
 correspond to the minimum data required by LS-GRU (i.e.,
 TABLE X the model with the slowest convergence) to achieve its peak
AUROC OF C ROSS -DATASET E VALUATIONS IN W HICH THE M ODELS A RE performance. The curves reveal distinct patterns among the
 T RAINED ON O NE DATASET AND T ESTED ON A NOTHER . T HE L AST approaches because they utilize different learning paradigms.
 C OLUMN I S THE AVERAGE D EGRADATION C OMPARED
 TO THE I NTRA -DATASET P ERFORMANCE
 Compared to its maximum performance, with only 3% labeled
 validating data, the proposed model reaches 99.47% on CIC17
 (0.943 over 0.948 AUROC), 99.48% on NB15 (0.957 over
 0.962 AUROC), 99.48% on TON (0.949 over 0.954 AUROC),
 and 99.37% on 5GAD (0.950 over 0.956 AUROC). MDCG-
 IDS stabilizes its performance beyond 20% labeled data.
 Especially, MDCG-IDS shows superiority over methods that
 are designed for small-sample data (i.e., AHDM, FOSS).
 AHDM achieves low initial performance and shows little
 improvement with increasing data. Supervised methods reveal
 a high dependency on labeled data, as TCG-IDS employs
 contrastive learning, and LS-GRU combines LSTM with
improves on average by 3.1% compared to FOSS, while GRU. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of parameter
S-NIDS-mg achieves a 1.6% improvement over S-NIDS. optimization through unsupervised optimal transport dis-
These results demonstrate the universal applicability and tances, requiring minimal labeled data solely for score weight
consistent effectiveness of MDCG processing. In the calibration.
CVAE-EVT-ot variant, the Wasserstein distance is inte- 8) Robustness Against Data Contamination: Figure 9 illusgrated as an additional reconstruction loss term that captures trates the evaluations of the models under contaminated data,
distributional differences in the VAE latent space. This where attacks are mixed with benign training samples in a ratio
enhanced variant gains an average improvement of 0.4% over of 0% to 15%. This scenario represents practical conditions
CVAE-EVT. in which obtaining perfectly clean data is challenging. These
 6) Cross-Dataset Evaluation: We perform cross-dataset evaluations include both baseline models that use traditional
experiments in which one dataset is used for training and unsupervised training (Isolation Forest, OSVM) and models
another for testing. Some dataset pairs are considered to that train mainly on benign traffic (FOSS, S-NIDS, and
represent more similar network domains (e.g., CIC17 and CVAE-EVT). The MDCG-IDS framework maintains a high
NB15), while other pairs represent less similar domains (e.g., detection accuracy against contamination, experiencing less
CIC17 and 5GAD). The results in Table X show that the than 6.7% degradation of AUROC at 15% contamination (on
proposed framework demonstrates superior cross-dataset per- CIC17). Traditional unsupervised methods exhibit significant
formance, with an average performance degradation of only performance degradation, showing a decrease of more than
6.2%, compared to the 11.8-21.2% degradation observed in the 20% at 15% contamination. Other methods (FOSS, S-NIDS,
baseline methods. Especially, MDCG-IDS achieves the highest CVAE-EVT) experience more than 14% degradation on all
performance, with scores of 0.923 and 0.937 in the scenarios datasets. Enhanced variants (FOSS-mg, S-NIDS-mg, CVAE-
TON→ 5GAD and 5GAD→TON, respectively. These two EVT-ot) consistently outperform their base versions, but still
datasets represent the IoT and 5G environments, which have significantly fall short of the MDCG-IDS framework.
similar device-heterogeneous and service-oriented character- 9) Computational Efficiency: Fig. 10 presents the comistics. The CIC17 → 5GAD scenario represents the most putational efficiency of the proposed framework compared
4644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 9. Performance of the models against data contamination on (a) CIC17, (b) NB15, (c) TON, and (d) 5GAD. Attack samples are mixed into the benign
training set at a ratio ranging from 0% to 15%.

 1.7 times longer, CVAE-EVT-ot takes 1.5 times longer, and
 S-NIDS-mg takes 1.6 times longer to process than their
 base versions. In Fig. 10d, the computational overhead of
 MDCG-IDS is justified by a substantial performance gain;
 especially, its variants form a clear Pareto front, illustrating the
 trade-off between detection performance and computational
 efficiency. Across the variants, when the dimension components are deactivated, throughput increases dramatically while
 AUROC decreases in a moderate manner.

 VI. D ISCUSSIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
 A. Computational Trade-Offs
 The proposed framework achieves improved performance
 with additional computational cost due to its comprehensive
 MDCG feature analysis. On the one hand, Fig. 10 shows
 that the framework achieves lower throughput than simpler
 baselines, but remaining within a comparable range to state-ofthe-art methods (e.g., CVAE-EVT, S-NIDS), while delivering
 consistently higher detection accuracy. On the other hand,
Fig. 10. Experimental results of the models about the computational efficiency reflecting the throughput characteristics in other works such
on (a) Processing throughput in packets/second, (b) Memory consumption, as [24] (standard enterprise network) and [50] (IoT network),
(c) Processing time, and (d) Accuracy–efficiency trade-off. our deployment targets edge servers or security gateways
 rather than high-speed backbone links, where comprehento baseline methods. This experiment selects the CIC17 sive analysis is prioritized over raw line-rate processing.
dataset as the representative benchmark due to its generic For resource-constrained environments, the framework targets
network environment and widespread adoption, which facil- aggregation points such as IoT gateway, rather than individual
itates cross-study comparisons. Although our framework has resource-limited endpoints. Future engineering optimizations
a comprehensive multi-dimensional processing mechanism, it will include self-optimizing sampling techniques, adaptive
maintains competitive efficiency with a throughput of 12,500 tensor-compute designs, and sparse tensor implementations.
packets per second, a memory consumption of 634 MB, and a
processing time of 80 ms per 1000 packets. Within that multi- B. Optimality
dimensional processing time, the OT computations which have To mitigate the risk of local optima, we improve the
O(n2 × k × D × Gmax ) complexity contribute less than 15% convergence consistency by two common practices: multiple
of the total duration when the Sinkhorn approximation is random initializations and early stopping [24], as described in
utilized. Note that since we use network sessions as the Section V-A. Although global optimality cannot be guaranteed,
data unit, throughput is reported in packets per second by (i.e., a known characteristic of gradient-based methods) the
tracking the number of raw packets contained within each ses- convergence in Fig. 6 as well as the low-variance curves in
sion. Conventional open-set methods (Isolation Forest, OSVM) Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 demonstrate consistent performance across
achieve the highest throughput of 19,800-22,500 packets per 5 independent runs with different initializations. Further, the
second with a minimal memory footprint (98-156 MB) but evaluations throughout the paper, particularly the cross-dataset
deliver poor detection performance (0.831 and 0.818 AUROC, robustness analysis, show stable performance across four
respectively, as shown in Fig. 10d). The advanced base- diverse datasets with varying traffic characteristics.
line methods (FOSS, S-NIDS, CVAE-EVT) demonstrate a
balanced performance-efficiency characteristic, with moderate
throughput (14,800-18,500 packets per second) and reasonable C. Deployment Architecture
memory consumption (245-389 MB). Their enhanced variants Similar to the deployment mechanism in [51] which
show considerable computational overhead: FOSS-mg takes separates offline model update and online inference, the
THI AND GURUSAMY: MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CROSS-GRANULARITY OPEN-SET NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION 4645

MDCG-IDS’s semi-supervised paradigm is designed for a deployment. The practical applicability of the proposed framehybrid deployment where the benign reference set and its work is also validated by its reasonable processing throughput
corresponding parameters are updated offline, while real-time and resource consumption.
inference processes incoming traffic independently. In this
way, the computationally intensive optimization is decoupled
from the online detection which mainly relies on distance com- R EFERENCES
putation. Regarding the preparation of benign traffic, although
 [1] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
this type of data already greatly reduces labeling effort, col- of intrusion detection systems: Techniques, datasets and challenges,”
lecting purely benign records remains a common challenge for Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, Dec. 2019.
weakly-supervised, semi-supervised, cluster-based, and one- [2] N. Sultana, N. Chilamkurti, W. Peng, and R. Alhadad, “Survey on
 SDN based network intrusion detection system using machine learning
class detection frameworks [52]. Given this challenge, our approaches,” Peer-Peer Netw. Appl., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 493–501, Mar.
framework demonstrates that it maintains robust performance 2019.
(less than 6.7% AUROC degradation) even with 15% training [3] (2023). Malware Statistics. [Online]. Available: https://www.av-test.org/
set contamination (Section V-B8). fileadmin/pdf/reports/AV-TESTHYASProtectEvaluationFeb.2023.pdf
 [4] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A
 survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Comput. Secur.,
D. Feature Extraction vol. 86, pp. 147–167, Sep. 2019.
 [5] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 While most MDCG features are derived from packet headers a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
and flow statistics without inspecting application-layer content, in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
some features such as application protocol may be affected by pp. 108–116.
 [6] Z. Lin, Y. Shi, and Z. Xue, “IDSGAN: Generative adversarial networks
encryption. In such cases, features in the MDCG tensor can for attack generation against intrusion detection,” in Proc. Pacific–Asia
be substituted with observable proxies (e.g., destination port Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2022, pp. 79–91.
as an approximation of application protocol under TLS) or [7] W. J. Scheirer, A. de Rezende Rocha, A. Sapkota, and T. E. Boult,
zero-padded, as described in our 5GAD dataset processing. “Toward open set recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
 vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1757–1772, Jul. 2013.
Such substitution or zero-padding strategies apply to other [8] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine
encryption mechanisms such as IPsec, which are challenges learning for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
shared by NIDS frameworks. Privacy, May 2010, pp. 305–316.
 [9] Y. Sharon, D. Berend, Y. Liu, A. Shabtai, and Y. Elovici, “TANTRA:
 Timing-based adversarial network traffic reshaping attack,” IEEE Trans.
E. Future Works Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 3225–3237, 2022.
 [10] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and
 Several extensions would enhance the framework’s practical E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques,
deployability. First, given that the current temporal granulari- systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28,
ties are fixed based on flow timeout conventions, an adaptive Feb. 2009.
 [11] X. Wang, X. Wang, M. He, M. Zhang, and Z. Lu, “Spatial–temporal
granularity selection mechanism could automatically adjust graph model based on attention mechanism for anomalous IoT intrusion
granularity levels based on network characteristics. This adap- detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3497–3509,
tation can optimize the detection performance while reducing Mar. 2024.
the computational overhead for different environments (e.g., [12] S. Cheng, D. Jin, Y. Ma, S. Chen, H. He, and J. Yang, “LinkGuard:
 Link flooding attack detection and mitigation via spatio-temporal graph
bursty control-plane traffic vs. steady sensor streams). Second, convolutional network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5,
the integration of federated learning would create opportunities pp. 4059–4075, Sep. 2024.
for collaborative detection, wherein multiple organizations [13] L. Chao, L. Yinghua, D. Fengqian, and S. Rui, “Spatio-temporal
enhance their intrusion detection capabilities without sharing anomaly detection for 5G-clusters: A multi-scale fuzzy contrastive
 learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw., vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 1588–1602,
sensitive data. In this way, we address both privacy concerns Aug. 2025.
and the challenge of limited diverse training data in individual [14] W. Yang, P. Gao, H. Huang, X. Wei, H. Zhang, and Z. Qu, “Advanced
organizations. persistent threat detection in smart grid clouds using spatiotemporal
 context-aware graph embedding,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf.,
 Dec. 2022, pp. 534–540.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [15] X. Jiang, H.-R. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “Multi-granularity abnormal traffic
 In this paper, we developed a multi-dimensional cross- detection based on multi-instance learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1467–1477, Apr. 2024.
granularity framework for open-set network intrusion detec- [16] J. He, C. Tang, W. Li, T. Li, L. Chen, and X. Lan, “BR-HIDF: An
tion. The framework can decompose network samples anti-sparsity and effective host intrusion detection framework based
into three complementary dimensions—traffic, temporal, and on multi-granularity feature extraction,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 Security, vol. 19, pp. 485–499, 2023.
spatial—each at multiple granularity levels. The integration
 [17] Y. Geng, Y. Li, and S. Zhang, “Research on multi-granularity intruof optimal transport theory provides a novel foundation for sion detection algorithm based on sequential three-way decision,” in
quantifying the distributional deviations between benign and Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Technol. Comput. Eng., Oct. 2021,
known/unknown network attacks. Our evaluations demon- pp. 1154–1160, doi: 10.1145/3501409.3501613.
 [18] C. Villani, Optimal Transport: Old and New, vol. 338. Cham, Switzerstrate substantial improvements in detection accuracy while land: Springer, 2009.
addressing practical deployment challenges. Specifically, the [19] M. Cuturi, “Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal
framework consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods transport,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2013,
across diverse experimental scenarios while requiring minimal pp. 2292–2300.
 [20] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. P. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. Allabeled validating data. The reduced dependency on labeled Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent
traffic, combined with the training exclusively on benign sam- intrusion detection system,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 41525–41550,
ples, addresses the critical issue of data scarcity in practical 2019.
4646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[21] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for [43] Y. A. Farrukh, I. Khan, S. Wali, D. Bierbrauer, J. A. Pavlik, and
 intrusion detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, N. D. Bastian, “Payload-byte: A tool for extracting and labeling packet
 vol. 5, pp. 21954–21961, 2017. capture files of modern network intrusion detection datasets,” in Proc.
[22] T. E. T. Djaidja, B. Brik, S. Mohammed Senouci, A. Boualouache, IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Big Data Comput., Appl. Technol. (BDCAT), Dec.
 and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “Early network intrusion detection enabled by 2022, pp. 58–67.
 attention mechanisms and RNNs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, [44] NProbe. Accessed: Apr. 30, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
 vol. 19, pp. 7783–7793, 2024. www.ntop.org/products/netflow/nprobe/
[23] T. Bilot, N. E. Madhoun, K. A. Agha, and A. Zouaoui, “Graph neural [45] B. Claise, “Cisco systems netflow services export version 9,” Internet
 networks for intrusion detection: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, Eng. Task Force, RFC Editor, Tech. Rep. RFC 3954, Oct. 2004, doi:
 pp. 49114–49139, 2023. 10.17487/RFC3954.
[24] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “TCG- [46] R. Hofstede et al., “Flow monitoring explained: From packet capture to
 IDS: Robust network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph data analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 1475–1486, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037–2064, 4th Quart., 2014.
 2025. [47] G. Sadasivan, N. Brownlee, B. Claise, and J. Quittek, Architecture for
[25] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for IP Flow Information Export, document RFC 5470, Mar. 2009. [Online].
 fast anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5470.txt
 Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023. [48] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
[26] N. Wei et al., “An autoencoder-based hybrid detection model for intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
 intrusion detection with small-sample problem,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2402–2412, Apr. 2024. [49] P. Zhao, Y.-J. Zhang, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Exploratory machine learning
[27] J. Qin, Y. Xun, Z. Deng, and J. Liu, “GPIDS: GAN assisted contextual with unknown unknowns,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 pattern-aware intrusion detection system for IVN,” IEEE Trans. Veh. vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 10999–11006.
 Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 12682–12693, Sep. 2024. [50] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and
[28] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on
 R. C. Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional learning techniques,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3,
 distribution,” Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, Jul. 2001. pp. 2671–2701, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[29] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th [51] C. Wu et al., “WAFBooster: Automatic boosting of WAF security against
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422. [Online]. Available: mutated malicious payloads,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:6505449 vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1118–1131, Mar. 2025.
[30] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection [52] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,” anomaly detection: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR), vol. 54,
 IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024. no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
[31] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, and M. Song, “A scalable network intrusion
 detection system towards detecting, discovering, and learning unknown
 attacks,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 1649–1665,
 Jun. 2021.
[32] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion Minh-Thuyen Thi received the Ph.D. degree in
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, information and communications from Inje Univer-
 2021. sity, South Korea, in 2017. Since 2018, he has
[33] G. Ping and X. Ye, “Open-set intrusion detection with MinMax autoen- been a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Université
 coder and pseudo extreme value machine,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Paul Sabatier, France. Since 2019, he has been a
 Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jul. 2022, pp. 1–8. Researcher with the Communications Systems Labo-
[34] Y. Cao, K. Liu, Y. Lin, L. Wang, and Y. Xia, “Deep-reinforcement- ratory, Institute LIST, CEA, Université Paris-Saclay.
 learning-based self-evolving moving target defense approach against Since 2024, he has been a Research Fellow with
 unknown attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 20, the National University of Singapore, Singapore. His
 pp. 33027–33039, Oct. 2024. research interests include communication networks,
[35] Y. Liu, A. Zhao, L. Du, C. Zhang, H. Yan, and Z. Gu, “OIDMD: game theory-based network control, AI-based net-
 A novel open-set intrusion detection method based on Mahalanobis work management, and machine learning for network intrusion detection.
 distance,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Cyberspace (DSC), Aug.
 2023, pp. 253–260.
[36] J. Wu, H. Dai, K. B. Kent, J. Yen, C. Xu, and Y. Wang, “Open set
 dandelion network for IoT intrusion detection,” ACM Trans. Internet
 Technol., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–26, Feb. 2024.
[37] Y. A. Farrukh, S. Wali, I. Khan, and N. D. Bastian, “Detecting unknown
 attacks in IoT environments: An open set classifier for enhanced network
 intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM),
 Oct. 2023, pp. 121–126. Mohan Gurusamy (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[38] F. Mémoli, “Gromov–Wasserstein distances and the metric approach to the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engineerobject matching,” Found. Comput. Math., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 417–487, ing from Indian Institute of Technology Madras in
 Aug. 2011. 2000. He joined the National University of Singa-
[39] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for pore (NUS) in June 2000, where he is currently an
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” Associate Professor with the Department of Electriin Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6. cal and Computer Engineering (ECE). He has over
[40] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, 280 publications to his credit, including two books
 “TON IoT telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and and three book chapters. His research experience
 IIoT for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, and interests include the areas of the Internet of
 pp. 165130–165150, 2020. Things, 5G, software defined networks, metaverse,
[41] C. Coldwell et al., “Machine learning 5G attack detection in pro- edge computing, and optical networks. He served as the TPC Co-Chair for
 grammable logic,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), several conferences, including IEEE GLOBECOM 2019 (ONS) and IEEE ICC
 Dec. 2022, pp. 1365–1370. 2008 (ONS). He served as an Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C LOUD
[42] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, C OMPUTING, IEEE I NTERNET OF T HINGS J OURNAL, and Photonic Network
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd Communications; and a Guest Editor for IEEE Communications Magazine
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017, and Computer Networks journal. He is serving on the Editorial Board for
 pp. 253–262. Computer Networks journal (Elsevier).