3790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Multi-Scenario Cloud–Edge Collaborative DDoS
 Detection in LLM-Enabled AIoT
 Aoran Huang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Jingfu Yan , Xiaojing Fan , and Huachun Zhou

 Abstract—DDoS attack detection has become crucial for se- provides a hotbed for DDoS attacks [5]. According to research
curing the Internet of Things (IoT). However, next-generation from Nexusguard and Nokia, DDoS attacks targeting IoT surged
intelligent networks produce large-scale, heterogeneous data, and by 233% year-on-year from 2023 to 2024 [6], with daily attack
intrusion-detection systems built on conventional AI models lack frequency increasing from once per day to over 100 times [7],
the capacity to provide targeted detection for diverse IoT appli- underscoring that DDoS has become the primary means of
cation scenarios. Large language models (LLMs) have attracted
attention due to their strong ability to capture contextual recompromising IoT systems [8]. Attackers launch different types
lationships. Given the correlated nature of DDoS flows, using of DDoS attacks according to the characteristics of different
LLMs for scenario-specific DDoS detection across heterogeneous IoT application scenarios [9]. For example, in the consumer
IoT applications is a promising direction. Nevertheless, two main IoT scenario [10] with the main purpose of hijacking and stealchallenges remain: (1) how to enable LLMs to process non-textual ing, botnets are often used for attacks [11]; in the vehicular
DDoS flow data and to leverage edge models’ detection capabilities network [12], DrDoS is a commonly used attack type [13].
within AI-IoT (AIoT) scenarios; and (2) how to design a detection Considering the wide application scenarios of the IoT, whether it
framework that harnesses LLM strengths in large-scale, multi-type is the loss of important flow data caused by the edge device being
data handling to accurately identify diverse attack types across controlled as a zombie machine [14], or the server-side device
IoT application scenarios. To this end, we propose CE4LDD, a being attacked and affecting the normal operation of the entire
cloud–edge collaborative method for detecting DDoS attacks based
on an LLM architecture. We design an order-assignment module, a
 network [15], the risks and costs are unacceptable. Therefore,
token generation group (TGG), and an embedding module for flow targeted detection of DDoS attacks in different IoT scenarios is
data. DDoS detection is formulated as a token-classification task the key to ensuring the security of the IoT [16].
within the LLM. During tokenization, we leverage edge models’ In the face of large-scale flow data caused by the complexity
detection capabilities. Moreover, to support diverse AIoT scenarios, of the IoT architecture and scale [17], how to design a detection
we present EAL-BT, a bottom-up training and detection process. scheme to detect different DDoS attacks in different application
We describe how edge models assist the LLM in scenario-specific scenarios [18] has become a key research issue [19], [20].
detection and provide CE4LDD’s complete training and detection The application scenarios of different edges in a cloud may
workflow. Finally, using CIC2019 and a custom dataset, we simulate be different. Existing solutions primarily deploy AI models at
five IoT scenarios under different DDoS attacks. Experimental the edge, enabling different DDoS detection across multiple
results show that the proposed method can help LLM perform
DDoS detection in AIoT and achieve excellent performance in
 scenarios via techniques like knowledge sharing [21] and fedhandling DDoS attacks across different IoT application scenarios. erated learning (FL) [22]. Or deploy the model directly on the
 cloud/edge side and train the model with a large amount of hybrid
 Index Terms—Large Language Model, AIoT Security, DDoS DDoS data [23]. These methods incur heavy communication
Intelligent Intrusion Detection, Multi-Scenario, Intelligent and computation costs during training, and often suffer from
Network Security. overfitting, slow convergence, and poor generalization.
 The emergence of Large Language Model (LLM) provides a
 I. INTRODUCTION new way to solve the above problems [24], [25]. Its powerful performance has been proved in natural language processing [26],
 ECAUSE edge devices in IoT deployments are directly
B exposed to the Internet, they are more susceptible to network attacks [1]. With the advent of next-generation intelligent
 multimodal [27], [28] and other aspects, and has begun to explore
 its application in wireless communication [29], [30], IoT [31],
 IoV [32] and other fields. Especially in IoT, numerous recent
network technology [2], [3], the access of a large number of studies on the agent mode of LLM in AI-IoT (AIoT) [33],
widely distributed devices with certain bandwidth resources [4] distributed reinforcement learning methods [34], and industrial
not only enriches the application scenarios of the IoT, but also IoT (IIoT) applications [35] have demonstrated the adaptability of LLM in AIoT networks [36]. Leveraging vast training
 Received 28 July 2025; revised 13 October 2025; accepted 19 November 2025. data and its attention mechanism [37], LLM outperforms con-
Date of publication 27 November 2025; date of current version 24 December ventional AI models by capturing broader relationships and
2025. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of
China under Grant U2569201 and Grant 62341102 and in part by the National characteristics among data, making it well-suited for handling
Key R&D Program of China under Grant 2018YFA0701604. Recommended for large-scale, diverse flow data across various AIoT scenarios.
acceptance by Dr. Liehuang Zhu. (Corresponding author: Huachun Zhou.) Combined with the characteristics of DDoS attacks that there
 The authors are with the School of Electronic and Information En- is a certain correlation between their flow, such as frequent
gineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China (e-mail:
huangaoran@bjtu.edu.cn; yanjingfu@bjtu.edu.cn; xiaojing_fan@bjtu.edu.cn;
 access to the same address, multiple use of the same protocol,
hchzhou@bjtu.edu.cn). etc., it is reasonable to use LLM to detect DDoS attacks in
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3637740 AIoT.

 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3791

 However, considering the application scenarios of LLM, the attack types, so as to realize the help of the edge model detection
resource distribution of the IoT and the needs of actual DDoS ability to the LLM in the cloud to detect DDoS attack flow. In
detection, this paper reviews a large number of recent studies addition, the architecture also stipulates the training sequence of
on DDoS detection in AIoT and the application of LLM in IoT, multiple models in the cloud and edge of the detection system
mainly facing the following two difficulties: and the transmission rules of flow in the detection process. This
 r Considering the resource constraints at the AIoT edge [38], paper gives the complete training and testing process, model and
 LLM can only be deployed in the cloud, while edge models data transmission direction of EAL-BT architecture. The main
 retain valuable capabilities for detecting prevalent DDoS contributions of this paper are as follows:
 attacks. How can these edge models be leveraged to assist r A large number of studies on DDoS detection in AIoT and
 LLM in DDoS detection? Additionally, since LLMs are the application of LLM in IoT are reviewed. The key indesigned primarily for textual data—with tokenization, formation such as the technical scheme, scenario-oriented,
 embedding, and associated processes tailored to natural DDoS attack type, and data set used are summarized. The
 language—how can non-textual, unordered flow data be limitations of the current research and the differences and
 selected and preprocessed for ingestion by LLM, thus advantages of the proposed scheme are analyzed.
 utilizing its robust capabilities for flow classification [39]. r A cloud-edge collaboration method named CE4LDD based
 r Edges under the same cloud may serve different application on LLM to detect DDoS attack flow is proposed. To enable
 scenarios [40], and consequently face different types of the LLM to handle non-text DDoS flow data, we order
 DDoS attacks [41]. For example, smart wearable scenarios the flows and design tokenization and embedding methods
 and car networking scenarios can be connected to the same that allow the LLM to bypass masking and analyze correcloud through different edge terminals. However, the main lations in large-scale flow data. The DDoS detection task
 DDoS attacks on the two are different. How to design is corresponding to the token classification task to achieve
 a detection scheme based on the advantages of LLM in flow token classification. In order not to waste the detection
 processing large-scale and multi-type data, so that it can ability in the edge, the edge model is used to construct a
 make targeted attack detection for different types of attacks token generation group to assist the LLM in the cloud to
 in different AIoT scenarios. analyze the characteristics of the flow.
 To address these challenges, this paper first proposes a cloud- r We propose EAL-BT, a bottom-up training and detection
edge collaboration method based on LLM to detect DDoS attack process for AIoT that enables CE4LDD to perform tarflow, named CE4LDD (Cloud Edge for LLM DDoS Detection). geted DDoS detection according to varying attack prefer-
It describes in detail how cloud–edge collaboration processes ences across application scenarios. The complete process
flow data according to LLM characteristics, enabling flow clas- is given. In the training process, the training order: edge
sification using the LLM’s capabilities. Its edge function is model → embedding module, linear projection layer →
provided by the conventional AI model, and the cloud function is T-Gate is specified, and the loss function of embedding
composed of five parts: order generation module, token selection model, linear projection layer and T-Gate training is given.
gating (T-Gate), token generation group (TGG), embedding In the detection process, the transmission rules of flow
module and LLM without mask. Considering the correlation data in the detection process are given based on the trusted
between DDoS attack flow [42], the module is designed to entropy. The supervision and detection part is designed to
give the flow order [43] and generate the flow order matrix. ensure that the detection system can be updated in time.
According to the different types of attacks, the appropriate TGG r CIC2019 and self-dataset are used to simulate five IoT
is selected by T-Gate based on weight entropy. The TGG is scenarios under different DDoS attacks, including DrDoS,
constructed from aggregated edge models and leverages their LDDoS, AppDDoS, NetDDoS and Botnet. The compardetection capabilities. Compared with the tokenization of text ative experiments with the other five models show that
data, there is no padding tokens added in the process of flow the proposed scheme has obvious advantages in terms of
data tokenization, which is more suitable for LLM to process accuracy, recall and F1-score in the face of unbalanced
large-scale and diversified flow data. The embedding module attacks and hybrid attacks. The ablation experiment proves
maps generated flow tokens into a high-dimensional space for that the proposed order assignment module can help LLM
input to the LLM, enabling analysis of richer high-dimensional perform DDoS detection better, and the bottom-up training
features. We disable the LLM’s masking mechanism so it can process can accelerate the convergence speed.
attend to all input flow tokens; DDoS detection is formulated as The remainder of this paper is composed as follows. In
a token-classification task within the LLM, and final predictions Section II, the related work and preliminaries are firstly introare produced by a linear projection layer. duced. In Section III, the architecture, function and implemen-
 To tailor CE4LDD for AIoT environments and enable scenar- tation of CE4LDD are introduced. In Section IV, the complete
iospecific DDoS detection, a bottom-up [44] edge assisted LLM processes of EAL-BT is introduced. The Section V describes
training and detection process called EAL-BT (Edge Assist the simulation experiment. Finally, the Section VI provides a
LLM-Bottom to Top) is proposed. The architecture can use the summary of this paper.
targeted detection ability of the edge model to help the detection
of LLM. For the edge, edge clusters are defined according to the
division of application scenarios. The edge model in each cluster
is trained based on the flow data of the subordinate IoT devices, II. RELATED WORK AND PRELIMINARIES
so that it has a certain DDoS detection capability. Models in This section introduces the DDoS detection in AIoT and the
the same cluster is aggregated into the cloud to construct a application of LLM in AIoT. In preliminaries, the basic idea of
TGG, and the last hidden-layer outputs of these edge models are using LLM to process flow data, as well as DDoS classification
combined to generate tokens corresponding to different DDoS and its correlation, are introduced.
3792 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

A. Related Work segmentation learning and FL respectively. MFGD3QN [52]
 proposed a multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithm
 1) DDoS Detection in AIoT: The development of next gen- (MADRL) by constructing the mean field game model (MFG),
eration network technology provides support for ubiquitous and realized the DDoS defense strategy in the edge intelligent
collaboration and connectivity [45], and will also bring more scene. FOSS [62] used the isolation tree as the backbone to
opportunities for DDoS attacks [46]. The rise of complex ap- construct a model to segment the data distribution hyperplane to
plication scenarios, such as satellite-terrestrial integrated net- detect unknown DDoS attacks in IoT. However, neither of them
works [47], has compelled researchers to account for scenario- can take advantage of the detection ability of the edge model.
specific characteristics. For IoT, different IoT application scenar- FlEAM [63] uses distributed data sets to train the global model
ios and types are vulnerable to different types of DDoS attacks. through FL and edge computing to mitigate DDoS attacks, and
Firstly, some work on DDoS attacks in a single IoT scenario or realizes the use of edge models while supporting multi-scene
type is sorted out. X. He et al. [48] et al. simulated the DNS detection. However, since the model that needs to be transmitted
attack of DrDoS in the ship IoT scenario based on Markov to the edge in the cloud is too large, the scheme cannot support
chain, proved that the IoT in the marine network is vulnerable LLM. R. F. Hayat et al. [64] proposed a multi-level DDoS
to DNS rebinding attacks, and gave the detection and defense mitigation method that uses blockchain verification mechanisms
system by controlling access rights. Z. Liu et al. [49] analyzed to blocklist suspicious devices to prevent them from being
the characteristics of LDDoS in SDN-IoT, and designed a double controlled. In addition, compared with the proposed methods,
sliding method with expansion filling to deal with LDDoS flow. although the above method support multi-scenario DDoS attack
Combined with CNN and LSTM, a detection method of LDDoS detection, they essentially still use hybrid DDoS attacks to train
is proposed. Yin.W et al. [50] proposed a feature optimization a common model to sink to the edge. The edge does not have
method for LDDoS detection by combining clustering algo- the ability to detect a certain DDoS attack, and the ability of the
rithm and decision number to filter traffic features for SDN-IoT edge model is not fully utilized. Our scheme can detect various
network features. For the application scenario of smart grid, types of DDoS attacks according to different scenarios.
M.N.Kurt et al. [51] took UDP Flood attack and spam attack in Table I provides an overview of the above methods, including
NetDDoS as the detection objects in this scenario, and proposed model methods, IoT scenarios/types, types of DDoS attacks that
an online privacy-preserving anomaly detection method through can be detected, edge model utilization capabilities, use of data
data-driven and differential privacy methods. Z. Tian et al. [52] sets and whether LLM is supported. Among them, it is difficult
analyzed AppDDoS attacks in Web of things and used deep to support LLM access due to incompatibility with LLM in some
learning to detect AppDDoS attacks based on various URL aspects.
representation methods. Jia. Y [53] used GNN to analyze the 2) LLM for IoT: Recent research on the combination of LLM
characteristics of DDoS attacks initiated by various applications and next-generation network communication has proved the
and their characteristics for smart home scenarios, and proposed feasibility of LLM enabling multi-type networks [65], and also
an improved RCNN user activity inference to help AppDDoS provided a basis for deploying LLM for IoT [66], [67]. With
detection. X. Yan et al. [54] analyzed the enhancement effect the development of multi-agent technology [68], helping IoT
of smart contracts on botnets in the smart blockchain scenario, processing tasks through Agent mode is a major way for LLM
and proposed a botnet detection method based on domain em- to be applied in IoT [69]. Rivkin et al. [31] triggered LLM
bedding and unsupervised learning. W. Ma et al. [55] proposed control discrete program based on user request to realize agent
a lightweight botnet detection method based on the proposed function in smart home scenario. H. Cui et al. [70] proposed an
cloud-edge-node framework in resource-constrained IoT scenar- AI-oriented proxy framework, which implements language-toios. A. Sharma et al. [56] discussed a fundamental component code conversion based on LLM to generate control scripts to
of IDS based on the important parameter security in intelligent orchestrate complex task execution in IoT. Facing the IoT of
healthcare scenarios by combining deep learning, CNN and multiple application scenarios, Zhong et al. [71] designed the
bidirectional LSTM. An intrusion detection method for multiple LLM agent system through the memory and summary module,
attacks including botnets is designed. A. Ali et al. [57] designed a and provided strategies for different application scenarios based
homomorphic encryption model based on hybrid deep learning on prompts and historical data. B. Xiao et al. [72] proposed a
and combined with blockchain to achieve privacy protection LLM-based generative IoT system that uses prompt enhanced
and network attack resistance in the industrial medical Inter- LLM to help IoT handle tasks in different application scenarios.
net of Things scenario. M. F. Saiyedand et al. [58] integrated Based on generative adversarial networks and self-learning,
CNN and LSTM to detect hybrid DDoS attacks, and optimized Tu et al. [73] proposed the Seafarer architecture, which solves
the integrated model by pruning to facilitate deployment on the problem of model deviation when using heterogeneous data
resource-constrained IoT devices. to fine-tune LLM to help deal with unknown tasks in AIoT.
 Beyond DDoS analysis and detection in single IoT sce- N.-B.-V.Le et al. [74] added LLM to the auxiliary layer to help
narios, distributed architectures or cloud–edge collaboration users analyze different environmental conditions and data. A.
have been proposed to address detection needs across diverse Selim et al. [75] used LLM to detect the curve manipulation
IoT application scenarios [59]. H. Feng et al. [60] designed of Volt/VAR based on text control command to realize network
a multi-agent reinforcement learning method supporting GNN attack detection in smart grid. B. Karunanayake et al. [76] proin SDN-IoT for path selection to mitigate DDoS attacks. This posed an adaptive IDS policy orchestration framework without
paper theoretically supports multi-scenario DDoS detection, and LLM reasoning in the policy execution phase by combining
agent supports LLM access, but there is no further design and LLM Agent with advanced prompt policy in real-time IoT, which
discussion. The three schemes of MFGD3QN [61], FOSS [62] meets the delay-sensitive requirements of real-time IoT.
and FlEAM [63] meet the needs of DDoS detection in different The above research mainly focuses on the agent application
application scenarios of IoT through distributed architecture, of LLM in IoT, while another active research area involves
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3793

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF DDOS DETECTION SCHEMES IN AIOT

leveraging LLM’s architecture to address network issues in IoT by retrieval enhancement technology, and used local models
via cloud-edge collaborative fine-tuning and inference [77]. M. to enhance global models with federated continuous learning
Fu et al. [78] pre-trained and fine-tuned traffic data by assigning (FCL) to improve the accuracy of fault diagnosis in IIoT.
context semantics to traffic data, combined with targeted data Table II summarizes the application of LLM model in differsets. Using ability of LLM to process context, an LLM-based ent IoT scenarios. It is worth noting that although this paper also
IDS is given in IoV, which can detect attacks in a dynamic directly uses the LLM architecture to empower AIoT, the method
environment. Q. Liu et al. [79] used LLM to learn multiple proposed in this paper is different from FL. FL is to help each
types of data, and generated a real-time RIS model by letting node learn global knowledge through a top-down architecture,
LLM learn traffic data such as channels and vehicles. Based so that the size of the model transmitted to the edge is large. As a
on this model, a wireless resource allocation strategy is given. result, LLM in the cloud needs to be pruned or transmitted some
R. Zhang et al. [80] discussed the integration method of genera- parameters to send to the edge, which makes it difficult to give
tive AI (GAI) in vehicle networks, and proposed a multi-modal full play to the performance of LLM. Our method is a bottom-up
semantic awareness framework to support multi-modal content architecture that uses global nodes to provide knowledge help
generation to guide system operation. G. Sun et al. [81] proposed for large models in the cloud and avoids problems in FL. The
a new GAI framework to improve communication and security existing scheme is mainly based on the language processing
performance in UAV networking scenarios. The combination of ability of LLM and deploys it as an expert model that can answer
LLM and federated learning is a typical example. Federal LLM questions in AIoT for tasks such as text analysis and answering.
is systematically introduced by J. Hu et al. [82], including its The data format processed is limited to text data. The proposed
paradigm, workflow and future challenges. S. Han et al. [83] pro- scheme directly uses LLM to empower AIoT, and uses LLM as a
posed an attack defense method named FedSecurity based on FL large neural network model to process the input non-text format
and gave a joint LLM training method. F. Wu et al. [84] refined flow data.
public datasets through FL to adapt to private datasets, helping users with insufficient data to achieve privacy-preserving
fine-tuning of LLM. C. Han et al. [85] proposed a hierarchical B. Preliminaries
federated collaborative computing framework. By dynamically 1) LLM for Flow Data: LLM consists of four parts: Tosplitting the LLM into a global shared layer and a device native kenization, embedding, LLM backbone and LLM task. The
layer, the inference speed and malicious node detection per- tokenization part divides the input text, and adds padding token
formance in resource-constrained environments are improved. to cooperate with the mask mechanism in the LLM backbone
Aiming at special IoT application scenarios such as IIoT, con- to ensure that LLM cannot observe the subsequent input and
sidering its problems of resource coordination and delay [86], ensure the reliability of the model. Embedding is responsible
Y. Liu et al. [87] used LLM as a supervisor to realize fault for vectorizing the generated token and mapping it to a highdiagnosis in IIoT through vertical federated learning (VFL) com- dimensional space for feature analysis. The LLM skeleton part
bined with brain-like thinking chain. Y. Xia et al. [88] assisted is based on multiple Transformers to capture the order and
LLM to generate virtual data sets in the case of sensor failure context correlation between tokens. Its essence is also composed
3794 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON OF APPLICATION SCHEMES OF LLM IN AIOT

of Transformer combined with other machine learning models, 2) DDoS Categories and Correlations: In this paper, DDoS
activation functions and other common modules, and its weights is divided into five categories: Botnet [11]: Botnet infects a
are generated by training a large number of training data sets. large number of hosts to form a one-to-many network for bots
Finally, perform tasks, including token classification, inference to launch attacks. Application layer DDoS (AppDDoS) [89]:
tasks, and prediction tasks. Analyzing LLM’s core reveals that, Puppet hosts use the application layer protocol to issue a large
despite its design for language processing, its ML-based back- number of requests to the server to exhaust resources. Network
bone can fundamentally handle non-text flow data. Therefore, Layer DDoS (NetDDoS) [90]: Depletes resources by repeatedly
the key to LLM processing flow data is how to design a token sending ACK or SYN packets without responding to a flooding
generation module suitable for data to generate flow token and attack. Low-rate DDoS (LDDoS) [91]: Slow data transmission
embedding parts. prevents the server from interrupting the connection with the
 The flow is regarded as a language to generate a flow token attacking host to exhaust resources. Reflex DDoS (DrDoS) [13]:
after tokenization. Through the context analysis ability of LLM, Sends a large number of packets to the server by forging packets
the correlation between the front and back flow tokens can be and IP addresses to overwhelm the target host. From the above
analyzed and the deep context features can be learned. This is five principles of DDoS attacks is not difficult to see, DDoS atdifficult to achieve by conventional AI models. Conventional tacks often use duplicate protocols and often go through the same
AI often detects attack flow only for the characteristics of a IP/Port address. This shows that DDoS attacks have similarities
single flow, such as header characteristics, interval time, etc. in the direction of flow, source address, destination address,
This method ignores the important relationship between flows. protocol and other characteristics. Based on this similarity and
DDoS attacks overwhelm hosts by denying access via volumi- combined with the ability of LLM context correlation, DDoS
nous, interrelated flows. After flow tokenization, LLM can not flow can be better detected. However, the routinely collected
only mine the deep information between flow tokens, but also DDoS flow is sorted by default in chronological order. This
learn the correlation between each flow feature. Therefore, the sorting method is difficult to reflect the characteristics of DDoS
analysis method using LLM is more in line with the principle of attacks. Detection in this order weakens the LLM’s attention to
DDoS attack. Finally, the DDoS detection task is corresponding the related rows before and after the flow. In order to enable LLM
to the token classification task to realize the processing of flow to better play its contextual performance, this paper designs
data by LLM. a order assignment module based on the correlation of DDoS
 The pre-training purpose of Llama3 used in this paper is to attack flow.
predict the next token. Token classification task is not its native
function, which needs to be realized by adding a linear classi- III. OVERVIEW OF CE4LDD
fication layer to map to the target label space. Therefore, the This section mainly introduces the overall composition and
same method is used in the flow token classification to achieve principle of CE4LDD detection scheme in AIoT, including the
the final DDoS detection. In addition, since the requirement of detection architecture, cloud edge function and the working
DDoS detection does not need to predict the next token, the mask principle of each component. It elaborates how to use the
mechanism blocks the observable range of the subsequent input correlation between flow and realize DDoS attack detection in
flow in order to ensure the feasibility of the prediction. In order to different application scenarios based on the performance of LLM
analyze all the input flow more widely, the mask mechanism is through the bottom-up cloud edge collaboration method. The
deleted. The proposed reverse filling mechanism ensures that key symbols and notations are listed in Table III.
the integrity of the LLM architecture will not be destroyed
after the mask removal mechanism, as shown in III B. Consid- A. Overall Architecture
ering the difficulty of using a large amount of data to train LLM, The system architecture is shown in Fig. 1, including the
the method proposed in this paper can keep the LLM backbone cloud, edge service layer and device layer. In the device
unchanged, and the idea of designing only token, embedding layer, the set of IoT devices accessed is represented as D =
and linear layer modules is reasonable and feasible. {D1 , D2 , · · · DK }.For the k-th device Dk ∈ D, it selects the
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3795

 TABLE III {{S1 , . . . , Si }1 , . . . , {Sj , . . . , Sm }P }, where Si , Sj ∈ Cx ⊆
 KEY SYMBOLS AND NOTATIONS
 S. The clusters in the edge service layer and the devices connected to the corresponding clusters in the device layer constitute
 a multi-application scenario of the IoT, a total of P scenarios.
 The composition in the cloud of CE4LDD is shown in Fig. 1,
 which mainly includes two parts: pre-processing and LLM detection. The pre-processing component handles data and models
 from the edge, encompassing the data pre-processing module,
 the order generation module, T-Gate and the upload model
 merging module. The data pre-processing module is responsible
 for the preliminary preprocessing of the flow data uploaded from
 the edge data to the cloud. The order generation module is responsible for sorting the preprocessed flow data according to its
 characteristics, giving it order, so as to facilitate the subsequent
 LLM analysis of the correlation between flow. T-Gate select the
 corresponding TGG by analyzing the type of attack that the flow
 data may belong to. The upload model merging module divides
 the uploaded model according to the edge server cluster, deletes
 the final output layer and averages the output of the last hidden
 layer.
 The LLM detection part is responsible for classifying the
 processed flow to distinguish whether it is DDoS attack flow,
 which is composed of TGG, embedding module, LLM without
 mask and linear projection layer. TGG is composed of a neural
 network model uploaded by the edge server, which is responsible
 for tokenizing the flow data and performing high-dimensional
 mapping through the embedding module to facilitate input to
 LLM for processing. The model in each edge server cluster
 deletes the output layer and combines them to form a TGG,
 which can be represented as G = {G1 , G2 · · · , GP }, where
 Gx ⊆ G. The LLM without mask mechanism is responsible
 for processing the data after embedding. Through the maskless mechanism, it focuses on a wider range of flow and pays
 attention to the correlation between its flow, so as to facilitate the
 token classification task of the tokenized flow token to achieve
 the distinction of DDoS attack flow. The linear projection layer
 is responsible for the dimensionality reduction mapping of the
 high-dimensional data output by the LLM and the final classification result is output.
Fig. 1. CE4LDD schematic diagram in AIoT.

edge server it connects according to the nearest principle and B. Function Description and Implementation
transmits the flow data Fk = {fk1 , fk2 , . . . , fkNk } to it, where This section mainly describes the functions of each module in
fkn ∈ Fk represents each flow data collected by the device, the edge and cloud and the basic principles of its implementation.
and Nk represents the number of flows in the k-th device. It describes in detail how to use LLM to process flow data
Each flow is represented by the feature fkn ∈ R1×B obtained and cooperate with the detection ability of the edge model
by the edge, where B is the number of features. Because the to realize the detection of DDoS attack flow, including flow
analysis using all the features of the flow is too burdensome pre-processing, order assignment, tokenization and embedding,
for communication and does not help much for performance LLM detection and final result output.
prompts, in the selection of the number of features, feature 1) Function Description and Implementation in Edge: The
selection methods can be used, such as random forests, to edge application scenario consists of two parts: the IoT device
select some important typical features for analysis [92]. The layer and the edge service layer. IoT devices are mainly responsiset of all flow data is represented as F = {F1 , F2 , . . . , FK }. ble for collecting flow in the network and transmitting it to edge
In the edge service layer, the edge server set is represented servers for processing. The edge server includes two functions:
as S = {S1 , S2 , . . . , Sm }, and one neural network model Mi flow feature extraction and edge attack detection model training.
is deployed in each edge server Si . The set of models is rep- For the flow transmitted by the device, the characteristics of the
resented as M = {M1 , M2 , . . . , Mm }, exists |S| = |M| = m. flow is used to represent the flow. Firstly, feature extraction is car-
Each edge server connects to the wireless transmission node ried out, and important features are screened by machine learnaccording to the proximity principle, which is responsible for ing and other methods. Each flow is represented by B features
transmitting the data and models in the edge server to the as fkn ∈ R1×B . Then, personalized model training is performed
cloud. All edge servers connected to the same node form based on the collected flow and filtered features. The detection
an edge server cluster, denoted as C = {C1 , C2 , . . . , CP } = model obtained by has a certain detection preference based on
3796 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

the flow data obtained by the edge server cluster. For example, Based on the principle of DDoS attack, the flow order hides the
the AppDDoS attacks in this application scenario are more, attacker’s attack mode. When there is frequent flow through
and the trained model has a strong detection abil- the same IP address or the same port, it is likely to be a
ity for AppDDoS, which is called edge personalization harbinger of malicious attacks. Similarly, the high frequency
model. For the obtained i-th edge personalization model use of specific protocols may also represent the occurrence
Mi ∈ M, it can be expressed as Mi = {Ii , Li , Oi } = of attacks. These attacks indicate that the starting position,
{Ii , (Li1 , Ni1 ), . . . , (Liq , Niqi ), Oi }, where Ii represents the destination, transmission direction and mode of flow can be
input layer set, Li represents the hidden layer set andOi repre- used as an important basis for distinguishing flow categories.
sents the output layer set. The (Liq , Niqi ) represents the q-th Five-tuple IPsrc , IPdst , P ortsrc , P ortdst , P rotocol is used
hidden layer in the model Mi and the number of neurons to divide and sort flow Fk according to source IP, destination IP,
contained in the hidden layer is Niqi , while the total number source port, destination port and protocol.
of hidden layers in the model is qi . Note that in order to ensure The flow of the same source and purpose is divided into
that the size of the data dimension intercepted from the model a regional flow block, which is represented as Buk , where u
is consistent, it is necessary to make the last hidden layer of is the index, and the divided Buk is sorted according to the
the model in the same edge cluster have the same number of transmission protocol used to sort the regional flow blocks of
neurons Niqi . After obtaining the characteristics of the flow the same protocol together.
and the edge detection model, the wireless transmission node is Buk = {fkn |fkn ∈ fki,kj ,
responsible for transmitting the two to the cloud for subsequent
processing. In addition, according to the above model set, the (Src(fki ) = Src(fkj ) ∩ Dst(fki ) = Dst(fkj ))∪
TGG representation can be updated to G = {G1 , . . . , GP } =
 (Src(fki ) = Dst(fkj ) ∩ Dst(fki ) = Src(fkj ))}. (2)
{{{I1 , L1 }, . . . , {Ii , Li }}1 , . . . , {· · · }P }, where {Ii , Li } ∈
Mi ∈ Gx ⊆ G. Finally, according to the detection results, the where fki , fkj represent the i, j-th flow in the k-th device. Src(·)
data and models of different scenes in the edge are uploaded to represents the source of flow, and Dst(·) represents the purpose
the cloud (see Section IV for details) and further detected by of flow. For the divided flow block Buk , its interior can be divided
CE4LDD. more carefully according to the direction of flow transmission.
 2) The Function and Implementation of CE4LDD in Cloud: Assuming that BS2D represents the source-to-destination flow
The cloud function of CE4LDD includes two parts: pre- and BD2S represents the destination-to-source flow, it can be
processing and LLM detection. The pre-processing part is re- expressed as follows.
sponsible for processing and selecting the data and models u
 BS2D = {fkn |fkn ∈ fki,kj , Src(fki ) = Src(fkj )} ,
uploaded from the edge to the cloud. The data pre-processing
module and the order generation module are responsible for
 u
 BD2S = {fkn |fkn ∈ fki,kj , Dst(fki ) = Dst(fkj )} . (3)
processing the flow data. The upload model merging module is Therefore, Buk can be expressed as
responsible for processing the edge models of different scenar- Buk = {BS2D
 u u
 , BD2S }. (4)
ios. T-Gate is responsible for matching data and TGG; the LLM
detection part is jointly coordinated by the TGG, the embedding |Bu | is defined as the number of flows it contains. The function
 k

module, the LLM without mask and the linear projection layer Seq(·) is used to represent the order assignment process of the
to realize the detection of DDoS flow. entire generated regional flow block. It should be noted that
 Data pre-processing module: Processing flow data uploaded the Seq(·) function not only contains the generation of regional
by different scenarios. Since the flow data transmitted from the flow blocks, but also is responsible for sorting the generated
edge has been preprocessed by feature extraction and screening blocks according to the protocol. For the flow data FK of the
before it is used for edge model training and testing. In this k-th device, the flow can be expressed as equation (5) after being
process, it is necessary to filter and normalize the transmitted order assigned.
features so that the model can quickly converge during subse- 
 U
  k
quent training. Assume that fkn ∈ R1×B is the flow transmitted Seq(Fk ) = {B1k , B2k , · · · BUk },  B u  = Nk . (5)
to and f¯kn represents the average value of flow features and fˆkn u=1
represents the variance. The normalized fkn s
 can be expressed Through the generation method of regional flow block, the
as transmission direction and mode of flow, the starting point and
   end point position can be included in the subsequent sorting
 f − f¯kn 
 fkn = 
 s
 . (1) basis, so as to realize a more reasonable sorting of flow to mine
 fˆkn + α more correlation between flow.
 After generating regional flow blocks according to the above
Where α is the minimum value, in order to prevent the denomi- sorting method, in order to more effectively input into LLM and
nator becoming 0. In the course of the experiment, a random make full use of its correlation detection ability and parallel
minimum value can be used to set u. Because for fˆkn = 0, processing characteristics, the order matrix of regional flow
∃|f − f¯kn | = 0, it cannot affect the actual results. blocks is generated and the generation diagram of the order
 Flow order generation module: For the flow data after pro- matrix is shown in Fig. 2.
cessing, in order to use LLM to analyze the correlation between The obtained flow blocks are sorted by rows to obtain the
flow, it is necessary to give a clear order to the flow. Because flow order matrix. For Nk flow data, assuming that the number of
the collection of flow is carried out in chronological order flows perrowis V , the number of rows required can be expressed
and the order of flow in the time dimension is not obvious, as W = NVk . The input flow is filled sequentially until the last
only focusing on the time dimension is not enough to reveal flow. For the last line, if it is not filled completely, the input
the internal relationship and characteristics of the flow itself. flow is filled backward until it is filled. This sorting method can
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3797

 can be expressed as
 
 P
 s
 H(gi (fkn )) = − s
 gi (fkn ) · log(gi (fkn
 s
 )). (8)
 i=1
 The closer the entropy value is to 0, which means H(g(fkn s
 )) →
 0, the better the effect of selection gating. For the trained gating
 model, the maximum weight of the output is selected as the
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of flow order matrix generation. basis for the selection of TGG, which can be expressed as
 {Gp |gp (fkn
 s
 ) = max(g(fkn s
 ))}.
 The upload model is merged to generate TGG and embedensure that the number of flows in each row of the generated flow ding: After the gated control makes a decision, the flow data
matrix is the same, and the correlation between the front and back is transmitted to the specified TGG Gp , which is composed of
reaches the maximum. For the subsequent input is processed in the models in the corresponding edge server cluster, and the
LLM, the input is performed by column input. Because when transmission process is based on the EAL-BT architecture.
generating regional flow blocks, the flow with strong correlation After the edge model is transmitted to the cloud, the upload
is clustered and sorted, and this order is maintained when the model merging module merges the models of different scenarios
flow order matrix is generated, which ensures that each flow has to generate TGG. For model Mi = {Ii , Li , Oi }, the input layer
a strong correlation with the flows at both ends, so as to give Ii and the hidden layer Li of the model are saved, the output layer
full play to the ability of LLM to extract correlation. Moreover, Oi is discarded, and all the connections and weight relationships
because the length of a DDoS flow is variable, we represent flow between the input layer and the hidden layer and the hidden
using a fixed set of flow characteristics so that the token length layer are retained, and the detection ability of the edge model
remains controllable. In other words, the token length can be is retained to the greatest extent. The flow data input is a highadjusted by selecting the number of flow characteristics. dimensional vector through the output of the last hidden layer.
 For the generated flow order matrix, its row index r and Assuming that the input flow data is fkn ∈ R1×B , since the
column index c can be expressed as edge model is frozen in the subsequent process, Mi (·) is used
  i to represent the output of the last hidden layer of the model,
 r= V + 1, i mod V = 0 , which means that yi = Mi (fkn ), where yi ∈ R1×Niqi , W Liq ∈
 i
 V , i mod V = 0 RB×Niqi , W Liq is the weight matrix of the last hidden layer.
  For the edge server cluster Cp ∈ C, the number of models
 i mod V, i mod V = 0
 c=
 m, i mod V = 0
 . (6) it contains is |Cp |. As the last hidden layer of each model
 is configured with the same number of neurons, leading to
where i represents the order of flow in Seq(Fk ) after sorting. So identical output dimensions, thus |y1 | = |y2 | = · · · = |y|Cp | | can
far, the flow order is given to the process to complete, and the be obtained. So the output of TGG can be expressed as
change of the disordered flow to the ordered matrix Fk → Xk is |Cp |
realized, where Fk ∈ RNk ×B , Xk ∈ RW ×V ×B . All subsequent i=1 yi
 y T oken = ∈ R1×Niqi . (9)
flow processing processes are based on this order, and the input |Cp |
is entered into the LLM by column input to ensure that the LLM Where [[·]] is defined as a rounded symbol. Therefore, the output
can fully extract the correlation between the successively input of all the flow of the k-th device after TGG is expressed as Xk →
data. XkT oken ∈ RW ×V ×Niqi , which indicates that the dimension of
 T-Gate: Tokenization is required before inputting LLM for the feature is mapped from B dimension to Niqi , which is the
the flow given order. In the scheme proposed in this paper, the number of neurons in the last hidden layer.
work of tokenization is undertaken by TGG, and how to select For the generated flow token matrix, in order to facilitate batch
the appropriate group is responsible by T-Gate.This design is processing and ensure that the order length is consistent, in the
inspired by Mixed Expert Models (MoE) [93]. The gating uses a subsequent input to LLM according to the column, the direction
small neural network to obtain the probability score of the attack filling processing in the order matrix generation process ensures
type of the input flow according to the flow characteristics, and that the order length of this input method is consistent. In order to
calculates the activation weight of each TGG according to the facilitate the description, the subsequent processing of the token
output probability score. matrix is still introduced from the perspective of the matrix.
 For the edges where there are P edge model clusters, P TGGs After obtaining the output of the TGG, it needs to be mapped
are generated according to the model uploaded by them, which in high dimension to realize emedding, which is convenient for
correspond to P personalized attack types, denoted as Attp , so subsequent input into LLM. For the output of TGG, its feature
gate control generates P weights, expressed as {g1 · · · gP }. For extraction ability comes from the edge model. In order to use
 s
the input flow fkn , the weight is expressed as follows the performance of LLM to detect malicious flow, the linear
 s
 gi (fkn s
 ) = softmax(Wg fkn + bg ), i = 1 · · · P (7) classification results after LLM output are used to train the
 embedding model.
 For the fkn s
 ∈ Attp of the p-th attack type, gp (fkn s
 ) → 1 and For the flow data that the order is given, in order to make full
{g1 (fkn ), . . . , gi (fkn ), . . . , gP (fkn )} → 0, i = p are required,
 s s s
 use of its order, the MLP-Mixer composed of Token-Mixing
indicating that the more accurate the classification of the attack, MLP and Channel-Mixing MLP is used for high-dimensional
the more reasonable the selection of the gating. Because of mapping for embedding. Compared with conventional MLP,
P s s
 i=1 gi (fkn ) = 1, the weight entropy H(gi (fkn )) can be used MLP-Mixer processes data channels and spatial dimensions
 s
to reflect the performance of the selection gating, H(gi (fkn )) through two independent MLPs, which can better capture global
3798 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

features and the relationship between features, and is more
suitable for processing flow data after giving order.
 For the tokenized flow data XkT oken , the data is first flat-
 T oken
tened to Xk,flatten = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xW ×V ], and the flattening
data is linearly transformed by the weight coefficient W T M to
T oken T oken
X k,flatten = W T M Xk,flatten
 T oken
 , where X k,flatten ∈ RW ×V ×B .
 T oken
 T oken
 Finally, the output XkT M = Xk,flatten + σ(X k,flatten ) of the
Token-Mixing MLP is obtained by adding the original input and the linear change after activation through the residual connection, where σ(·) represents the nonlinear activation
function (such as GELU, etc.). The XkT M is input into the
Channel-Mixing MLP, and the feature fusion transformation
is performed on it by the weight coefficient W CM to ob-
 CM
tain X k = W CM XkT M ∈ RW ×V ×B . The output XkCM =
 CM
XkT M + σ(X k ) of Channel-Mixing MLP is obtained by
residual connection. The high-dimensional mapping weight matrix W h is used to map it to high dimensions to obtain
 Fig. 3. LLM structure diagram for correlation analysis.
 XkEm = W h XkCM ∈ RW ×V ×H . (10)
Where H denotes the high-dimensional dimension to be After a series of operations such as merging and normalization,
mapped. the feature is input into a MLP for high-dimensional extraction.
 LLM without mask: The flow data is mapped into high- After repeatedly passing through the N layer backbone, the
dimensional data by embedding and input into LLM.Since it output result is expressed as y Bb = Backbone(X Em ). The
remains order and in the form of matrix, considering the charac- input X Em of the LLM is input by column, and then the flow
teristics of LLM processing input data, it is input by column. In token after high-dimensional mapping is classified according
LLM, in order to ensure the reliability of the output prediction to the idea of token classification in llama3. Finally, enter
results, a mask mechanism is introduced to block all data after the classification task part, perform dimensionality reduction
the current input, so as to prevent the input data observed in through the linear layer and output the final classification result
advance from affecting the prediction results. However, in the y Class = Class(y Bb ) in combination with the loss function.
input process of flow data, the purpose is to analyze the rela- The effective part is the first |Fk | term of y Class , and the last
tionship between flow tokens to help detect DDoS flow without W × V − |Fk | term is the reverse filling of the complete matrix
predicting the next flow token. Therefore, the existence of the in order to supplement the order assignment, rather than the
mask mechanism affects the LLM ’s analysis of the correlation original flow data.
between all input flow. In the proposed flow token generation Corresponding the entire flow detection process to the LLM
process, padding tokens are not used to unify the length of the workflow can better understand how the TGG, the embedding
input flow, but the generated flow matrix is input column by module, the LLM without mask, and the linear projection layer
column to achieve length unification. Therefore, the mask mech- work together. The text input in LLM is divided into tokens and
anism can be ignored and its batch processing ability and model vectorized embedding into the LLM backbone. The proposed
performance can not be affected. The way to ignore the mask scheme divides the flow order matrix into flow tokens and vecmechanism is to directly return the causal mask of the lower torizes them through the TGG. The TGG is composed of an edge
triangle generated in the _prepare_decoder_attention_mask to model with characteristic DDoS attack detection capabilities,
None, so as to realize the full connection of attention to observe and then the flow token is mapped to a high-dimension through
all the input flow token, and improve the ability of the model to the embedding module and input into the LLM backbone. The
analyze the internal relationship of the context flow token. DDoS detection task is corresponding to the token classification
 For the flow data after the order is given, it still maintains its task in LLM, and the flow token is classified. For the output that
order after TGG and embedding. In order to enable LLM to pay is still in a high-dimensional state after classification, the linear
attention to the relationship between a wider range of flow and projection layer is used to project it to low-dimensional to obtain
analyze the order relationship between flows, make full use of the final DDoS detection result. During the training process,
its order, LLM also needs to ignore the mask mechanism. The the LLM backbone is frozen, and the embedding and linear
LLM ignoring the mask mechanism can focus on all the data projection layers are considered as a whole for joint training.
before and after the current input. The improved LLM structure We exclude the LLM backbone from the training scope because
diagram for flow correlation analysis is shown in Fig. 3. fine-tuning it requires substantial computational resources, the
 The improved LLM structure is based on llama3 as the back- available dataset is far smaller than the corpus used during the
bone, which consists of flow processing part, backbone part and LLM’s pretraining, and fine-tuning risks degrading the model’s
classification task part. Flow Processing maps the flow to high pre-trained contextual understanding. Furthermore, fine-tuning
dimensions through the token generation team and embedding offers limited opportunity to leverage the capabilities of the edge
to get X Em input to backbone. After normalization in backbone, model.
we first analyze the relationship between flow by the attention So far, the whole CE4LDD scheme has been completed. In
mechanism without adding padding token to bypass the mask. AIoT, through cloud edge collaboration, the detection ability
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3799

Fig. 4. The complete EAL-BT training and testing process.

of the edge model is aggregated from different edge scenarios Step 3 means that the flow data and the trained model
from bottom to top to construct the corresponding TGG, and are transmitted to the cloud for data preprocessing and TGG
the TGG is selected based on weight entropy by selection generation for subsequent processing. The data preprocessing
gating. The flow data is transmitted from the edge to the cloud. module processes the received data F, the order generation
After pre-processing, it is divided into blocks and sorted by the module blocks the flow and generates a flow order matrix Xk ,
order generation module according to the given sorting rules to and the upload model joint module jointly generates the TGG
generate a flow order matrix. Finally, the MLP-Mixer is used to according to the server cluster. In the training phase, since the
embed into a high-dimensional space, combined with the LLM TGG does not have a preference for dealing with malicious flow
bypassing the mask and the linear projection layer and finally at this time, it does not need to go through the T-Gate for TGG
the detection result is output. A bottom-up DDoS flow detection selection, and only needs to input the data to the TGG formed
scheme using the correlation between flow is implemented. by the same server cluster. Step 4 indicates that the generated
 flow order matrix is input to the corresponding TGG.
 Step 5 6 7 8 9 : Firstly, the output of TGG is mapped to
 IV. THE TRAINING AND TESTING PROCESSES OF EAL-BT high-dimension by embedding and then input to LLM without
 In order to apply to AIoT scenarios and make targeted de- mask. The final detection result is obtained by reducing the
tection of different DDoS attacks in different AIoT application dimension of LLM output through linear projection layer. Based
scenarios, this paper presents a bottom-up training and detection on the input flow matrix Xk and the output detection result
process called EAL-BT. The detection process also includes y Class , the embedding module composed of MLP-Mixer and
two parts: routine detection and supervision detection. Through the linear projection layer are jointly trained. The loss function
EAL-BT, the CE4 LDD in the cloud is assisted by the detection can be expressed as:
model in different scenarios of the edge. The complete training L1 =
and detection process is shown in Fig. 4, which includes the
transmission direction of data and model. The left side is the W−1  V
 1
training process and the right side is the detection process. In − · true
 yr,c Class
 log yr,c +(1−yr,ctrue Class
 ) log(1−yr,c )
order to facilitate the description, the detection process is only |Fk | r=1 c=1
described for a simple situation with only one scene and only ⎤
 V −W V +|Fk |
one edge model. 
 Class ⎦
 For the training phase, four parts need to be trained, including + true
 yW,c Class
 log yW,c +(1−yW,ctrue
 ) log(1 − yW,c ) .
 c=1
the edge scenarios detection model, the T-Gate, the MLP-Mixer
for high-dimensional mapping and the linear projection layer. (11)
For the conventional detection stage, it is mainly composed of true
 Where yr,c ∈ Xk , r, c is the matrix index, which represents
edge detection and cloud detection. The edge detection is re- Class
 the true label of the original data, yr,c represents the detection
sponsible for the flow in the edge; cloud detection is responsible
for the flow flowing through the cloud and the unconvinced flow result, for the last row of the matrix data, the last W V − |Fk |
in the edge. Supervised detection is to randomly sample the item is the reverse filling data, so only the first V − W V + |Fk |
credible detection results, combine the detection results of the item is considered to avoid repeated calculation.
edge and the cloud to ensure the detection ability of the model, After training the embedding and linear projection layer, enter
and can timely discover the deficiencies and update the model. step 10 to train the T-Gate. For flow data, add a label y Cluster ∈
 R1×P to it to represent the edge server cluster of its source. For
 the selection weight of the T-Gate output, the cross entropy loss
A. The Training Process of EAL-BT is used to calculate its matching degree with the real label as
 The training process is shown on the left side 1 - 10 in Fig. 4. follows:
 Step 1 represents the transmission of flow data F from the P

accessed IoT device D to the edge server S. L = − yiCluster log(gi ). (12)
 Step 2 indicates that the edge model M used to detect i=1
malicious flow is trained according to the collected data and In order to ensure the reliability of the weight generation, the
the characteristics of flow data are extracted and screened. cross loss entropy H(gi ) is used to control the dispersion of the
3800 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

weight. The smaller the entropy value is, the more reliable the detection results in the cloud are collected and all the results
selection is. Therefore, the total loss function can be expressed with objections are summarized and recorded. If the number of
as recorded objection results exceeds the set threshold τ , it means
L2 = L + λH(gi ) that there may be unknown attacks or errors in the system. It is
  P  necessary to retrain the model and update the trained data set to
 P  adapt to new attacks and ensure the reliability of the detection
 =− yiCluster
 log(gi )+λ − gi (fkn ) · log(gi (fkn )) .
 s s
 results.
 i=1 i=1 Latency is a primary concern in cloud–edge collaboration;
 (13) therefore, we analyze the testing-process latency T . Detection
 latency is decomposed into three components: the edge latency
B. The Testing Process of EAL-BT Te dge, which includes edge-model inference time and gatingmodel computation time; the upload latency Tu pload, which
 The conventional detection process is shown on the right side
 comprises data upload time and protocol overhead; and the cloud
of Fig. 4, including edge detection and cloud detection.
 latency Tc loud, corresponding to the time the LLM requires to
 Firstly, the IoT device transmits the flow data flowing through
 analyze DDoS flows. Consequently, the total detection latency
it to the edge server, and then uses the detection model M
 has two cases. If the edge detection is trusted (i.e.,HC < τ ),
trained by the edge server to perform edge detection and obtain
 then T = Tedge . If the edge is untrusted (i.e., HC ≥ τ ), then
the detection results. At this time, it can be divided into two
 T = Tedge + Tupload + Tcloud . Thus, the latency of the procases: the detection results of the trust edge model and the
 posed cloud–edge collaborative architecture is primarily govdetection results of the distrust edge model. It is assumed that
 erned by the trust threshold τ , other components are determined
the probability of the model judging the flow as malicious flow
 by model and system configurations, such as batch size and GPU
is P , and the probability of normal flow is 1 − P . When one
 performance.
of them is closer to 1, which means P → 1 or 1 − P → 1, the
test results are more credible. On the contrary, P, 1 − P → 0.5
indicates that the model cannot accurately classify flow. In order V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
to better reflect the credibility of the detection results, entropy This section consists of two parts: experimental environment
is used to represent the credibility, which is represented as setting and performance comparison. The proposed system
 HC = −(P log(P ) + (1 − P ) log(1 − P )). (14) model is built and the performance is evaluated by simulating
For P tends to 1 or 0, HC → 0, the credibility of the prediction DDoS attacks on five different AIoT scenarios. Mainly explain
results is high; P → 0, the entropy value tends to the maximum the following three questions:
 r Does the detection system based on LLM perform excellent
value HC → log(2) and the uncertainty is high. The credibility
 in detection performance?
threshold is set to τ , for HC < τ , the detection result is credible, r Can flow order affect the detection performance of the
otherwise the HC > τ indicates that the result is not credible.
 model?
For trusted results, the detection results are output directly; for r Does the bottom-up of edge models in different scenarios
untrusted results, the flow data and results are transmitted to the
cloud together and further detected. help to improve performance?
 Firstly, the flow data is preprocessed and given the order
to generate the flow order matrix. Through T-Gate, select its A. Experiment Setting
suitable TGG. The flow token is generated by the selected TGG. For the overall architecture of the system, its important
Then input it to the LLM without mask by embedding mapping parameters are shown in Table IV. Five edge server clusters
to high-dimensional and the output result is linearly projected to C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 , C5 are set up to correspond to different DDoS
obtain the final detection result. For untrusted detection results, attacks in five different AIoT scenarios, namely DrDoS, LDDoS,
if the detection results in the edge and the cloud are inconsistent, NetDDoS, AppDDoS and BotNet. In the five edge server clusthe detection results in the cloud shall prevail. The inconsistent ters, five different models are trained based on the DDoS flow
results are recorded. Finally, the detection results are returned data in the cluster. Three identical edge models are deployed in
to the edge server and the IoT device to complete the entire each cluster, and the specific structure of each model is described
detection phase process. in detail.
 In addition, in order to ensure the reliability of the detection Dataset: The self-data1 set is constructed by simulating five
performance of the detection system, and to update the new at- major types of DDoS attacks, and in order to avoid the influence
tack in time, the supervision and detection process is introduced of the deviation of the self-data set, the public CIC2019 DDoS
to supervise the whole system. In the conventional detection data set [94] is used as a supplement, and the proportion of flow
process, the untrusted detection results are transmitted to the data from the two data sets is guaranteed to be close to 1 : 1. The
cloud to improve the credibility. However, for the credible results construction method of self-data is as follows : multiple Ubuntu
that do not need to be transmitted to the cloud, there may still 18.04 virtual machines are deployed on the VMware vSphere
be detection errors. Therefore, for the detection results that are platform, each of which is allocated with 8-core CPU, 16 GB
judged to be credible, a random sampling method is adopted memory, and 32 GB hard disk to form a three-layer network
to randomly send the flow data to the cloud for detection, and topology of attack domain-entrance routing-target domain to
the detection results of the two are compared. In the case of simulate attack flow in real scenarios. LDDoS: Of the 8 hosts,
consistent detection results, no processing is performed, and 4 attackers launched slow headers, slow body, shrew, slow read
the results of inconsistent detection results are based on the
CE4LDD results in the cloud. In the joint detection stage,
the data whose edge untrusted results are inconsistent with the 1 DDoS Attack Datasets https://github.com/liliMpro/source_dataset
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3801

 TABLE IV
 IMPORTANT PARAMETERS OF EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

and other attacks through SlowHTTPTest, and 2 Web servers TABLE V
received flow. AppDDoS: four attackers use Hulk, Webbench, IMPORTANT PARAMETERS FOR TRAINING AND TESTING
GoldenEye and other tools to simulate HTTP-Flood, CC attack,
HTTP-Post and HTTP-Get. DrDoS: An attacker uses Scapy to
forge requests to two reflection servers, generating reflective
flow such as Memcached, TFTP, Chargen, NTP, SNMP, SSDP,
etc. Botnet : Four controlled zombie hosts communicate with
four CC servers, and the attack vectors include Ares, BYOB,
Zeus and Mirai. NetDDoS: 3 attackers use hping to launch
SYN, ACK, UDP flooding attacks. Benign: Use Python socket
to generate legitimate requests in simulated 5 G public service,
smart home, and MTC scenarios, and mix them with normal
flow in the CICIDS2017 [95] data set to enrich the diversity
of background flow. Grab the full amount of PCAP through
tcpdump on the entry route. The CICFlowmeter tool is used to set to 64, and the number of rows that can be accommodated
convert PCAP into a flow table of packet statistical features. in each row is determined according to the number of flows.
 The important parameters for training and testing are shown in The advantage of this setting is to ensure that the size of each
Table V. The number of feature representations of flow is set to column input is the same and a fair comparison is made. The final
B=12. Through the random forest and Boruta method [96], three dimension of the embedding module after high-dimensional
types of features are first obtained through Boruta: Confirmed, mapping is set to 4096 dimensions, which corresponds to the
Tentative and Rejected. The Rejected class represents insignif- embedding dimension in the llama3-7/8B model [97]. This can
icant features, so only the first two categories are retained. The ensure that the output of our embedding can be directly input
random forest is used to calculate the importance I on the into the Embedding itself in llama3. If the dimensions do not
retained features, and the mean μ and standard deviation σ of correspond to each other, it is necessary to change the original
the importance are calculated. The importance of each feature emebdding setting of lama3 to correspond to our embedding
is standardized to I s = I − μ/σ . In order to remove the weak direction, and the parameters and weights of the model need to
features, only the I s > 1 features are retained. Finally, a total be retrained.
of 12 features are retained to represent flow. In the process of The accuracy rate, precision rate, recall rate and F1-score
generating the flow order matrix, the total number of rows is are selected as the evaluation indexes of model detection
3802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE VI
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF MODELS ON DIFFERENT ATTACK TYPES: PROPOSED SCHEME VS. FIVE MODELS

performance. The calculation formula is as
 TP + TN
 Acc = ,
 TP + TN + FP + FN
 TP
 Pr e = ,
 TP + FN
 TP
 Rec = ,
 TP + FP
 2T P
 F1 = . (15)
 2T P + F P + F N
Where TP represents true positive, TN represents true negative,
FP represents false positive, and FN represents false negative.
In the experiment, the attack flow is set as a positive sample
and the benign flow is set as a negative sample. For all the
following experimental results, they are the results of averaging
after repeating ten times.

B. Comparison With Five ML Models and One LLM-Based
Baseline Fig. 5. Distances between positive and negative points after high-dimensional
 data dimensionality reduction on a balanced dataset: Proposed scheme vs. five
 1) Comparison of Performance With Five Models on a Bal- models.
anced Dataset: The ratio of benign flow to attack flow is set to
1 : 1 to construct a balanced data set. The proposed scheme
is compared with five ML models. For the five models, the negative points is significantly larger than the other five models.
DDoS attack types in the corresponding cluster are first used for It shows that the proposed scheme can learn more knowledge becorresponding training, and only the attacks in the corresponding tween flow data to better classify. The experimental results also
cluster are detected. It should be noted that the five models provide an explanation for the excellent detection performance
used for comparison do not directly use the edge model in of the proposed scheme in subsequent experiments.
the proposed scheme. The experimental results are shown in 2) Comparison of Performance With Five Models on an
Table VI. It can be seen that for different DDoS attacks in Imbalanced Attack Dataset: Considering that the number of
different clusters, the performance of the proposed scheme is benign flow in the real network is far more than the number
higher than that of the conventional model in four evaluation of attack flow, in order to better simulate the real flow situation.
indexes, and the detection ability of the proposed model to Modify the flow ratio column and set the attack flow to account
attack flow and benign flow is basically the same. For the 1 : 1 for 10% of all flow to build an unbalanced data set. Comparing
attack flow and benign flow distribution, the detection difficulty the performance of different methods on imbalanced data sets,
is relatively simple, but the proposed scheme still has advantages the experimental results are shown in Fig. 6. The proposed
in performance. scheme still maintains advantages in accuracy, recall and F1-
 In order to better observe the classification performance of dif- score. Compared with the other five schemes, the average recall
ferent models under the balanced data set, the high-dimensional rate increased by 15.62%. The F1-score of the key index of the
data generated by the above model flow data is reduced based detection performance on the unbalanced data set is increased by
on t-SNE. The coordinates of all positive points and negative 5.95% on average. Because the number of attack flow in unbalpoints are averaged. The results are shown in Fig. 5. The distance anced data sets is small, it is difficult for conventional methods to
between the two points after dimensionality reduction is 236, fully learn from limited data. In addition to the characteristics of
which is much larger than 63 of MLP, 58 of CNN, 136 of flow itself for learning, LLM can also analyze the relationship
MLP-Mixer, 61 of LSTM and 115 of Transformer. The farther between flow tokens, so it has better performance under the
the distance between the positive point and the negative point, condition of less attack flow data.
the easier it is to distinguish the attack flow and the benign flow, 3) Comparison of Performance With Five Models on an Imand the classification performance is better. It can be seen that balanced Attack Dataset With Hybrid Attacks: In order to better
although the proposed model has no obvious advantage in the respond to the different situations of the main DDoS attacks
four detection performance due to the simple detection difficulty in different clusters, the proportion of flow is modified again.
of the balanced data set, the distance between the positive and Set the proportion of benign flow in each cluster to 80%, the
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3803

Fig. 6. Performance comparison on imbalanced attack data: Proposed scheme vs. five models.

Fig. 7. Performance comparison on imbalanced attack data with hybrid attacks: Proposed scheme vs. five models.

proportion of main attack flow to 15%, and the proportion of the proportion of attack flow, its detection performance is improved
remaining four types of attack flow to 5%. The performance test compared with the unbalanced data test results of 10% attacks.
of unbalanced and hybrid DDoS attacks is performed, and the Compared with other detection schemes, it still maintains advanresults are shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the mixing of other tages in accuracy, recall and F1-score. The average recall rate
non-major DDoS attacks has little effect on the detection per- is 12.35% higher, and the average F1-score is 5.07% higher. In
formance of the proposed scheme, and due to the increase in the addition, due to the addition of hybrid attacks, under the premise
3804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 8. Detection performance comparison on unknown datasets.

of decreasing imbalance, the accuracy of other schemes is still re- the proposed scheme demonstrates significant improvements in
duced, with an average decrease of 0.222%. The accuracy of our accuracy, recall, and F1-score, achieving increases of 4.99%,
scheme has been improved, with an average increase of 0.118%. 10.69%, and 5.29%, respectively. Furthermore, in comparison
Although the increase is not significant, it can still be shown that with the known and balanced attack tests, the accuracy, precithe proposed scheme can adapt to scenarios with hybrid DDoS sion, recall and F1-score of other conventional models decreased
attacks. by 5.83%, 3.28%, 8.84% and 5.83%, respectively. In con-
 The reason can be explained from two aspects: the number trast, the proposed model exhibited a more stable performance,
of attack features that can be used for learning and the ability with reductions of only 2.35%, 4.80%, -0.24% and 2.28%,
to learn attack features. In the two cases of unbalanced and respectively.
hybrid attacks, the number of attack flow provided to the model In the above experiments, the accuracy of the proposed model
for learning attack features is small. The model does not have is lower than that of the other three performance. The reason for
enough learning samples to learn the characteristics of attack this is that the model can learn more knowledge to judge the
flow, so it tends to judge attack flow as benign flow. The proposed flow as attack flow in a limited number of flow. In the face of
scheme is based on the ability of flow order assignment and less attack flow or unknown flow, the model tends to predict more
LLM to focus on the correlation between flows, which can positive samples, which means attack flow. Combined with the
better understand the differences and characteristics between proposed model, it has a stronger ability to predict attack flow,
step flows. In contrast, our scheme can pay attention to more so the accuracy is not high.
features under the same condition of less attack flow. There- 5) Comparison of Performance With an LLM-Based Basefore, it has better performance in unbalanced and hybrid attack line: In addition to five conventional models, we compare the
scenarios. proposed scheme with DoLLM [39], an advanced LLM-based
 4) Comparison of Performance With Five Models on an DDoS detection method; the results are shown in the Fig. 9. On
Unknow DDoS Dataset: In addition to being able to adapt to the balanced dataset the two approaches perform similarly, with
unbalanced and hybrid DDoS attack scenarios, we also hope our scheme showing a small advantage. Across the other three
that the proposed model can have good generalization ability scenarios, our method exhibits clear superiority in all metrics
to face unknown attacks. A total of 20,000 attacks of CI- except that its recall on the unknown dataset is slightly lower than
CDDoS2019 and unknow attack types LDAP, SNMP, SSDP, DoLLM’s. Averaged over all test cases, our scheme improves
ACK, Chargen and SNMP from the data set are selected, and accuracy by 0.85%, precision by 2.04%, recall by 1.98%, and
20,000 benign flow data are mixed to form a new data set that F1 score by 2.02%. Unlike traditional AI methods that often
is unknown to the model. The data set is used for testing to have an advantage in precision, DoLLM does not, because it
reflect the generalization ability of the model. The training is is also LLM-based; both LLM-based methods can learn from
based on the scene and data in Table III and the unknown limited data and capture traffic trends according to the domidata set is used for testing. The experimental results are pre- nant data types. Compared with DoLLM, our scheme confers
sented in Fig. 8. Compared with conventional detection models, stronger sequential structure to flow tokens, which helps the
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3805

Fig. 9. Detection performance comparison with DoLLM on four kinds of datasets.

LLM extract richer information for DDoS detection. Moreover, ensure the consistency of the length and the mask mechanism
the bottom-up architecture enables more targeted detection for is reintroduced. The balanced data set is used as the test data
different attack types. Therefore, the overall performance of the set and the comparison results are shown in Fig. 11. The results
proposed scheme is superior to that of DoLLM. show that the accuracy rate, precision rate, recall rate and F1-
 score decrease by 9.19%, 9.35%, 9.20% and 9.21% respectively
 after using the mask mechanism. Because the mask mechanism
C. Ablation Experiment prevents the model from learning all the flow data, the scope
 1) Impact of Flow Order on Detection Performance: In order of its learning becomes smaller and the basis for judging attack
to prove the role of flow order generation module, delete the flow flow is reduced. In the above experiments, the phenomenon that
order generation module, not in the form of a flow order matrix the normal flow is judged as the attack flow leads to the low
input by column. Use the flow data sorted in chronological order accuracy rate also disappears. The existence of the mask can
and slide the window with a length of 64 to generate a flow order also hinder the continuity between flow data, frequent access to
and input it into the TGG. The balanced data set is used as the the same address or request the same protocol can be interrupted
test data and the comparison results are shown in Fig. 10. After due to the presence of the mask. It is difficult for the model to
deleting the flow order generation module, the detection ability learn enough knowledge from the relationship between flows to
decreased significantly, and the accuracy rate, precision rate, detect flow.
recall rate and F1-score decreased by 3.99%, 2.04%, 5.79% and 3) Impact of TGG on Convergence Speed: In order to verify
3.86%, respectively. Because LLM’s ability to focus on context the role of EAL-BT in generating TGG from the bottom up, it
is not utilized after deleting the flow order generation module, is proved whether the ability of the edge model is utilized in
the correlation of DDoS flow data in the time dimension is not the cloud. Deleting the TGG in CE4LDD make it impossible
high. The order assignment module is designed according to the to use the edge type to transform the dimension before the
characteristics of the attack, which can make better use of the high-dimensional mapping of the flow order matrix. The flow
attention ability of the LLM context to learn, so as to obtain order matrix is directly generated by the column token input to
better detection performance. the embedding module. Comparing the training convergence
 2) Impact of Masking Mechanism on Detection Performance: speed of the embedding module before and after deleting the
The flow order matrix is used to input the flow data into the LLM TGG, the training loss and verification loss during CE4LDD
by column input, which ensures that the input length is the same training are shown in Fig. 12. It can be seen that the convergence
each time and does not need to be filled with padding token. rate decreases after removing the TGG generated from the
The mask mechanism of LLM can be ignored so that it can bottom-up EAL-BT process. This is because TGG contains
pay attention to all the input flow data. As a comparison, we the knowledge of edge model to deal with specific DDoS
keep the order of the flow unchanged and randomly intercept attacks. Before high-dimensional mapping, the flow can be
the length of the input flow order. The length of interception vectorized according to the knowledge of edge model, so
is set to 4,8,16,32,48 and 64 respectively and it is filled to as to help CE4LDD training converge faster. After deleting
3806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 10. Detection performance comparison without the flow order generation module.

Fig. 11. Detection performance comparison with the mask mechanism.

TGG, this part of knowledge is wasted, which makes the initial TGG being pre-trained at the edge before cloud training;
loss value of CE4LDD higher and has a slower convergence the knowledge acquired at the edge accelerates subsequent
speed. Moreover, using TGG reduces training time by 7.71% cloud training. Thus, cloud–edge collaboration reduces training
compared with not using it. This improvement is attributable to overhead.
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3807

 [5] D. Wang et al., “An empirical study on the insecurity of end-of-life (EoL)
 IoT devices,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4,
 pp. 3501–3514, Jul./Aug. 2024.
 [6] “Nexusguard Distributed denial of service (DDoS) trend report 2024,”
 Nov. 2024. [Online] Available: https://www.nexusguard.com/threatreport/ddos-trend-report-2024
 [7] “Nokia threat intelligence reportfinds cybercriminal attacks on telco
 infrastructure are accelerating, driven by Generative AI and automation,”
 Oct. 2024. [Online] Available: https://www.nokia.com/aboutus/news/releases/2024/10/02/nokia-threat-intelligence-report-findscybercriminal-attacks-on-telco-infrastructure-are-accelerating-drivenby-generative-ai-and-automation
 [8] H. Wang, X. Di, Y. Wang, B. Ren, G. Gao, and J. Deng, “An intelligent
 digital twin method based on spatio-temporal feature fusion for IoT attack
 behavior identification,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 41, no. 11,
 pp. 3561–3572, Nov. 2023.
 [9] Y. Feng, W. Zhang, S. Yin, H. Tang, Y. Xiang, and Y. Zhang, “A collaborative stealthy DDoS detection method based on reinforcement learning
 at the edge of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 20,
 pp. 17934–17948, Oct. 2023.
 [10] Y. Liu, K. -F. Tsang, C. K. Wu, Y. Wei, H. Wang, and H. Zhu, “IEEE
 P2668-Compliant multi-layer IoT-DDoS defense system using deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 69, no. 1,
Fig. 12. Convergence speed comparison after removing TGG. pp. 49–64, Feb. 2023.
 [11] M. Lefoane, I. Ghafir, S. Kabir, I.-U. Awan, K. El Hindi, and A. Mahen-
 VI. CONCLUSION dran, “Latent semantic analysis and graph theory for alert correlation: A
 proposed approach for IoT botnet detection,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc.,
 This paper presents a multi-scenario DDoS detection for AIoT vol. 5, pp. 3904–3919, 2024.
based on LLM. Firstly, a cloud-edge collaborative method called [12] K. -Y. Lam, S. Mitra, F. Gondesen, and X. Yi, “ANT-centric IoT security reference architecture—Security-by-design for satellite-enabled smart
CE4LDD is proposed to realize LLM to detect DDoS attacks. cities,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 5895–5908, Apr. 2022.
The ability of LLM is utilized by assigning order to flow. [13] Z. Li, Y. Kong, and C. Jiang, “A transfer double deep Q network based
TGG and embedding module are designed to enable LLM to DDoS detection method for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Techprocess non-text type flow data. We formulate DDoS detection nol., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 5317–5331, Apr. 2023.
as a token-classification task within the LLM framework; final [14] M. Al-Fawa’reh, J. Abu-Khalaf, P. Szewczyk, and J. J. Kang, “MalBoT-
 DRL: Malware botnet detection using deep reinforcement learning in
decisions are produced by a linear projection layer. Second, we IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 9610–9629,
propose EAL-BT, a bottom-up training and detection process Mar. 2024.
that enables LLMs to adapt to multi-scenario DDoS attacks [15] A. Noroozian, E. T. Rodriguez, E. Lastdrager, T. Kasama, M. V. Eeten,
in AIoT and leverages edge-model capabilities to assist cloud- and C. H. Gañán, “Can ISPs help mitigate IoT malware? A longitudinal
 study of broadband ISP security efforts,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE Eur. Symp.
based LLM detection. Public data sets and self-data sets are Secur. Privacy, Vienna, Austria, 2021, pp. 337–352.
used to simulate five scenarios of IoT applications that are [16] B. Ji et al., “Survey of secure communications of Internet of Things with
subject to different DDoS attacks. Comparative experiments artificial intelligence,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 92–99,
are carried out with six models for four different situations: Sep. 2022.
balanced data, imbalanced data, hybrid attack data and unknown [17] H. Gu, L. Zhao, Z. Han, G. Zheng, and S. Song, “AI-Enhanced cloudedge-terminal collaborative network: Survey, applications, and future diattack data. The results demonstrate that the proposed scheme rections,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1322–1385,
has obvious advantages in detection performance, particularly in Second Quarter 2024.
the latter three cases. Through ablation experiments, it is proved [18] A. Hekmati, J. Zhang, T. Sarkar, N. Jethwa, E. Grippo, and B. Krishnathat the designed flow order generation module can improve machari, “Correlation-aware neural networks for DDoS attack detection
 in IoT systems,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3929–3944,
the detection performance of DDoS. The designed TGG can Oct. 2024.
speed up the training of the model. For future work, we will [19] L. Zhao et al., “Shielding collaborative learning: Mitigating poisoning
focus on optimizing transmission latency to improve cloud–edge attacks through client-side detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
adaptability, account for realistic network-traffic characteristics, Comput., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2029–2041, Sep./Oct. 2021.
and investigate methods for enabling LLM-based detection of [20] Y. Ma et al., “A survey of DDoS attack and defense technologies in
 multiaccess edge computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 2,
encrypted traffic. pp. 1428–1452, Jan. 2025.
 [21] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, J. Prieto, A. G. Arrieta, and J. M. Corchado, “Un-
 REFERENCES leashing the potential of knowledge distillation for IoT flow classification,”
 IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw., vol. 2, pp. 221–239, 2024.
 [1] K. Banti, M. Louta, and P. Baziana, “Data quality in human-centric
 [22] V. Pourahmadi, H. A. Alameddine, M. A. Salahuddin, and R. Boutaba,
 sensing-based next-generation IoT systems: A comprehensive survey of
 “Spotting anomalies at the edge: Outlier exposure-based cross-silo fedmodels, issues, and challenges,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 4,
 erated learning for DDoS detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 pp. 2286–2317, 2023.
 Comput., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4002–4015, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 [2] R. Zhang et al., “Toward democratized generative AI in next-generation
 [23] F. Xing, F. Tong, J. Yang, G. Cheng, and S. He, “RAM: A resourcemobile edge networks,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 251–260,
 aware DDoS attack mitigation framework in clouds,” IEEE Trans. Cloud
 Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MNET.2025.3541078.
 Comput., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 1387–1400, Fourth Quarter 2024.
 [3] R. Zhang et al., “Interactive AI with retrieval-augmented generation for
 [24] H. Zhu, P. Tiwari, A. Ghoneim, and M. S. Hossain, “A collaborative AInext generation networking,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 414–424,
 Enabled pretrained language model for AIoT domain question answering,”
 Nov. 2024.
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 3387–3396, May 2022.
 [4] R. Zhang, K. Xiong, Y. Lu, D. W. K. Ng, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief,
 [25] Y. -J. Liu et al., “A survey of integrating generative artificial intelligence
 “SWIPT-Enabled cell-free massive MIMO-NOMA networks: A machine
 and 6G mobile services: Architectures, solutions, technologies and outlearning-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 7,
 looks,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1334–1356,
 pp. 6701–6718, Jul. 2024.
 Jun. 2025.
3808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[26] J. Xue, Y. Deng, Y. Gao, and Y. Li, “Auffusion: Leveraging the power [48] X. He et al., “DNS rebinding threat modeling and security analysis for
 of diffusion and large language models for text-to-audio generation,” local area network of maritime transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 IEEE/ACM Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process., vol. 32, pp. 4700–4712, Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2643–2655, Feb. 2023.
 2024. [49] Z. Liu, J. Yu, B. Yan, and G. Wang, “A deep 1-D CNN and bidirectional
[27] Y. Li, B. Hu, X. Chen, L. Ma, Y. Xu, and M. Zhang, “LMEye: An interactive LSTM ensemble model with arbitration mechanism for LDDoS attack
 perception network for large language models,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 6, no. 6,
 vol. 26, pp. 10952–10964, 2024. pp. 1396–1410, Feb. 2023.
[28] B. Du, H. Du, D. Niyato, and R. Li, “Task-oriented semantic com- [50] W. Yin, et al., “DIAMOND: A structured coevolution feature optimization
 munication in large multimodal models-based vehicle networks,” IEEE method for LDDoS detection in SDN-IoT,” Wireless Commun. Mobile
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 9822–9836, Oct. 2025, Comput., vol. 1, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 9530274.
 doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3564543. [51] M. N. Kurt, Y. Yılmaz, X. Wang, and P. J. Mosterman, “Online privacy-
[29] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, B. Kantarci, B. Cakmak, A. Ozgun, and N. preserving data-driven network anomaly detection,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
 Ghoualmi-Zine, “LLM-based edge intelligence: A comprehensive survey Commun., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 982–998, Mar. 2022.
 on architectures, applications, security and trustworthiness,” IEEE Open [52] Z. Tian, C. Luo, J. Qiu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “A distributed deep
 J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 5799–5856, 2024. learning system for web attack detection on edge devices,” IEEE Trans.
[30] R. Zhang et al., “Generative AI for space-air-ground integrated networks,” Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1963–1971, Mar. 2020.
 IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 10–20, Dec. 2024. [53] Y. Jia, “Security enhancement of IoT-based edge computing,” Ph.D. dis-
[31] D. Rivkin et al., “AIoT smart home via autonomous LLM agents,” IEEE sertation, The George Washington Univ., Washington, DC, USA, 2021,
 Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 2458–2472, Feb. 2025. doi: 10.5555/AAI28864213.
[32] R. Zhang et al., “Embodied AI-Enhanced vehicular networks: An inte- [54] X. Yan, Y. Xu, S. Yao, and Y. Sun, “A domain embedding model for botnet
 grated vision language models and reinforcement learning method,” IEEE detection based on smart blockchain,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 11494–11510, Nov. 2025, no. 5, pp. 8005–8018, Mar. 2024.
 doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3582864. [55] W. Ma, X. Wang, J. Dong, M. Hu, and Q. Zhou, “A lightweight method
[33] Y. Wang et al., “Large model based agents: State-of-the-art, coopera- for botnet detection in Internet of Things environment,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 tion paradigms, security and privacy, and future trends,” IEEE Commun. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 2458–2472, Jul./Aug. 2025.
 Surveys Tuts., early access, Jun. 3, 2025, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2025. [56] A. Sharma, S. Rani, S. H. Shah, R. Sharma, F. Yu, and M. M. Hassan,
 3576176. “An efficient hybrid deep learning model for denial of service detection
[34] H. Du et al., “Reinforcement learning with LLMs interaction for dis- in cyber physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5,
 tributed diffusion model services,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., pp. 2419–2428, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 8838–8855, Oct. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2025. [57] A. Ali et al., “A novel homomorphic encryption and consortium
 3584698. blockchain-based hybrid deep learning model for industrial internet
[35] L. Yang et al., “FuzzCoder: Code large language model-based fuzz testing of medical things,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 5,
 for industrial IoT programs,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 18, pp. 2402–2418, Sep./Oct. 2023.
 pp. 36842–36851, Sep. 2025, doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2025.3577602. [58] M. F. Saiyedand and I. Al-Anbagi, “Deep ensemble learning with pruning
[36] J. Wen et al., “Generative AI for low-carbon artificial intelligence of things for DDoS attack detection in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn.
 with large language models,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 8, no. 1, Commun. Netw., vol. 2, pp. 596–616, 2024.
 pp. 82–91, Jan. 2025. [59] W. Zhang, Y. He, T. Zhang, C. Ying, and J. Kang, “Intelligent resource
[37] L. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao, L. Hou, L. Nie, and J. Li, “A survey of knowledge adaptation for diversified service requirements in industrial IoT,” IEEE
 enhanced pre-trained language models,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 2648–2661, Aug. 2025,
 vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1413–1430, Apr. 2024. doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3502493.
[38] W. Fang, C. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Toward secure and lightweight data [60] H. Feng, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Li, J. Yin, and J. Kang, “GNNtransmission for cloud–edge–terminal collaboration in artificial intelli- enabled multi-agent DRL for adaptive path selection in multi-network
 gence of things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 105–113, domains,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 130–145, Jun. 2025,
 Jan. 2024. doi: 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3582258.
[39] Q. Li et al., “DoLLM: How large language models understanding network [61] S. Shen, C. Cai, Y. Shen, X. Wu, W. Ke, and S. Yu, “MFGD3QN:
 flow data to detect carpet bombing DDoS,” 2024, arXiv:2405.07638. Enhancing edge intelligence defense against DDoS with mean-field games
[40] J. Zuo, Z. Guo, T. An, Z. Xu, and Y. Lu, “A security resilience and dueling double deep Q-network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11,
 metric framework based on the evolution of attack and defense sce- no. 13, pp. 23931–23945, Jul. 2024.
 narios,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 19, pp. 17007–17021, [62] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
 Oct. 2023. against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate flow,”
[41] S. Wang et al., “Dissecting operational cellular IoT service secu- IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024.
 rity: Attacks and defenses,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 2, [63] J. Li, L. Lyu, X. Liu, X. Zhang, and X. Lyu, “FLEAM: A federated learning
 pp. 1229–1244, Apr. 2024. empowered architecture to mitigate DDoS in industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans.
[42] C. Benzaıd, T. Taleb, A. Sami, and O. Hireche, “FortisEDoS: A Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 4059–4068, Jun. 2022.
 deep transfer learning-empowered economical denial of sustainabil- [64] R. F. Hayat, S. Aurangzeb, M. Aleem, G. Srivastava, and J. C. -
 ity detection framework for cloud-native network slicing,” IEEE W. Lin, “ML-DDoS: A blockchain-based multilevel DDoS mitigation
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2818–2835, mechanism for IoT environments,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 71,
 Jul./Aug. 2024. pp. 12605–12618, 2024.
[43] X. Lin et al., “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with [65] G. Sun et al., “Large language model (LLM)-Enabled graphs in dynamic
 pre-training transformers for encrypted flow classification,” in Proc. ACM networking,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 290–301, Jul. 2025.
 Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. [66] W. Zhang, N. Tang, D. Yang, R. Guo, H. Zhang, and X. Shen, “Det(Com)2:
[44] Y. Tian et al., “An edge-cloud collaboration framework for generative AI Deterministic communication and computation integration toward AIGC
 service provision with synergetic big cloud model and small edge models,” services,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 32–41, Jun. 2024.
 IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 37–46, Sep. 2024. [67] I. Lotfi, N. Alabbasi, and O. Alhussein, “Rethinking strategic mechanism
[45] W. Zhang, D. Yang, C. Zhang, Q. Ye, H. Zhang, and X. Shen, “(Com)2Net: design in the age of large language models: New directions for commu-
 A novel communication and computation integrated network architecture,” nication systems,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 50–57, 5,
 IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 35–44, Mar. 2024. Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MIOT.2025.3576260.
[46] S. Lakshminarayana and P. S. Thilagam, “Next-generation DDoS attacks [68] R. Zhang, K. Xiong, Y. Lu, B. Gao, P. Fan, and K. B. Letaief, “Joint
 on IoT deployments: Targeting the advanced features of MQTT v5.0 coordinated beamforming and power splitting ratio optimization in MUprotocol,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 22090–22109, MISO SWIPT-Enabled HetNets: A multi-agent DDQN-Based approach,”
 Jun. 2025. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 677–693, Feb. 2022.
[47] W. Zhang, P. Liao, D. Yang, Q. Ye, S. Mao, and H. Zhang, “Towards [69] J. Liu, T. Li, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Guo, and K. Yu, “Unleashing collabdeterministic satellite-terrestrial integrated networks via resource adapta- orative potentials: Multifaceted collaboration among agents in multitask
 tion and differentiated scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, Internet of Things networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 14,
 no. 10, pp. 11092–11109, Oct. 2025, doi: 10.1109/TMC.2025.3574740. pp. 28121–28135, Jul. 2025.
HUANG et al.: MULTI-SCENARIO CLOUD–EDGE COLLABORATIVE DDOS DETECTION IN LLM-ENABLED AIOT 3809

[70] H. Cui, Y. Du, Q. Yang, Y. Shao, and S. C. Liew, “LLMind: Orchestrating [93] R. Zhang et al., “Generative AI agents with large language model for
 AI and IoT with LLM for complex task execution,” IEEE Commun. Mag., satellite networks via a mixture of experts transmission,” IEEE J. Sel.
 vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 214–220, Apr. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MCOM.002.2400106. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 3581–3596, Dec. 2024.
[71] N. Zhong et al., “CASIT: Collective intelligent agent system for Internet [94] I. Sharafaldin et al., “Developing realistic distributed denial of service
 of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19646–19656, (DDoS) attack dataset and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Secur.
 Jun. 2024. Technol., 2019, pp. 1–8.
[72] B. Xiao, B. Kantarci, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and M. Guizani, “Efficient [95] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a
 prompting for LLM-based generative Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
 Things J., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 778–791, Jan. 2025. Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privac, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[73] T. Tu et al., “Towards lifelong unseen task processing with a lightweight [96] O. Liu et al., “Multi-domain malicious behavior knowledge base frameunlabeled data schema for AIoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 4, work for multi-type DDoS behavior detection,” Intell. Automat. Soft Compp. 3441–3452, Feb. 2025. put., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 2955–2977, 2023.
[74] N. -B. -V. Le and J. -H. Huh, “AgTech: Building smart aquaculture assistant [97] H. Touvron et al., “LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language
 system integrated IoT and Big Data analysis,” IEEE Trans. AgriFood models,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971.
 Electron., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 471–482, Sep./Oct. 2024.
[75] A. Selim, J. Zhao, and B. Yang, “Large language model for smart
 inverter cyber-attack detection via textual analysis of Volt/VAR commands,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 6179–6182, Aoran Huang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 Nov. 2024. was born in Liaoning, China. He received the B.S.
[76] B. Karunanayake, I. Khalil, X. Yi, and K. -Y. Lam, “Toward LLM-driven degree from the North China University of Technoladaptive policy orchestration for host-based intrusion detection systems ogy, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is currently working
 in IoT environments,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 66–73, Sep. 2025, toward the Ph.D. degree in information and telecomdoi: 10.1109/MNET.2025.3579532. munications engineering. He joined the National En-
[77] X. Chen, W. Wu, L. Li, and F. Ji, “LLM-Empowered IoT for 6G networks: gineering Research Center for Advanced Network
 Architecture, challenges, and solutions,” IEEE Internet Things Mag., Technologies, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing.
 vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 34–41, Nov. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MIOT.2025.3582641. His research interests include the architecture of next-
[78] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS: Hybrid generation internet, network security, intelligent comnetwork intrusion detection system in IoV using large language models,” munication networks, and large language model.
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb. 2025.
[79] Q. Liu, J. Mu, D. Chen, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, and T. Hong, “LLM enhanced
 reconfigurable intelligent surface for energy-efficient and reliable 6G IoV,”
 IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1830–1838, Feb. 2025.
[80] R. Zhang et al., “Generative AI-Enabled vehicular networks: Fundamentals, framework, and case study,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 259–267, Jingfu Yan received the B.S. degree from Anhui
 Jul. 2024. University, Hefei, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree
[81] G. Sun et al., “Generative AI for advanced UAV networking,” IEEE Netw., from Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China, in
 vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 244–253, Jul. 2025. 2022, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D.
[82] J. Hu et al., “Federated large language model: Solutions, challenges and degree with the National Engineering Research Cenfuture directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 82–89, ter for Advanced Network Technologies. His research
 Aug. 2025, doi: 10.1109/MWC.009.2400244. interests include network security, next generation
[83] S. Han et al., “FedSecurity: A benchmark for attacks and defenses in internet, and intelligent networks.
 federated learning and federated LLMs,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, New York, NY, USA, pp. 5070–5081.
 2024.
[84] F. Wu et al., “FedBiOT: A solution for federated large language model finetuning with intellectual property protection,” 2023. [Online] Available:
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=i5da6iedW8
[85] C. Han, T. Yang, Z. Cui, and X. Sun, “A privacy-preserving and trust- Xiaojing Fan received the M.S. degree in elecworthy inference framework for LLM-IoT integration via hierarchical tronic information from Beijing Jiaotong University
 federated collaborative computing,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, (BJTU), China, in 2023. She is currently working
 no. 24, pp. 51877–51891, Dec. 2025. toward the Ph.D. degree in information and com-
[86] W. Zhang, T. Sun, D. Yang, T. H. Luan, and H. Zhang, “Dy- munication engineering. She joined the National Ennamic resource scheduling for deterministic communication, compu- gineering Research Center for Advanced Network
 tation, and control integration in industrial cyber-physical systems,” Technologies, BJTU. Her research interest includes
 IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., early access, May 15, 2025, the architecture of next-generation internet, satellite
 doi: 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3570438. communications, and artificial intelligence.
[87] Y. Liu et al., “Brain-like cognition-driven model factory for IIoT
 fault diagnosis by combining LLMs with small models,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 16, pp. 32296–32309, Aug. 2025,
 doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2024.3503274.
[88] Y. Xia et al., “FCLLM-DT: Enpowering federated continual learning
 with large language models for digital-twin-based industrial IoT,” IEEE Huachun Zhou received the B.S. degree from the
 Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 6070–6081, Mar. 15, 2025. People’s Police Officer University of China, in 1986,
[89] A. Praseed and P. S. Thilagam, “Modelling behavioural dynamics for and the M.S. degree in telecommunication automaasymmetric application layer DDoS detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics tion and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunications
 Secur., vol. 16, pp. 617–626, 2021. and information systems from Beijing Jiaotong Uni-
[90] S. Vaishali et al., “SYNTROPY: TCP SYN DDoS attack detection for versity (BJTU), Beijing, China, in 1989 and 2008,
 software defined network based on Rényi entropy,” Comput. Netw., 244, respectively. He is currently a Professor with the
 2024, Art. no. 110327. National Engineering Research Center for Advanced
[91] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance and features: Network Technologies, BJTU. He has authored more
 Mitigating the low-rate TCP-Targeted DoS attack via SDN,” IEEE J. Sel. than 40 peer-reviewed papers and is also the holder of
 Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444, Jan. 2022. 17 patents. His research interests mainly include the
[92] A. M. Eldhai et al., “Improved feature selection and stream traffic classi- areas of Internet architecture, space-air-ground integrated networks, intelligent
 fication based on machine learning in software-defined networks,” IEEE communication networks, mobility management, mobile and secure computing,
 Access, vol. 12, pp. 34141–34159, 2024. and routing protocols.