1758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

 Multilingual Cyber Threat Detection in Tweets/X
Using ML, DL, and LLM: A Comparative Analysis
 Saydul Akbar Murad , Ashim Dahal , and Nick Rahimi

 Abstract—Cyber threat detection has become an important works efficiently fulfill user needs, resulting in a continuing
area of focus in the digital age of today due to the growing rise in account registrations. Users continuously express their
spread of fake information and harmful content on social media opinions on subjects of interest, rendering social networks a
platforms such as Twitter (now “X”). These cyber threats, often
disguised within tweets, pose significant risks to individuals, vibrant arena for communication and engagement. Twitter, now
communities, and even nations, emphasizing the need for effective renamed as “X,” is recognized as one of the most prominent
detection systems. While previous research has explored tweet- and impactful social networks. Tweets have emerged as a sigbased threats, much of the work is limited to specific languages, nificant data source for many users, including manufacturers,
domains, or locations or relies on single-model approaches, celebrities, healthcare experts, politicians, and researchers [2].
reducing their applicability to diverse real-world scenarios. To
address these gaps, our study focuses on multilingual tweet The extensive information dissemination on Twitter makes it a
cyber threat detection using a variety of advanced models. significant asset for activities such as cyber threat identification,
The research was conducted in three stages: 1) we collected sentiment analysis, and predictive modeling, underscoring the
and labeled tweet datasets in four languages—English, Chinese, influence of social networks in contemporary society.
Russian, and Arabic—employing both manual and polarity-based With the increase of social media, cyber threats have belabeling methods to ensure high-quality annotations; 2) each
dataset was analyzed individually using ML and DL models to come an increasing concern, affecting both individuals and
assess their performance on distinct languages; and 3) finally, organizations in different ways [3], [4]. Threats come in varwe combined all four datasets into a single multilingual dataset ious forms, such as online harassment, phishing scams, misand applied deep learning (DL) and large language model information, and direct threats, using anonymity and etc. [5].
(LLM) architectures to evaluate their efficacy in identifying cyber Some threats are sent privately through messages that target
threats across various languages. Our results show that among
machine learning models, random forest (RF) attained the highest specific people, while others are made public. The goal is
performance, and the bidirectional long short-term memory (Bi- spreading fear among people or manipulating public opinion
LSTM) architecture consistently surpassed other DL and LLM [6]. These types of cyberbullying can affect human life, leading
architectures across all datasets. These findings underline the to emotional distress, misinformation can create chaos or ruin
effectiveness of Bi-LSTM in multilingual cyber threat detection. reputations, and phishing scams can cause financial losses [7].
 Index Terms—Accuracy, deep learning (DL), large language As social media is increasingly embedded in our daily lives,
model (LLM), loss, machine learning (ML), Tweet/X data. we need an effective system to identify and mitigate these
 threats, ensuring a safer and more secure digital platform for
 everyone.
 In recent years, cyber threats based on tweets have be-
 I. INTRODUCTION come a growing concern, especially through the exploitation
 of public tweets [6]. Such threats can result in serious con-

S OCIAL networks have emerged as a global focal point,
 functioning as platforms for the dissemination of opinions, ideas, marketing, and several other activities [1]. These
 sequences, often leading to public unrest or even community
 violence [8]. Fake or misleading tweets can sometimes incite
 mobs, creating panic and chaos in society [7]. On a broader
platforms offer customers rapid, complimentary, and readily level, such tweets can exacerbate group differences, inciting
available tools to fulfill their varied requirements. Social net- hostility along cultural, religious, or ideological lines [9]. In
 many instances, aggressive or misleading tweets have instigated
 diplomatic conflicts between nations, thereby straining international relations [10]. The rapid dissemination of harmful content
 on platforms such as Twitter underlines the urgent necessity
 Received 12 February 2025; revised 9 June 2025 and 21 July 2025; accepted to address these challenges and protect societal and global
15 October 2025. Date of publication 6 November 2025; date of current
version 3 April 2026. (Corresponding author: Nick Rahimi.)
 stability.
 The authors are with the School of Computing Sciences and Com- Many researchers are actively working on detecting cyber
puter Engineering, University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg, MS threats in tweets, using advanced AI techniques such as ML
39406 USA (e-mail: saydulakbar.murad@usm.edu; ashim.dahal@usm.edu;
nick.rahimi@usm.edu).
 [11], DL [12], and other novel approaches. Although significant
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSS.2025.3623021 progress has been made, there are still several limitations in

 2329-924X © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1759

the current body of research. One major issue is that most of 3) Experiments were conducted in two approaches:
the research concentrates on a single language [13]. But every- analyzing each dataset individually to evaluate model
day tweets are coming in different languages. This language- performance on single-language tweet threat detection
specific focus limits the scalability and applicability of the mod- and combining all datasets for a multilingual tweet threat
els in addressing threats in different linguistic contexts. Some analysis.
researchers worked on multilingual tweet datasets, but mostly 4) We employed three modeling techniques—ML, DL, and
their approaches involve developing separate models for each LLMs—to thoroughly compare their effectiveness in delanguage [14]. This approach may be effective for small-scale tecting tweet threats across diverse datasets.
investigations, but it becomes wasteful and impractical when These contributions address gaps in previous research and
used for big datasets comprising multiple languages. To address provide a robust framework for tweet classification across
the diversity of cyber threats on social media, it is important languages.
to develop a generalized model capable of classifying tweets The remainder of this research article is organized as folacross multiple languages effectively. lows. Section II provides an overview of related work, high-
 Another challenge is performance. Many researchers are lighting key studies and comparing them with our approach.
struggling to deliver robust results, particularly when handling Section III outlines the methodology, detailing the data preprocomplex datasets with diverse linguistic [15]. Moreover, the ab- cessing steps, the models used, and the performance metrics
sence of thorough comparisons among various architectures— employed in the analysis. Section IV presents and discusses the
such as ML, DL, and LLM-based models—makes it difficult to experimental results. Finally, Section V concludes the article by
identify the most effective approach for tackling cyber threats summarizing the findings and discussing potential directions for
in tweets [16]. Without such comparisons, it is ambiguous future work.
which approaches provide the optimal equilibrium of accuracy,
scalability, and flexibility. Considering these limitations, it is
 II. LITERATURE REVIEW
important to develop a unified, generalized model to handle
multilingual tweet datasets. Additionally, a thorough evaluation This section reviews the current state-of-the-art (SOTA) reof different model architectures is essential to understand their search on multilingual threat detection on Twitter/X. Although
strengths and weaknesses to build more efficient and reliable ML, DL, and LLMs have widely reached the depths of multisystems. Addressing these gaps will not only advance the field ple disciplines and achieved commendable results, multilingual
of cyber threat identification but also foster a safer, more secure threat detection ceases to remain one of them. This gap is particonline world. ularly concerning given the current rising prevalence of cross-
 To address the limitations of previous research, we fo- country cyber threats and social media based cyber attacks.
cused on identifying cyber-threats in tweet data across mul- Rehan et al. [17] claimed to be one of the first to offer
tiple languages. Our study employed in two different ways. multilingual threatening text detection on Twitter with LLMs.
In the first approach, we applied ML and DL models sep- They achieved this by first translating English text into their
arately to each language dataset—English, Chinese, Rus- Urdu corpus and then working on the Urdu language with
sian, and Arabic—to evaluate their performance on individ- their AI implementation. The authors fine-tuned RoBERTa with
ual datasets. In the second approach, we combined all four 1313 English and 2400 Urdu samples. The sample of English
language datasets into a unified, multilingual dataset and used threats is highly skewed with only 128 nonthreat messages out
DL and LLMs for classification. The threat identification task of the given 1313 samples. The authors also chose standard
involved multiclass categorization for English, Chinese, and ML algorithms such as support vector machine (SVM), logis-
Russian tweets, while the Arabic dataset was treated as a binary tic regression (LR), random forest (RF), convolutional neural
classification problem. In the single-language analysis, both networks (CNN), bidirectional long short-term memory (Bi-
ML and DL models demonstrated strong performance, effec- LSTM) with RoBERTa and Word2Vec approaches to test their
tively identifying threats within individual datasets. However, approach. Although they have shown exceptional results with
when working with the combined dataset, the performance over 91.89% accuracy, the definition of multilingual classificaof the models was less satisfactory, with results falling short tion for the papers includes just English and Urdu. Our article
of expectations. As this project is ongoing, we are actively overcomes this shortcoming by providing a more quantifiable
working to improve the performance of the models on the and diverse approach that can work in English, Arabic, Russian,
combined dataset. The contributions of our research are as and Chinese; all of which, according to the CIA’s The World
follows. Factbook [18], are in the top 10 most-spoken first languages
 1) We independently collected four diverse datasets of around the world. This limitation in detecting multiple language
 tweets containing potential cyber threats, covering En- to detect cyber threat can lead to catastrophic cyber attack
 glish, Chinese, Russian, and Arabic, to ensure a compre- vectors where the exploiters simply make use of the standing
 hensive and multilingual analysis. language and its essence barriers.
 2) The datasets were labeled using a combination of manual Apart from this, there exists very little literature on multilanannotation and polarity-based methods, specifically de- guage threat detection on Twitter tweets specifically. However,
 signed to identify cyber threat-related content, with cross- there are some related research works in the field which indivalidation to ensure high accuracy. rectly address the theme of this article. Tundis et al. [19] provide
1760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

a multilanguage approach towards identification of suspicious In the context of analyzing text for cybersecurity threats,
users on social network platforms. Although their approach also cyberbullying or hate speech by using SoTA LLMs, Kmainasi
relies on using platforms such as Google Translate, Yandex, et al. [22] fine-tuned Llama to LlamaLens which is a multilinand Bing Translate, the authors deduce a similarity score. The gual LLM for analyzing news and social media content. Their
authors do not mention a general formula to calculate the sim- dataset contains 2.7 million samples and over 222 labels, all of
ilarity score, but we can deduce it to the following from their which is an amalgamation of 103 dataset consisting multiple
examples: social media post, news article, political debates and transcripts.
 
 n Out of the three languages tested: English, Hindi and Arabic,
 SNmax = maxSimilarity (R1i × S1i ) cyberbullying was the only common category of interest in all
 i=1 three languages where the authors gained accuracy of 90.07,
 n 60.90, and 86.30, respectively. Hindi and Arabic had two com-
 (R2i × S2i ) mon hate speech categories. Offensive speech was yet another
 i=1 common category in all three of them, but the definition of
 n  the term itself could be ambiguous. Miah et al. [23] worked
 (R3i × S3i ) (1) with ensemble learning of transformer and LLM for multilini=1
 gual sentiment analysis. Although they work on five languages:
where Sij ∈ [0, 1], i and j ∈ {1, 2, 3}, is the similarity score of Arabic, Chinese, English, French, and Italian, their method
all tweets between the three service providers, (i.e., S12 denotes depends upon a translation layer as that of [17], [19]. The ausimilarity between service 1 and service 2) and Rij ∈ 0, 1 is thor’s ensemble consisted of Twitter-Roberta-Base-Sentimentthe binary indication that gives if the similarity score of Sij is Latest, bert-base-multilingual-uncased-sentiment, and GPT-3
associated with the service or not. and produced an accuracy of 86% on all languages. Although
 From evaluation of (1), it can be evident that the function the authors argue that sentiment analysis is possible through
grows exponentially as i and j grow, i.e., adding more service translation to English given their ensemble method achieved
translators for languages that may not be best performed by the accuracy, but it is not the effective way to do so. We show
the given three translators. We again argue for the need of a that by using a language specific corpus and model we can
language-dependent corpus system because some essence of the handle nuanced information within the language like slang,
original message could be lost within translation. Furthermore, irony, and sarcasm away from the actual threats present in the
the authors only apply naive approaches such as bag of words dataset.
(BoW) alongside bi-gram and tri-gram versions of N-gram Hirdi et al. [24] utilized different BERT based method to
technique. This provides a more statistical analysis of whether detect offensive behavior on low resource language Bengali.
the profile of some users could be dangerous or not rather than They trained XLM-RoBERTa-base with 44 000 comments from
a prediction with a finely labeled dataset and advanced ML and social media platforms and gained an accuracy of 83.54%. This
DL algorithms. We overcome this drawback by using a finely accuracy is lower than [23], but the authors worked with a
labeled dataset which gives robust prediction against tweets that different language with not as many resource for accurate transcontain cyber threats. lation and also accounted for Banglish which is a combination
 In other similar works, Chiril et al. [20] comparatively stud- of Bengali and English; either Bengali written in romanized Enied and experimented with several methods and models to detect glish form or a mix of both language into a single sentence. This
multilingual hate speech towards multiple targets. Their dataset practice of writing is common in many foreign language system
contains 13 071 English and 3085 French tweets classified into which do not use the roman alphabet as English alphabets can
hate and nonhate tweets towards immigrants and women. They be used to produce similar sounds as the other characters in
achieve precision of 0.78 and 0.66 in the two tasks, respectively. Arabic, Chinese, Devanagari, and Bengali scripts [25], [26],
The authors, however, do not train on more variety or advanced [14]. The authors divided the remarks in the 44 000 comments
techniques like LLMs or GRUs. The benefit of not implement- into one of five categories: sexual, not bully, troll, religious,
ing a translation layer for multilanguage system can be observed and threat. The authors employed technique to translate English
in this study as even with simple techniques like dimensionality words in a Bengali text to Bengali to fit for this corpus which
reduction and singular value decomposition the authors were is a better approach than translating the entire text from one
able to get good results in their dataset. Hussein et al. [21] did language into another. The author’s work in the Bengali lanmulticlass classification of tweets on Threat (8280), business guage is commendable. Their work highlights the importance
(2331), irrelevant (6598), and Unknown (4159); number of of language understanding by constructing methodology for
samples in brackets. They experimented with SVM, random Bengali which is not written in the roman alphabet and use the
forest (RF), logistic regression (LR), decision tree (DT), naive finer details observed to determine the level of threat present
bayes (NB), and K-nearest-neighbor (KNN) algorithms and in the given tweet/post. We do argue that their approach could
got the best result with RF classification with a precision of be expanded to cover bases for multiple languages which our
74 and accuracy of 67. Similar to the previous literature, we research touches upon.
conclude we could use more advanced methods and models to Table I shows a detailed comparison between our work and
bridge the research gap presented by the findings of this article previous research. Our work contributes to the existing literaas well. ture by providing a deeper analysis of tweet classification for
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1761

 TABLE I
 SUMMARY OF MULTILINGUAL THREAT DETECTION/ANALYSIS STUDIES

 Data Source Number of Models Used Metrics
 Study Content Language
 Tweet FB IG Classes ML DL LLM Acc. Prec. Rec. F1
 [17]  ✗ ✗ 2 SVM, LR, RF CNN, BiLSTM RoBERTa     English, Urdu
 [19]    2 BoW, NGram ✗ ✗  ✗ ✗ ✗ Multilingual
 [20]   ✗ 2 SVD BERT ✗    ✗ English, French
 SVM, RF
 [21]  ✗ ✗ 4 ✗ ✗   ✗ ✗ English
 LR, DT, NB
 [22]   ✗ Multi ✗ ✗ LLaMA  ✗ ✗ ✗ English, Hindi, Arabic
 [23]  ✗ ✗ 3 ✗ BERT RoBERTa, GPT-3  ✗ ✗ ✗ Multi-lingual
 [24]   ✗ 5 ✗ ✗ XLM-RoBERTa  ✗ ✗ ✗ Bengali
 Our work  ✗ ✗ Multi LR, DT, RF RNN, LSTM, GRU XLM-RoBERTa    ✗ English, Russian, Chinese, Arabic

 Note: Abbreviations: X = Twitter, FB = Facebook, IG = Instagram, ML = machine learning (SVM = support vector machine, LR = logistic regression, RF = random forest,
 DT = decision tree, NB = naive bayes, BoW = bag of words, NGram = N-gram, SVD = singular value decomposition), DL = deep learning (CNN = convolutional neural
 network, BiLSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, BERT = bidirectional encoder representations from transformers, XLM-RoBERTa = Cross-lingual RoBERTa),
 LLM = large language model (GPT-3 = generative pretrained transformer 3).

Fig. 1. Workflow of the tweet data classification process.

safer online interactions. We offer a comprehensive evaluation of the models. Fig. 1 provides a visual representation of our
of various ML, DL, and LLM algorithms across four of the top working procedure.
five most spoken languages, enhancing our understanding of
cyber threat detection.
 A. Data Collection and Labeling
 For this research, we collected the dataset in 2021 from
 III. IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
 the Tweet/X platform, focusing on tweets in four languages:
 In this section, we briefly discuss the working procedure of English, Arabic, Russian, and Chinese. The data was collected
this research. We started by discussing the data, including its without any specific geographical focus or topic constraints,
source and the process of labeling it. Next, we explained how we ensuring a broad and diverse representation of content across
processed the data, which included steps such as data cleaning, different languages. The aim was to capture a wide range of
removing stopwords, and tokenization. After processing, we tweets to evaluate cyber threat detection in a multilingual conencoded the tokenized data and applied various techniques to text. Initially, the collected data was unlabeled, and the objective
the dataset. Finally, we concluded the section by describing was to classify the tweets into three categories: threat, neutral,
the different parameters considered to measure the performance and nonthreat. We defined these categories as follows.
1762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

 TABLE II performance of the classification models. In the preprocessing
 DISTRIBUTION OF ANNOTATED TWEETS BY CLASS phase, before proceeding to the main code, we manually re-
 ACROSS LANGUAGES
 moved meaningless sentences and irrelevant information. This
 Lang. process was carried out by native annotators, who ensured that
 English Arabic Chinese Russian
 Class linguistic variations, such as slang, code-switching, and emojis,
 Neutral 1416 418 452 106 were appropriately handled. Following this, we removed stop-
 Nonthreat 842 - 841 129 words from the tweets in all four languages (English, Arabic,
 Threat 313 1605 754 902 Russian, and Chinese). Additionally, stemming was performed
 to reduce words to their root forms, ensuring consistency and
 further simplifying the data. Finally, the cleaned text data was
 1) Threat: We defined “threat” tweets as those containing tokenized, breaking the tweets into individual words or submalicious intent to harm or cause distress, such as direct words, and padding was applied to standardize the input length.
 threats or harassment. These steps prepared the data for model training, ensuring com-
 2) Nonthreat: We categorized “nonthreat” tweets as clearly patibility and optimal input representation for the subsequent
 benign, positive, or harmless informational content with stages of analysis.
 no malicious intent. 1) Data Cleaning: After labeling the datasets, our first ob-
 3) Neutral: We classified “neutral” tweets as those lacking jective was to clean the data to ensure it was suitable for analclear malicious intent or strong positive/negative senti- ysis. Many tweets contained sentences that lacked meaningful
 ment; they are not harmful but also not explicitly benign. context, so we removed such sentences. As part of the manual
 We have made the dataset publicly available, and it is in- annotation and quality control process, annotators identified
cluded with the source of this article. Table II summarizes the and removed tweets that lacked meaningful context, such as
distribution of tweets classified as neutral, nonthreat, and threat those consisting only of URLs or user mentions with no other
for the four languages. decipherable text, tweets containing only random characters,
 We employed two labeling approaches to annotate the or content that was entirely indecipherable or irrelevant to the
dataset. The first approach was manual annotation, where four study’s scope. Additionally, we eliminated URLs, mentions,
students, each proficient in one of the four languages, assisted hashtags, punctuation, and special characters using regular exin classifying the tweets into the predefined categories. This pressions (Regex).
ensured linguistic nuances were considered during the labeling We denote the labeled dataset as follows:
process.
 The second approach is polarity-based classification. Polarity X l = {(t1 , y1 ) , (t2 , y2 ) , . . . , (tn , yn )} (3)
(P ) measures the sentiment of a tweet and was calculated as
follows. where ti represents the ith tweet. yi is the corresponding label
 Given a tweet T consisting of n words w1 , w2 , . . . , wn , the for ti , where yi ∈ { threat, neutral, nonthreat }.
Polarity of the tweet is calculated as follows: The cleaning process transforms each tweet ti into a cleaned
 n version ti by applying the following operations: a) removal of
 s (wi )
 P (T ) = i=1 (2) irrelevant or nonsensical sentences; and b) removal of URLs,
 n
 mentions, hashtags, punctuation, and special characters via
where P (T ) is the polarity of the tweet. s (wi ) represents the Regex.
sentiment score of the ith word in the tweet. This score is The cleaned dataset is represented as follows:
positive for positive words, negative for negative words, and
zero for neutral words. n is the total number of words in the Xcl = {(t1 , y1 ) , (t2 , y2 ) , . . . , (tn , yn )} (4)
tweet.
 To classify tweets based on their polarity. where ti is the cleaned version of ti . This ensures that the
 1) Threat: P (T ) ≤ −0.5 l
 dataset Xclean retains the labels yi while improving the quality
 2) Neutral: −0.5 < P (T ) < 0.5 and relevance of the tweets ti .
 3) Nonthreat: P (T ) ≥ 0.5 2) Remove Stopwords and Stemming: After completing the
 The polarity-based labeling approach yielded results that data cleaning process, we proceeded to remove stopwords from
were largely consistent with the manual labeling. However, in the tweets in all four languages. Stopwords, which are comcertain instances, discrepancies were observed between the two mon words that do not significantly contribute to the semantic
methods. In such cases, we prioritized the manual labeling as meaning of the text. These were eliminated to reduce noise and
the final annotation, given its reliability and context-sensitive enhance the quality of the dataset. This step can be expressed
accuracy. This combined approach ensured the dataset was mathematically as follows:
comprehensively and accurately labeled.
 ti = RemoveStopwords (ti )
B. Data Preprocessing where ti is the cleaned tweet from the previous stage. ti is the
 In the data preprocessing stage, we began by cleaning unnec- tweet after removing stopwords. RemoveStopwords represents
essary data to enhance the quality of the dataset and improve the the stopword removal function applied to the cleaned tweet.
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1763

 After removing stopwords, stemming was applied to reduce 4) Handling Class Imbalance: After analyzing the class
words to their root or base forms, further standardizing the text. distribution in our dataset (Table II), we find that the dataset
This transformation is represented as follows: classes are not balanced, with the “neutral” and “nonthreat”
 classes being underrepresented compared to the “threat” class.
 t 
 i = Stem. (ti ) To address this imbalance and ensure that our model does not
 develop a bias toward the majority class, we employed the
where t
 i is the tweet after stemming. Stem (·) represents the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE). SMOTE
stemming function. works by generating synthetic samples for the minority class to
 The resulting dataset after these transformations is repre- balance the class distribution. We can represent the generation
sented as follows: of synthetic instances as follows:

 Xsl = {(t  
 1 , y1 ) , (t2 , y2 ) , . . . , (tn , yn )} . (5) T̂i = Ti + λ(Tj − Ti ). (9)

 This ensures that the processed tweets t
 i retain their asso-
 Here, T̂i represents the synthetic tokenized instance for the
ciated labels yi , making the dataset ready for tokenization and minority class, Ti is a tokenized instance from the minority
further preparation for model training. class, Tj is a randomly selected tokenized neighbor of Ti ,
 3) Tokenization and Padding: The final steps of our data and λ is a random value between 0 and 1 that controls the
preprocessing pipeline were tokenization and padding, essen- interpolation between the two instances. This allows for the
tial processes for preparing the text data for machine learning generation of new, plausible instances that enhance the minority
models. class’s presence in the dataset. By applying SMOTE, we were
 a) Tokenization: Tokenization involves breaking down able to balance the class distribution, ensuring that each class
the text into smaller units and converting these units into nu- had an equal opportunity to contribute to the model training.
merical values. For this research, we set a vocabulary limit
of max_words = 5000, meaning we only retained the 5000 C. Text Encoding
most frequent words in the dataset. Words outside this vocab-
 After preprocessing, the next step was encoding the text
ulary were replaced with a special token indicating “out of
 data into numerical vector representations using Word2Vec.
vocabulary.”
 Word2Vec transforms words into dense, continuous vector
 Mathematically, we can represent a preprocessed tweet ti as
 spaces where semantically similar words have closer represena tokenized sequence
 tations.
 Ti = Tokenize(t To handle the unique characteristics of each language, we
 i ). (6)
 used different pretrained word embedding models tailored to
 Here t
 i is the cleaned tweet after stopword removal and
 the linguistic features of English, Chinese, Russian, and Arabic.
stemming. Ti = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wk } is the sequence of tokenized 1) English: We used GoogleNews-vectors-negative300.bin,
words. Each token wj is an integer index ranging from 1 to a model trained on a vast corpus of news data, which efmax_words, corresponding to its place in the vocabulary. fectively captures the semantics and syntax of the English
 b) Padding: Since tweets can vary in length, padding language.
ensures consistency by standardizing the length of all tokenized 2) Chinese: For Chinese, we relied on GloVe’s 840B corpus
sequences to maxlen = 500. If a sequence is shorter than 500 (300-dimensional vectors), which is well-suited for the
tokens, zeros are added (padding). If it is longer, it is truncated intricacies of Chinese morphology and character-level
to the first 500 tokens. meaning.
 The padded version of a tokenized tweet Ti is as follows: 3) Russian: A custom-trained Word2Vec model,
 tweets_model.w2v, was used for Russian, ensuring that
 Pi = Pad(Ti , maxlen) (7) it captures the unique slang and informal expressions
 commonly found in Russian tweets.
where Ti is the tokenized tweet, Pi = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pmaxlen } is 4) Arabic: For Arabic, we trained a Word2Vec model on
the padded sequence, pj = wj for j ≤ k, and pj = 0 for j > k our own dataset to better account for the language’s rootwhen the sequence is shorter than 500 tokens. based structure, dialectal variations, and unique syntactic
 After tokenization and padding, the final dataset is repre- features.
sented as follows: By using language-specific models, we ensured that the embeddings could capture the cultural and linguistic nuances of
 Xtl = {(P1 , y1 ), (P2 , y2 ), . . . , (Pn , yn )} (8) each language, enhancing the effectiveness of our multilingual
 cyber threat detection approach.
where Pi is the padded sequence of the ith tweet and yi is the
corresponding label.
 This standardized approach significantly improved the data D. Word2Vec Representation
quality and ensured compatibility with the subsequent analyti- Each word w in a tweet t
 i was mapped to a vector w in a dcal processes. dimensional space, where d is the embedding size (300 in this
1764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

case). Mathematically, for a tweet t
 i = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wk }, the 1) Language-Specific Classification: In the experiment, we
Word2Vec embeddings create a sequence of word vectors. used ML and DL models for each language—English, Chinese,
 Russian, and Arabic. The primary goal was to evaluate the per-
 Ei = {w
  1, w  k },
  2, . . . , w  j ∈ Rd .
 w (10) formance of those models when trained and tested exclusively
 1) Aggregating Word Embeddings: As ML models typically on data from a single language. To achieve this, we employed
require fixed-length inputs, the sequence of word embeddings three ML models and three DL architectures, and we compared
for a tweet Ei was aggregated into a single vector. Common the results between the models.
aggregation techniques include. a) ML classifier: For training the ML models, we utilized
 Mean pooling: Taking the average of all word vectors 80% of the dataset, while the remaining 20% was reserved for
 testing. Each algorithm was carefully configured with hyperpa-
 1 
 k
 rameters optimized for the classification task. In the following,
 Ti = j.
 w we detail the three ML algorithms employed:
 k
 j=1 Logistic regression (LR): The LR model maps the input fea-
 Max pooling: Taking the maximum value across each dimen- tures Ti to probabilities using a sigmoid function. The predicted
sion of the word vectors probability of a label yi is given by
 1
 Ti = max(w
  1, w
  2, . . . , w
  k ). P (yi = 1|Ti ) = (12)
 1 + e−(w  Ti +b)
 Here, Ti ∈ Rd represents the encoded tweet as a fixed-length where w is the weight vector, b is the bias term.
vector. We trained the LR model with a maximum of 1000 iterations
 2) Passing Encoded Data to the Model: Once encoded, the (max_iterations = 1000) to ensure convergence.
tweet representations Ti were used as input to the classifica- Decision tree (DT): The decision tree algorithm partitions
tion model. The final dataset after encoding is represented as the feature space Ti into regions by recursively splitting the data
follows: based on features that maximize information gain or minimize
 Gini impurity. The decision rule at each node can be expressed
 l
 Xen = {(T1 , y1 ), (T2 , y2 ), . . . , (Tn , yn )}. (11)
 as follows:
 
where Ti is the vector representation of the ith tweet, yi is the 1if Tij ≤ threshold
corresponding label. 
 f (Ti ) = (13)
 0otherwise
 These embeddings preserve semantic information and ensure
that the text data is represented in a numerical format suitable where Tij is the jth feature of Ti and threshold is the splitting
for training machine learning or deep learning models. The value determined during training.
use of language-specific pretrained models further enhanced the Random Forest (RF): Random forest is an ensemble algoquality of the encoded representations by leveraging linguistic rithm that builds multiple decision trees (DT1 , DT2 , . . . , DTM )
and contextual knowledge inherent in each model. on random subsets of the data and features. The final prediction
 is obtained by majority voting
  
E. Classifier
 f (Ti ) = mode DT1 (Ti ), DT2 (Ti ), . . . , DTM (Ti ) (14)
 To analyze the dataset, we employed three distinct types of
models: ML, DL, and LLMs. For our ML approach, we utilized where M is the number of trees in the forest, and DTm (Ti ) is
logistic regression (LR) for its efficiency and interpretability the prediction of the mth tree.
 l
as a linear baseline, decision tree (DT) to capture nonlinear Each algorithm was trained on the encoded dataset Xencoded =
patterns, and random forest (RF) for its robustness and high {(T1 , y1 ), (T2 , y2 ), . . . , (Tn , yn )}, where Ti represents the enperformance as an ensemble method. In the DL category, es- coded tweet and yi the corresponding label. By using distinct
sential for sequential text data, we designed architectures us- approaches such as linear modeling (LR), hierarchical splits
ing long short-term memory (LSTM) and gated recurrent unit (DT), and ensemble learning (RF), we ensured diverse perspec-
(GRU) networks, chosen for their established ability to learn tives in analyzing and classifying the dataset.
long-range dependencies while mitigating vanishing gradient b) DL classifier: We employed three distinct DL architecissues. Crucially, we implemented these as bidirectional LSTMs tures Bi-RNN, Bi-LSTM, and Bi-GRU to analyze the dataset.
(Bi-LSTMs) and Bi-GRUs. This bidirectional approach was Each architecture was designed and tested independently to
selected because processing sequences in both forward and evaluate its performance and identify the most effective model.
backward directions enables the models to build a richer con- Additionally, we meticulously tuned the hyperparameters of
textual understanding of each token by considering its entire each architecture to achieve optimal results. To select the opsurrounding sequence, which is well-documented to enhance timal hyperparameters, such as learning rate, batch size, and
performance on complex natural language processing tasks like dropout, we employed a combination of grid search and random
classification. These carefully selected ML and DL models, search techniques. These methods helped systematically exalongside LLMs, allowed for a multifaceted assessment of the plore different configurations and identify the best-performing
dataset. settings for each model. A brief overview of these models and
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1765

Fig. 2. Workflow of the tweet data classification process.

their configurations, as used in our experiments, is presented in act as feature transformation layers, enhancing the learning
Fig. 2. Below, we provide detailed descriptions of the models capacity.
and configurations used in our experiments. The output from the final dense layer is passed to another
 Bi-RNF: The top architecture in Fig. 2 defines the RNF dense layer with num_classes neurons and a softmax activation
models, which begin with a word embedding layer common to function, producing a probability distribution for multiclass
all other architectures. The word embedding layer transforms classification
the input tokens into dense vectors of dimension d = 300, with
a maximum sequence length of 100. The embedding layer is P (y|T ) = Softmax(WOutput HDense + bOutput ). (15)
initialized with pretrained embeddings.
 The first layer after embedding is a Bi-RNN with different
 Here, WOutput and bOutput are the weights and biases of the
units like 32, 64, 128, configured to return sequences. This layer
 final dense layer, HDense is the output from the last dense layer,
captures temporal dependencies in both forward and backward
 and P (y|T ) represents the predicted probabilities.
directions. Mathematically, the output of this layer is as follows:
 The model was compiled using the Adam optimizer with a
 HBiRNN = BiRNN(E) learning rate of 0.005 and sparse categorical cross-entropy as
 the loss function. The architecture ensures a robust framework
where E is the embedding matrix for a sequence, and HBiRNN for processing sequential data, using bidirectional layers to
represents the bidirectional output. capture comprehensive context and dense layers to enhance
 Following the Bi-RNN layer, the output is passed through representational power.
a dense layer with different neurons and a ReLU activation Bi-LSTM: The second architecture in Fig. 2 is the Bi-LSTM
function model, which also begins with the same word embedding layer
 as the Bi-RNF architecture, transforming input sequences into
 D1 = ReLU(WDense1 HBiRNN + bDense1 ) dense vectors of dimension d = 300. The first layer after embedding is a Bi-LSTM with 32 neurons, configured to return
where WDense1 and bDense1 are the weights and biases of the
 sequences. For a sequence E from the embedding layer, the
dense layer.
 output of this layer is as follows:
 To prevent overfitting, a dropout layer with a rate of 0.4 is
applied
 HBiLSTM1 = BiLSTM(E).
 D1drop = Dropout(D1 , 0.4).
 Following the Bi-LSTM layer, the output is passed through
 This process is repeated for subsequent layers, including a
 a dense layer with different neurons and a ReLU activation
bidirectional GRU (Bi-GRU) and a bidirectional LSTM (Bifunction
LSTM), interspersed with dense layers (with varying neuron
counts such as 32, 64, and 128) and dropout layers. Each bidirectional layer captures sequential patterns, and the dense layers D1 = ReLU(WDense1 HBiLSTM1 + bDense1 )
1766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

where WDense1 and bDense1 are the weights and biases of the To alleviate overfitting, a dropout layer is applied with rate
dense layer. To prevent overfitting, a dropout layer with a rate 0.4
of 0.4 is applied
 D1drop = Dropout(D1 , 0.4).
 D1drop = Dropout(D1 , 0.4).
 The architecture contains more bidirectional GRU layers,
 This process is repeated for two other Bi-LSTM layers, each each designed to process the output from the previous layer,
configured to return sequences, followed by dense layers with using differing neuron counts (e.g., 64 and 32). Regarding the
different neuron counts (e.g., 128) and dropout layers. The second Bi-GRU layer
output for the second Bi-LSTM layer is as follows:
 HBiGRU2 = BiGRU(D1drop ).
 HBiLSTM2 = BiLSTM(D1drop ).
 The subsequent dense and dropout layers are applied as Upon passing the third Bi-GRU layer, designed to output a
follows: singular sequence instead of a whole sequence

 D2 = ReLU(WDense2 HBiLSTM2 + bDense2 ) HBiGRU3 = BiGRU(HBiGRU2 ).

 Finally, the model employs a dense layer including
 num_classes neurons, utilizing a softmax activation function
 D2drop = Dropout(D2 , 0.4).
 to provide output probabilities for multiclass classification
 The final Bi-LSTM layer is set to return a single sequence
instead of a complete sequence P (y|T ) = Softmax(WOutput HBiGRU3 + bOutput ). (17)

 HBiLSTM3 = BiLSTM(D2drop ). This design effectively captures sequential dependencies
 through the gating mechanism of GRUs, while demonstrating
 Before generating the output, the architecture implements a greater computational efficiency than Bi-LSTM.
final dropout layer with a rate of 0.4 2) Multiclass Classifier: Before implementing the multidrop
 HBiLSTM3 = Dropout(HBiLSTM3 , 0.4). class classification models, we combined datasets from all four
 languages—English, Chinese, Russian, and Arabic—into a sin-
 The output layer comprises a dense layer with num_classes gle unified dataset. Each dataset was processed independently
neurons and employs a softmax activation function for multi- up to the embedding stage, ensuring that the word embeddings
class classification were created separately for each language while maintaining
 drop a consistent embedding dimension across all datasets. After
 P (y|T ) = Softmax(WOutput HBiLSTM3 + bOutput ) (16)
 generating embeddings, we merged the four embedded datasets
where WOutput and bOutput denote the weights and biases of the into one.
output layer, while P (y|T ) denotes the projected probability It is worth noting that the datasets for English, Chinese, and
distribution for the classes. This architecture uses the sequential Russian contained three class labels (threat, neutral, nonthreat),
learning capabilities of three Bi-LSTM layers, interspersed with while the Arabic dataset included only two labels (threat and
dense and dropout layers, to extract contextual information and nonthreat). Despite this difference, we preserved the same emdeliver accurate multiclass predictions. bedding dimension across all datasets to ensure uniformity and
 Bidirectional gated recurrent unit (Bi-GRU): The final archi- compatibility during the model training process. This unified,
tecture in Fig. 2 is the Bi-GRU model, which closely follows multilingual dataset provided the foundation for training and
the structure of the Bi-LSTM architecture described earlier. The evaluating the multiclass classification models, including the
primary difference lies in replacing the Bi-LSTM layers with LLM-based classifiers.
Bi-GRU layers. GRU is a simplified variant of LSTM that uses a) DL classifier: For the multiclass classification task,
fewer parameters while maintaining similar performance for we utilized two distinct DL architectures: LSTM and GRU.
sequence modeling tasks. The architecture of those models is same that we already dis-
 The Bi-GRU model starts with the same word embedding cussed earlier. To maximize efficiency and improve outcomes,
layer, where input tokens are transformed into dense vectors we modified the hyperparameters to better align with the inof dimension d = 300. The first layer after embedding is a Bi- tegrated multilingual dataset. This process involved iteratively
GRU with 128 neurons, configured to return sequences. For a modifying key aspects of the model, such as the number of
sequence E from the embedding layer, the output of the initial recurrent layers, the quantity of neurons within these layers,
Bi-GRU layer is as follows: and the dropout rates used for regularization. These adjustments
 were made to better align the model’s capacity and learning
 HBiGRU1 = BiGRU(E).
 dynamics with the increased complexity and diversity presented
 This is followed by a dense layer with 32 neurons and a ReLU by the combined linguistic data. This methodology enabled us
activation function to evaluate the efficacy of these models while modifying them to
 address the complexities of multiclass classification in various
 D1 = ReLU(WDense1 HBiGRU1 + bDense1 ). languages.
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1767

 b) LLM classifier: For the multiclass classification of these performance metrics are presented in Fig. 1. These
task, we also used an LLM architecture, specifically XLM- equations form the foundation for our analysis, illustrating how
RoBERTa. The objective was to evaluate its performance in the metrics were calculated to ensure consistent and accurate
comparison to the DL architectures, such as LSTM and GRU. evaluation of the models.
The technique utilized the strong multilingual capabilities of
XLM-RoBERTa, which was pretrained on a vast corpus of IV. RESULT
text in many languages, rendering it very appropriate for the
 In this experiment, we utilized ML, DL, and LLM techniques
integrated multilingual dataset.
 to analyze tweet threats in four different languages: English,
 The LLM architecture begins with tokenization via the XLM-
 Chinese, Russian, and Arabic. We completed the experiment in
RoBERTa tokenizer, transforming input text into numerical reptwo different ways. In the first approach, we applied ML and
resentations while maintaining uniformity in sequence length
 DL models to each language dataset separately; that’s allowed
by padding and truncation. For a dataset D = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tn },
 us to evaluate performance on individual datasets. In the second
the tokenized input is represented as follows:
 approach, we combined all four datasets into a single multilin-
 T = Tokenize(D, max_len) gual dataset and utilized DL and LLM models to assess their
 performance.
where max_len = 100 is the maximum sequence length.
 The tokenized data T is then passed to the XLM-RoBERTa A. English Data Analysis
model, which outputs the last hidden state H
 Table III presents a comprehensive comparison between the
 H = XLM-RoBERTa(T ). performance of machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)
 Here, H is a tensor of size (n, max_len, d), where d is the models for English tweet threat detection, categorized into
hidden state dimension of the model. To reduce this tensor to threat (Th), neutral (Neu), and nonthreat (Non-Th). Among
a fixed-size vector for each input sequence, we apply a global the ML models, RF outperformed both LR and DT across all
average pooling operation metrics. Specifically, RF achieved the highest accuracy (86%)
 and F1-score weighted average (FWA) (87%) among the ML
 P = GlobalAveragePooling(H). models, highlighting its superior ability to handle structured
 data. Additionally, RF showed the best performance in precision
 The pooled output P serves as the input to a series of dense and recall, particularly excelling in the Threat category with a
layers. The first dense layer transforms P with 128 neurons and precision of 0.89% and in the nonthreat category with a recall
ReLU activation of 0.85%. On the other hand, LR performed the worst, with the
 D1 = ReLU(W1 P + b1 ). lowest overall accuracy (47%) and FWA (47%).
 In contrast, the DL models demonstrated competitive per-
 Dropout is applied after each dense layer to mitigate formance, especially in capturing sequential patterns in text
overfitting data. Bi-LSTM was the best-performing DL model, achiev-
 D1drop = Dropout(D1 , 0.4). ing an accuracy of 72% and FWA of 72%. While Bi-GRU
 showed strong performance in precision for the Threat category
 This process continues for two more dense layers with 64 and (0.87), it lagged behind RF in overall metrics. Bi-GRU followed
32 neurons, respectively, each followed by dropout layers. The closely with an accuracy of 67% and an FWA of 66%, while Bifinal dense layer, configured with num_classes neurons and a RNF underperformed, with an accuracy of only 28%. Despite
softmax activation function, produces the output probabilities these variations, RF still maintained a slight edge over the DL
 models, particularly in terms of the weighted F1-score and
 P (y|T ) = Softmax(WOutput D3drop + bOutput ) (18) overall classification robustness.
where P (y|T ) represents the probability distribution over the Fig. 3 illustrates the performance of GRU, LSTM, and
class labels for the input text. RNF—in a multiclass classification task where Class 0 is neu-
 The model was trained with a learning rate of 0.0005, a batch tral, Class 1 is threat and Class 2 is nonthreat. Each plot displays
size of 16, and for 50 epochs. It was evaluated using sparse the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR)
categorical cross-entropy loss and accuracy metrics. for individual classes, along with their corresponding area under
 the curve (AUC) scores. The dashed line representing “Random
 Chance” (AUC = 0.50) serves as a baseline for comparison
F. Performance Analysis
 across all models. Notably, the LSTM model demonstrates su-
 To evaluate the performance of all models, we considered perior overall performance, with AUC scores of 0.86 for neutral
different parameters, including loss, accuracy, precision, recall, (Class 0), 0.92 for threat (Class 1), and 0.85 for nonthreat (Class
and F1-score. These metrics provide a comprehensive view of 2). The GRU model also performs well, achieving AUCs of
models performance for all four tweet datasets English, Chi- 0.80 for neutral, 0.90 for threat, and 0.77 for nonthreat. In
nese, Russian, and Arabic. Each metric takes a specific aspect contrast, the RNF model exhibits performance equivalent to
of the models’ performance, allowing for a detailed comparison random chance for all classes, with AUC scores of 0.50 for
of their strengths and limitations. The mathematical definitions neutral, threat, and nonthreat.
1768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ML AND DL MODELS FOR ENGLISH CYBER TWEET THREAT DETECTION

 Precision Per Category Recall Per Category F1-Score Per Category
 Model Params (K) in % in % in % Accuracy PMA RMA FMA PWA RWA FWA
 Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th
 LR 0.40 0.48 0.57 0.54 0.46 0.43 0.46 0.47 0.49 0.47 0.48 0.48 0.47 0.49 0.47 0.47
 ML DT 0.77 0.80 0.73 0.78 0.77 0.75 0.78 0.78 0.74 0.76 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.77 0.76 0.76
 RF 0.89 0.84 0.86 0.91 0.85 0.85 0.90 0.85 0.85 0.86 0.87 0.87 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.86
 Bi-RNF 23.89 0.28 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.44 0.00 0.00 0.28 0.09 0.33 0.15 0.08 0.28 0.13
 DL Bi-LSTM 27.65 0.64 0.76 0.73 0.65 0.85 0.64 0.65 0.80 0.69 0.72 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72
 Bi-GRU 26.05 0.87 0.71 0.58 0.37 0.85 0.73 0.52 0.77 0.65 0.67 0.72 0.65 0.65 0.71 0.67 0.66

 Note: Abbreviations: ML = machine learning, DL = deep learning, LR = logistic regression, DT = decision tree, RF = random forest, Bi-RNF = bidirectional recurrent
 neural framework, Bi-LSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, Bi-GRU = bidirectional gated recurrent unit, Th = threat, Neu = neutral, Non-Th = nonthreat,
 PMA = precision macro average, RMA = recall macro average, FMA = F1-score macro average, PWA = precision weighted average, RWA = recall weighted average,
 and FWA = F1-score weighted average. Bold values are represent the best performance for each column.

 (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 3. Multiclass ROC curves for the LSTM, GRU, and RNF models, evaluated on the English dataset, illustrating the true positive rate (TPR) against the
false positive rate (FPR) for each class. Each curve displays its corresponding AUC score, with a baseline representing “Random chance” for comparison.
(a) LSTM ROC curve for English tweets. (b) GRU ROC curve for English tweets. (c) RNF ROC curve for English tweets.

B. Chinese Data Analysis Fig. 4 illustrates the performance of the LSTM, RNF, and
 Table IV presents a comparison of ML and DL models for GRU models, respectively, on a Chinese tweet dataset. The
 LSTM model demonstrates strong performance, with AUC
identifying threats in Chinese tweets. Among the ML models,
RF outperformed others, with an accuracy of 86% and an FWA scores of 0.95 for neutral tweets (Class 0), 0.94 for threat tweets
 (Class 1), and 0.95 for nonthreat tweets (Class 2). Similarly, the
of 86%. RF demonstrated consistently high precision and recall
 GRU model achieves high performance, with AUC scores of
across all categories, particularly excelling in Threat detection
with a precision of 0.89 and a recall of 0.87. DT followed 0.96 for neutral tweets (Class 0), 0.92 for threat tweets (Class
 1), and 0.94 for nonthreat tweets (Class 2). The RNF model also
closely with an accuracy of 78% and an FWA of 78%, while LR)
 shows robust performance, with AUC scores of 0.94 for neutral
showed limited performance with an accuracy of just 56% and
an FWA of 56%. These lower scores highlight LR’s challenges tweets (Class 0), 0.88 for threat tweets (Class 1), and 0.93 for
 nonthreat tweets (Class 2). Overall, these results indicate that all
in handling the complex patterns present in the Chinese tweet
 three models—LSTM, GRU, and RNF—perform significantly
dataset.
 In contrast, the DL models generally performed better than better than random chance.
ML counterparts across most metrics, showcasing their ability
to capture sequential dependencies and contextual nuances. Bi- C. Russian Data Analysis
LSTM achieved the highest accuracy (86%) and FWA (86%) Table V describes the performance comparison between ML
of all models, excelling in Threat detection with a precision and DL models for Russian tweet threat detection. The results
of 0.88 and a recall of 0.88. Bi-GRU closely followed with show a detailed perspective on the models’ effectiveness in
an accuracy of 85% and an FWA of 84%, while Bi-RNF also handling this dataset. For ML models, RF emerged as the best
achieved an accuracy of 82% and an FWA of 82%. The DL performer, achieving the highest accuracy of 95% and an FWA
models consistently surpassed the ML models in PMA, RMA, of 95%. RF also exhibited excellent precision and recall for the
and FMA, demonstrating superior classification capabilities. nonthreat category, achieving perfect scores in precision (96%)
These results underscore the enhanced performance of DL mod- and recall (99%), demonstrating its strength in identifying nonels, particularly Bi-LSTM, in categorizing Chinese tweets with threatening tweets. DT followed RF in performance, with an
greater accuracy and reliability. accuracy of 89% and an FWA of 89%. DT showed balanced
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1769

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ML AND DL MODELS FOR CHINESE CYBER TWEET THREAT DETECTION

 Precision Per Category Recall Per Category F1-Score Per Category
 Model Params (K) in % in % in % Accuracy PMA RMA FMA PWA RWA FWA
 Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th
 LR 0.53 0.60 0.60 0.58 0.74 0.41 0.55 0.66 0.48 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.57 0.56
 ML DT 0.79 0.76 0.78 0.84 0.70 0.80 0.81 0.73 0.79 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78 0.78
 RF 0.89 0.79 0.90 0.87 0.92 0.78 0.88 0.85 0.84 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86
 Bi-RNF 12.78 0.94 0.73 0.83 0.84 0.82 0.81 0.88 0.77 0.82 0.82 0.83 0.82 0.83 0.83 0.82 0.82
 DL Bi-LSTM 15.42 0.88 0.80 0.90 0.89 0.85 0.84 0.88 0.82 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.86
 Bi-GRU 14.43 0.93 0.75 0.88 0.86 0.89 0.78 0.89 0.81 0.83 0.84 0.85 0.84 0.84 0.85 0.84 0.84

 Note: Abbreviations: ML = machine learning, DL = deep learning, LR = logistic regression, DT = decision tree, RF = random forest, Bi-RNF = bidirectional recurrent
 neural framework, Bi-LSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, Bi-GRU = bidirectional gated recurrent unit, Th = threat, Neu = neutral, Non-Th = nonthreat,
 PMA = precision macro average, RMA = recall macro average, FMA = F1-score macro average, PWA = precision weighted average, RWA = recall weighted average,
 and FWA = F1-score weighted average. Bold values are represent the best performance for each column.

 (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 4. Multiclass ROC curves for the LSTM, GRU, and RNF models, evaluated on the Chinese dataset, illustrating the true positive rate (TPR) against the
false positive rate (FPR) for each class. Each curve displays its corresponding AUC score, with a baseline representing “Random chance” for comparison.
(a) LSTM ROC curve for Chinese tweets. (b) GRU ROC curve for Chinese tweets. (c) RNF ROC curve for Chinese tweets.

 TABLE V
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ML AND DL MODELS FOR RUSSIAN CYBER TWEET THREAT DETECTION

 Precision Per Category Recall Per Category F1-Score Per Category
 Model Params (K) in % in % in % Accuracy PMA RMA FMA PWA RWA FWA
 Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th Th Neu Non-Th
 LR 0.41 0.67 0.59 0.26 0.82 0.70 0.32 0.74 0.64 0.58 0.56 0.59 0.57 0.55 0.58 0.55
 ML DT 0.88 0.88 0.92 0.85 0.90 0.95 0.87 0.89 0.93 0.89 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.89 0.89 0.89
 RF 0.96 0.93 0.96 0.91 0.96 0.99 0.94 0.95 0.97 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
 Bi-RNF 12.53 0.65 0.81 0.70 0.69 0.74 0.72 0.67 0.77 0.71 0.71 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.72 0.71 0.72
 DL Bi-LSTM 15.72 0.81 0.86 0.82 0.81 0.81 0.87 0.81 0.83 0.84 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83 0.83
 Bi-GRU 12.82 0.79 0.86 0.79 0.79 0.82 0.83 0.79 0.84 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81 0.81

 Note: Abbreviations: ML = machine learning, DL = deep learning, LR = logistic regression, DT = decision tree, RF = random forest, Bi-RNF = bidirectional recurrent
 neural framework, Bi-LSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, Bi-GRU = bidirectional gated recurrent unit, Th = threat, Neu = neutral, Non-Th = nonthreat,
 PMA = precision macro average, RMA = recall macro average, FMA = F1-score macro average, PWA = precision weighted average, RWA = recall weighted average,
 and FWA = F1-score weighted average. Bold values are represent the best performance for each column.

precision and recall for all categories. LR, while achieving rea- Bi-GRU followed closely, achieving an accuracy of 81% and
sonable recall for the neutral category (0.82), performed poorly an FWA of 81%, showing strong performance in the neutral
overall, particularly for the Threat category, with an recall of category but moderate performance for the nonthreat category.
only 0.26, resulting in an accuracy of 58% and an FWA of 55%. Bi-RNF, while achieving reasonable accuracy (58%), lagged
 In contrast, the DL models demonstrated competitive per- in overall weighted metrics such as FWA (55%) due to lower
formance, with Bi-LSTM standing out as the top-performing scores in the threat and nonthreat categories. Although RF
DL architecture. Bi-LSTM achieved an accuracy of 83% and demonstrated exceptional precision and recall in managing nonan FWA of 83%. It performed particularly well in the neutral threat tweets, Bi-LSTM provided a more equitable performance
category, with a precision of 0.88 and recall of 0.81, and also across all categories, highlighting the robustness of the DL
demonstrated balanced performance across other categories. architecture.
1770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

 (a) (b) (c)

Fig. 5. Multiclass ROC curves for the LSTM, GRU, and RNF models, evaluated on the Russian dataset, illustrating the true positive rate (TPR) against the
false positive rate (FPR) for each class. Each curve displays its corresponding AUC score, with a baseline representing “Random chance” for comparison.
(a) LSTM ROC curve for Russian tweets. (b) GRU ROC curve for Russian tweets. (c) RNF ROC curve for Russian tweets.

 TABLE VI
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF ML AND DL MODELS FOR ARABIC CYBER TWEET THREAT DETECTION

 Precision Per Category Recall Per Category F1-Score Per Category
 Model Params (K) in % in % in % Accuracy PMA RMA FMA PWA RWA FWA
 Th Non-Th Th Non-Th Th Non-Th
 LR 0.74 0.61 0.53 0.80 0.62 0.69 0.66 0.68 0.66 0.65 0.68 0.66 0.65
 ML DT 0.91 0.91 0.92 0.90 0.91 0.90 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91 0.91
 RF 0.95 0.94 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95
 Bi-RNF 11.20 0.67 1.00 1.00 0.47 0.80 0.64 0.75 0.84 0.73 0.72 0.83 0.75 0.73
 DL Bi-LSTM 13.37 0.91 0.84 0.84 0.91 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88
 Bi-GRU 13.37 0.91 0.84 0.84 0.91 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88 0.88

 Note: Abbreviations: ML = machine learning, DL = deep learning, LR = logistic regression, DT = decision tree, RF = random forest, Bi-RNF = bidirectional
 recurrent neural framework, Bi-LSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, Bi-GRU = bidirectional gated recurrent unit, Th = threat, Non-Th = nonthreat, PMA
 = precision macro average, RMA = recall macro average, FMA = F1-score macro average, PWA = precision weighted average, RWA = recall weighted average,
 and FWA = F1-score weighted average. Bold values are represent the best performance for each column.

 Fig. 5 depicts multiclass ROC curves for the GRU, LSTM,
and RNF models used in Russian tweet classification. The GRU
model achieves AUC scores of 0.90, 0.94, and 0.94 for Classes
neutral tweets (Class 0), threat (Class 1), and nonthreat (Class
2), demonstrating strong performance with a high TPR and low
FPR. The LSTM model performs similarly well, with slightly
higher AUC values of 0.91, 0.95, and 0.93 for the respective
classes. In contrast, the RNF model shows a lower overall
performance, particularly for Class 0, with AUC scores of 0.81,
0.91, and 0.91. While the RNF model still effectively classifies
Classes 1 and 2, it underperforms relative to the GRU and
LSTM models, especially for Class 0. These results highlight
the superior classification capability of GRU and LSTM models Fig. 6. ROC curves for the LSTM, GRU, and RNF models, evaluated on
in this context. the Arabic dataset, illustrating the true positive rate (TPR) against the false
 positive rate (FPR) for each class.

D. Arabic Data Analysis
 Table VI illustrates the comparative performance of ML and recall and F1-score. LR, on the other hand, struggled with the
DL models in detecting threats in Arabic tweets. Among the Threat category, with a recall of just 0.53 and an F1-score of
ML models, the RF exhibited the highest overall performance, 0.62, leading to an overall accuracy of 66% and an FWA of 65%.
attaining an accuracy of 95% and an F1 score of 95%. RF For the DL models, Bi-LSTM and Bi-GRU both achieved an
had good precision for both threat (0.95) and nonthreat (0.94), accuracy of 88% and an FWA of 88%. They both had strong prealongside the maximum recall for threat (0.94). This equilib- cision (91%) and F1-score (88%) for the “Threat” category and
rium resulted in an F1-score of 0.95 for threat and 0.95 for balanced performance for “nonthreat” with an F1-score of 88%.
nonthreat, establishing RF as the most dependable ML model The bidirectional recurrent neural framework (Bi-RNF) model,
for this dataset. DT followed RF with an accuracy of 91% and an while performing reasonably well with a 75% accuracy, showed
FWA of 91%, performing well in both categories for precision, a notable imbalance, with a very high recall for “Threat” (100%)
MURAD et al.: MULTILINGUAL CYBER THREAT DETECTION IN TWEETS/X USING ML, DL, AND LLM 1771

 TABLE VII
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DL AND LLM MODELS ON THE COMBINED MULTI-LINGUAL TWEET DATASET

 Precision Per Category Recall Per Category F1-Score Per Category
 Train Validation Train Validation
 Model Params in % in % in %
 Accuracy Accuracy Loss Loss
 Th Ne Non-Th Th Ne Non-Th Th Ne Non-Th
 Bi-RNF 66.31K 0.46 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.63 0.00 0.00 0.46 0.44 1.05 1.07
 DL
 Bi-LSTM 67.81K 0.70 0.76 0.76 0.77 0.73 0.71 0.77 0.74 0.70 0.97 0.74 0.11 1.4
 XLM-RoBERTa 27.81M 0.46 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.63 0.00 0.00 0.46 0.46 1.05 1.06
 LLM
 mT5 49.606K 0.65 0.56 0.00 0.30 0.91 0.00 0.41 0.70 0.00 0.55 0.54 1.22 1.1

 Note: Abbreviations: ML = machine learning, LLM = large language model, LR = logistic regression, DT = decision tree, RF = random forest, Bi-RNF = bidirectional
 recurrent neural framework, Bi-LSTM = bidirectional long short-term memory, Th = threat, and Non-Th = nonthreat. Bold values are represent the best performance for each
 column.

but a low recall for “nonthreat” (47%), leading to a lower FWA for particular tasks while also highlighting the necessity for
of 73%. Overall, RF model stands out as the top performer additional fine-tuning and domain adaptation when addressing
among the ML models. However, DL models, particularly Bi- varied data.
LSTM and Bi-GRU, provided consistently strong and balanced The mT5 model demonstrated balanced performance across
performance across metrics, demonstrating their capability to all categories. It achieved a precision of 0.65 for threat, 0.56 for
handle the complex linguistic patterns. neutral, and 0.00 for nonthreat. The recall was notably strong
 Fig. 6 illustrates the ROC curves for three deep learning for neutral (0.91) and weaker for threat (0.30) and nonthreat
models—RNN, LSTM, and GRU—used for Arabic tweet clas- (0.00). The F1-scores were 0.41 for threat, 0.70 for neutral, and
sification. The RNF model achieves an AUC of 0.85, indicating 0.00 for nonthreat. mT5 achieved a train accuracy of 55% and a
a relatively strong classification performance, though it lags validation accuracy of 54%, with a validation loss of 1.1. These
behind the LSTM and GRU models, both of which have higher results indicate that mT5 shows promise for neutral category
AUC values of 0.95, suggesting superior discrimination ability. classification, although it struggles with threat and nonthreat
The random chance baseline, represented by an AUC of 0.50, detection. The model’s performance suggests that while LLMs
serves as a reference point, highlighting that all three models can be effective for some tasks, further tuning and adaptation
outperform random classification. This figure demonstrates the are necessary for optimal performance across all categories.
effectiveness of LSTM and GRU models for Arabic tweet classification, with RNN still showing competitive performance but
 V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
with slightly lower accuracy.
 This work presents a novel multilingual dataset, providing
 as a significant resource for research on cyber tweet threat
E. Combined Data Analysis
 identification. We performed an extensive examination of these
 Table VII illustrates the performance of DL and LLM tech- datasets, both separately and in a unified multilingual configuraniques on the combined dataset, which integrates tweet data tion. We employed three distinct model architectures—ML, DL,
from four languages: English, Chinese, Russian, and Arabic. and LLM—to evaluate the performance of different techniques.
Among the DL models, Bi-LSTM demonstrated the best overall Among the ML models, the RF algorithm exhibited superior
performance. It achieved a train accuracy of 97% and a valida- performance, showcasing its efficacy in managing structured
tion accuracy of 74%, with a relatively low train loss (0.11). Twitter data. The Bi-LSTM architecture for DL models at-
The model showed strong recall for all categories, particularly tained the best accuracy, surpassing all ML and DL models.
threat (0.77) and neutral (0.73), as well as a high F1-score for Significantly, Bi-LSTM surpassed LLMs in performance on
threat (0.77) and nonthreat (0.74). This indicates that Bi-LSTM the integrated dataset, demonstrating its proficiency in capwas highly effective at capturing sequential dependencies and turing sequential patterns and contextual information adeptly.
providing balanced classification across categories. In contrast, Although we utilized the LLM architecture (XLM-RoBERTa)
Bi-RNF had difficulties in generalization, achieving a validation for the integrated dataset, its performance was inferior to that of
accuracy of 44% and a validation loss of 1.07. The model exhib- Bi-LSTM, indicating the necessity for additional optimization
ited poor performance in the neutral and nonthreat categories, and fine-tuning of LLMs to fully realize their capabilities in
achieving an F1-score of 0.00 in both, indicating its deficiencies multilingual cyber tweet threat identification.
in managing intricate multilingual datasets. In the future, our efforts will concentrate on improving model
 The XLM-RoBERTa provide mixed results. Though it ex- performance on integrated datasets by investigating more socelled in recall for the threat detection (1.00), its performance phisticated LLM designs and utilizing fine-tuning techniques
in the neutral and nonthreat categories was weaker, with an specifically designed for multilingual data. Furthermore, we
F1-score of 0.00 for neutral and nonthreat. Both its train and intend to implement transfer learning techniques to modify
validation accuracy were 46%, and its validation loss (1.06) models pretrained on extensive datasets, enhancing their capacindicates challenges in generalizing across the multilingual ity to generalize to smaller and more heterogeneous datasets.
dataset. These findings emphasize the capabilities of LLMs Additionally, we intend to broaden our research to encompass
1772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL SOCIAL SYSTEMS, VOL. 13, NO. 2, APRIL 2026

other languages and domain-specific Twitter datasets, facilitat- [12] B. Amirshahi and S. Lahmiri, “Investigating the effectiveness of Twiting a more thorough assessment of the suggested techniques’ ter sentiment in cryptocurrency close price prediction by using deep
 learning,” Expert Syst., vol. 42, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. e13428.
robustness and flexibility. [13] S. Lu, L. Wei, and H. Liang, “Social media policies as social control
 in the newsroom: A case study of the New York Times on Twitter,”
 Journalism Stud., vol. 34, pp. 1–19, 2025.
 DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT [14] C. A. Ferguson and M. Chowdhury, “The phonemes of Bengali,”
 Language, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 22–59, 1960.
 The code of this article can be found in this link: https:// [15] R. Sánchez-Corcuera, A. Zubiaga, and A. Almeida, “Early detection
github.com/Mmurrad/Tweet-X-Data-Classification. and prevention of malicious user behavior on Twitter using deep learning
 techniques,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Syst., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 6649–
 REFERENCES 6661, Oct. 2024.
 [16] A. Sallah et al., “Fine-tuned understanding: Enhancing social bot de-
 [1] A. Sherin, I. J. SelvakumariJeya, and S. Deepa, “Enhanced aquila opti- tection with transformer-based classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp.
 mizer combined ensemble bi-LSTM-GRU with fuzzy emotion extractor 118250–118269, 2024.
 for tweet sentiment analysis and classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, [17] M. Rehan, M. S. I. Malik, and M. M. Jamjoom, “Fine-tuning transpp. 141932–141951, 2024. former models using transfer learning for multilingual threatening text
 [2] T. Elghazaly, A. Mahmoud, and H. A. Hefny, “Political sentiment identification,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 106503–106515, 2023.
 analysis using Twitter data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Internet Things Cloud [18] Central Intelligence Agency, “The World Factbookvol,” 2024. [Online].
 Comput., 2016, pp. 1–5. Available: https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/
 [3] J. Jia, L. Yang, Y. Wang, and A. Sang, “Hyper attack graph: Constructing [19] A. Tundis and M. Mühlhäuser, “A multi-language approach towards
 a hypergraph for cyber threat intelligence analysis,” Computers Secur., the identification of suspicious users on social networks,” in Proc. Int.
 vol. 149, 2025, Art. no. 104194. Carnahan Conf. Secur. Technol. (ICCST), 2017, pp. 1–6,
 [4] F. K. Sufi, “A new computational method for quantification and analysis [20] P. Chiril, F. Benamara Zitoune, V. Moriceau, M. Coulomb-Gully, and A.
 of media bias in cybersecurity reporting,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social Kumar, “Multilingual and multitarget hate speech detection in tweets,” in
 Syst., early access, May 5, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2025.3560199. Actes de la Conférence Sur le Traitement Automatique Des Langues Na-
 [5] J. Lyu, A. Song, E. Seo, and G. Kim, “An exploratory analysis of the turelles (TALN) PFIA in vol. II: Articles Courts, E. Morin, S. Rosset, and
 DPRK cyber threat landscape using publicly available reports,” Int. J. P. Zweigenbaum, Eds. Toulouse, France: ATALA, 7, 2019, pp. 351–360.
 Inf. Secur., vol. 24, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. 66. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2019.jeptalnrecital-court.21
 [6] R. Marinho and R. Holanda, “Automated emerging cyber threat identifi- [21] A. Hussein and A. A. Almazroi, “Multiclass classification for cyber
 cation and profiling based on natural language processing,” IEEE Access, threats detection on twitter,” Comput. Mater. Continua, vol. 77, no. 3,
 vol. 11, pp. 58915–58936, 2023. pp. 3853–3866, 2023. [Online]. Available: http://www.techscience.com/
 [7] N. R. de Oliveira, D. S. Medeiros, and D. M. Mattos, “A sensitive cmc/v77n3/55024
 stylistic approach to identify fake news on social networking,” IEEE [22] M. B. Kmainasi, A. E. Shahroor, M. Hasanain, S. R. Laskar, N. Hassan,
 Signal Process. Lett., vol. 27, pp. 1250–1254, 2020. and F. Alam, “Llamalens: Specialized multilingual llm for analyzing
 [8] B. Jamshidi, S. Hakak, and R. Lu, “A self-attention mechanism-based news and social media content,” 2024, arXiv:abs/15308. [Online]. Availmodel for early detection of fake news,” IEEE Trans. Comput. Social able: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:273501813
 Syst., early access, May 5, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TCSS.2025.3560199. [23] M. S. U. Miah, M. M. Kabir, T. B. Sarwar, M. Safran, S. Alfarhood,
 [9] R. Das, G. Karmakar, and J. Kamruzzaman, “How much I can rely and M. F. Mridha, “A multimodal approach to cross-lingual sentiment
 on you: Measuring trustworthiness of a Twitter user,” IEEE Trans. analysis with ensemble of transformer and LLM,” Sci. Rep., vol. 14,
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 949–966, Feb. 2019. no. 1, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 9603.
[10] J. Y. Nip and C. Sun, “Public diplomacy, propaganda, or what? China’s [24] A. T. Hridi, S. Abdullah, M. A. Ibna Hasnath, R. H. Adiba, S. Proma,
 communication practices in the South China sea dispute on Twitter,” and R. M. Rahman, “Identifying threats on social media to spot offensive
 J. Public Diplomacy, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 43–68, 2022. behavior,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Intell. Syst. (IS), 2024, pp. 1–7.
[11] K. A. Uddin et al., “Machine learning-based screening solution for [25] S. H. Kellogg, A Grammar of the Hindi Language., 1972.
 covid-19 cases investigation: Socio-demographic and behavioral factors [26] J. Vaid and A. Gupta, “Exploring word recognition in a semi-alphabetic
 analysis and covid-19 detection,” Human-Centric Intell. Syst., vol. 3, script: The case of devanagari,” Brain Lang., vol. 81, nos. 1–3, pp. 679–
 no. 4, pp. 441–460, 2023. 690, 2002.