JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 1

 Multimodal Reasoning with LLM for Encrypted
 Traffic Interpretation: A Benchmark
 Longgang Zhang, Xiaowei Fu, Fuxiang Huang, and Lei Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE

 （a）Traditional classification methods
 Abstract—Network traffic, as a key media format, is crucial
 for ensuring security and communications in modern internet Malicious (Tor)
 infrastructure. While existing methods offer excellent performance,
 they face two key bottlenecks: (1) They fail to capture multidimen- Traditional
 Classifier
 sional semantics beyond unimodal sequence patterns. (2) Their 45 00 3c 00 1c 46
 40 06 00 c0 a8 01 "Offsets 42 has a weight of 0.8"
arXiv:2604.08140v1 [cs.CR] 9 Apr 2026

 “black box” property, i.e., providing only category labels, lacks an c0 a8 01 02 00 50 (meaning it has no practical
 operational value)
 Raw Traffic Bytes
 auditable reasoning process. We identify a key factor that existing
 （b）ours
 network traffic datasets are primarily designed for classification Evidence-Grounded
 and inherently lack rich semantic annotations, failing to generate Forensic Report
 "class"
 human-readable evidence report. To address data scarcity, this Malicious (Tor)

 Perception Traffic

 Cognitive LLM
 "traits"
 paper proposes a Byte-Grounded Traffic Description (BGTD)

 Encoder
 TLS 1.3
 45 00 3c 00 1c 46 "evidence"
 benchmark for the first time, combining raw bytes with structured 40 06 00 c0 a8 01 high entropy, low ASCII ratio

 c0 a8 01 02 00 50 "description"
 expert annotations. BGTD provides necessary behavioral features Raw Traffic Bytes
 "Automated Tor
 malware C2 beaconing
 Understandable
 classification results and
 and verifiable chains of evidence for multimodal reasoning with high-entropy, lowthroughput payloads
 reasoning details
 "notes"
 towards explainable encrypted traffic interpretation. Built upon Persistent and low
 throughput

 BGTD, this paper proposes an end-to-end traffic-language Byte-Grounded
 Knowledge
 representation framework (mmTraffic), a multimodal reasoning
 architecture bridging physical traffic encoding and semantic
 Fig. 1. Comparison of traffic analysis paradigms. (a) Traditional classification
 interpretation. In order to alleviate modality interference and
 methods that act as a “black box”, providing only a label and low-level feature
 generative hallucinations, mmTraffic adopts a jointly-optimized weights that lack operational value. (b) Our proposed multimodal reasoning
 perception-cognition architecture. By incorporating a perception- framework, composed of a Traffic Perception Encoder and a Cognitive LLM,
 centered traffic encoder and a cognition-centered LLM generator, instructed by Byte-Grounded Knowledge, generating an evidence-grounded
 mmTraffic achieves refined traffic interpretation with guaranteed report with human-understandable reasoning and executable insights.
 category prediction. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
 mmTraffic autonomously generates high-fidelity, human-readable,
 and evidence-grounded traffic interpretation reports, while maintaining highly competitive classification accuracy comparing to relied on statistical features (e.g., packet size distribution and
 specialized unimodal model (e.g., NetMamba). The source code arrival time intervals, etc.) and machine learning techniques,
 is available at Traffic-Reasoning-Project.
 but struggled to adapt to the highly-dimensional and dynamic
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, network traffic adversarial nature of modern network traffic. In contrast,
 interpretation, large language model, multimodal learning. deep learning (DL) models achieved significant performance
 improvements by automatically extracting hierarchical represen-
 I. I NTRODUCTION tations from raw byte sequences. In recent years, inspired by the
 success of self-supervised pre-training in large models, traffic

 N ETWORK traffic analysis is a core pillar for ensuring analysis models based on Transformers [33] and state space
 network security, implementing intrusion detection, and models (SSMs) [13] are emerged. For example, ET-BERT [19]
 conducting traffic engineering. With the widespread deployment introduced a masked burst flow model, MPAF [6] proposed
 of Transport Layer Security (TLS 1.3), Quick UDP Connections a multi-phase attribute fingerprint, YaTC [38] proposed a
 (QUIC), and anonymous routing networks such as Tor [9], end- multi-level flow representation (MFR) matrix, NetMamba [34]
 to-end encryption has made payload content extremely opaque. achieved ultra-fast inference using the linear-time complexity of
 This evolution has rendered traditional Deep Packet Inspection the Mamba architecture, FlowletFormer [22] further optimized
 (DPI) mechanisms, relying on plaintext signature matching, alignment capabilities by introducing behavior-semantic-aware
 largely ineffective. Facing this challenge, encrypted traffic Flowlet units, and WF-Transformer [39] further proposed a
 classification techniques have emerged. These methods heavily Transformer-based temporal feature extraction method.

 This work was partially supported by National Natural Science Fund of Despite the empirical success of deep representation learning
 China under Grants 92570110 and 62271090, Chongqing Natural Science models, contemporary cryptographic traffic analysis models
 Fund under Grant CSTB2024NSCQ-JQX0038, and National Youth Talent remain constrained by two key bottlenecks: (1) Semantic Void in
 Project. (Corresponding author: Lei Zhang)
 L. Zhang, X. Fu and L. Zhang are with the School of Microelectronics and Unimodal Representations. Existing models essentially perform
 Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China. nonlinear boundary partitioning in a high-dimensional space,
 (E-mail: zlg502361@gmail.com, xwfu@cqu.edu.cn, leizhang@cqu.edu.cn,) directly mapping pure numerical hexadecimal byte sequences
 Fuxiang Huang is with the School of Data Science, Lingnan University,
 Hong Kong, China. (E-mail: fxhuang1995@gmail.com) to classification labels. In complex enterprise environments,
 Manuscript received April 19, 2015; revised August 16, 2015. security analysts often encounter the “statistical twin” phe-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 2

nomenon, i.e., benign traffic and malicious traffic employing knowledge. By providing discriminative behavioral traits
obfuscation techniques exhibit almost identical statistical distri- and verifiable chains of evidence, BGTD bridges the
butions. Relying solely on unimodal sequence patterns makes fundamental data-knowledge gap and enables multimodal
these models inadequate to capture the rich, multidimensional reasoning towards interpretable encrypted traffic analysis.
semantics required to distinguish such threats. (2) Black-box • A multi-modal traffic reasoning framework (mmTraf-
Property and Limitations of Traditional Explainable Artificial fic). We reformulate encrypted traffic analysis as a jointly
Intelligence (XAI). Purely statistical classifiers cannot provide optimized multimodal alignment pipeline. By unfreezing
human-readable, auditable, protocol-level forensic evidence to the traffic encoder and training it synergistically with the
justify their decisions. While post-hoc interpretation techniques LLM, we achieve a deep semantic mapping from physical
(e.g., SHAP [25], LIME [30] and Grad-CAM [31]) attempted network bytes to human-readable concepts.
to address this, they can only generate importance scores for • Auxiliary constraint and semantic-priority generation.
features or attention heatmaps. For frontline Security Operations We introduce a classification head to enforce discrimina-
Center (SOC) analysts, knowing that “the byte with offset 42 tive constraints on the traffic encoder. Furthermore, we
has high weight” is of no operational value unless the byte design a semantic-priority generation loss that dynamically
can be logically mapped to a specific protocol anomaly, such assigns higher weights to the categorical tokens, effectively
as a malformed handshake frame or an illegal cipher suite. mitigating LLM hallucinations in category prediction and
 To overcome the aforementioned semantic limitations and ensuring the quality of generated reports.
black-box constraints, the deep model is expected to learn to • Superior performance of traffic interpretation with
map low-level physical bytes to high-level protocol semantics. classification. Extensive evaluations across six diverse
However, existing network traffic datasets are primarily col- traffic benchmarks demonstrate that mmTraffic achieves
lected for the traditional classification task, providing only high-fidelity, auditable report generation, while maintaindiscrete category labels and inherently lacking the rich, multi- ing exceptional classification accuracy.
dimensional semantic annotations required, and thus unable
to train generative interpretable models. To bridge this funda- II. R ELATED W ORK
mental gap, we innovatively construct a Byte-Grounded Traffic A. Self-supervised Methods for Encrypted Traffic Classification
Description (BGTD) dataset. To the best of our knowledge, Large-scale self-supervised representation learning for net-
BGTD is the first benchmark that explicitly pairs raw network work traffic is one of the most significant breakthroughs in
traffic bytes with structured, rich expert knowledge. To ensure cybersecurity in recent years. Early efforts primarily adapted
strong generalization capabilities, the dataset integrates six paradigms from natural language processing and computer
authoritative public repositories covering a broad ecosystem vision. For instance, ET-BERT [19] pioneered the application
of applications. Beyond basic classification, BGTD provides of transformer architectures to traffic sequences via binary
fine-grained semantic annotations such as discriminative be- segmentation and masked burst flow modeling. Conversely,
havioral features, verifiable chains of evidence, and natural YaTC structured raw traffic as a multi-level flow representation
language descriptions. These elements are constructed through (MFR) matrix, employing a dual-attention masked autoenan automated expert knowledge generation process powered by coder to explicitly capture hierarchical packet interactions. To
Claude Opus. By linking numerical payloads with the high- address computational bottlenecks and structural limitations,
level forensic information, BGTD provides the key foundational recent research has shifted towards efficiency and behavioral
data required for multimodal reasoning. semantics. NetMamba [34] innovatively introduced state-space
 Building upon this multimodal benchmark, this paper pro- model (SSM) [13] via a stride-based representation, achieving
poses an end-to-end, multi-modal traffic-language representa- faster inference suitable for high-speed networks. Meanwhile,
tion framework (mmTraffic) to overcome the inherent limita- FlowletFormer [22] moved beyond fixed-length truncation by
tions of semantic void and black-box property in traditional encoding explicit multi-layer protocol semantics based on
traffic classifiers. Unlike traditional pipelines that strictly freeze coherent behavioral interaction units. Beyond masked modeling
the traffic encoder to prevent catastrophic forgetting and often paradigms, contrastive learning has also been explored as
lead to weak semantic alignment, mmTraffic advocates for a a self-supervised pre-training strategy for encrypted traffic
joint optimization for perception and cognition modules. By analysis. For instance, SmartDetector [32] proposes a Semantic
introducing an auxiliary classification head in perception and Attribute Matrix (SAM) representation and designs a traffic
a semantic-priority guided generation mechanism in cognition, data augmentation method to improve robustness against
our framework explicitly constrains the continuous feature obfuscation strategies such as dummy packet injection, prespace and forces the large language model (LLM) to perform training the detection model via contrastive learning to learn
accurate classification before reasoning. This intrinsically deep representations from unlabeled traffic data.
empowers LLM to understand non-semantic traffic bytes and Despite the diverse architectures and continuous breakgenerate human-readable, evidence-grounded reports. throughs [10] in accuracy, these models share a fundamental
 Fig. 1 describes the paradigm difference between mmTraffic limitation: they are entirely constrained by the nature of
and others. The main contributions are summarized as follows: unimodal black-box classifiers, as shown in Tables I. While they
 • A Byte-grounded traffic description benchmark excel at the classification task, they can only map numerical
 (BGTD). We construct the first benchmark to explicitly sequences to discrete labels, but fail to reasoning and generate
 pair raw network traffic bytes with structured expert interpretable reports with chains of evidence.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 3

 TABLE I
C OMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT PARADIGMS FOR NETWORK TRAFFIC ANALYSIS . MBM, SBP, MAE, MFM, AND FPT REPRESENT M ASKED B YTE M ODEL ,
 S EGMENT B URST P REDICTION , M ASKED AUTOENCODER , M ASKED F LOW M ODEL , AND F LOW P REDICTION TASK , RESPECTIVELY.

Model Traffic Representation Core Structure Pre-training Limitations

ET-BERT [19] 4-hex Bigram / Burst Transformer Encoder MBM / SBP Ignores protocol hierarchy; uses natural language
 Segmentation subword tokenization

YaTC [38] Multi-level Flow Dual-Attention MAE (Matrix Fixed matrix dimensions; truncates long-range
 Representation (MFR) Transformer Masking) session features
 Matrix

NetMamba [34] Stride-based Byte Sequence Unidirectional Mamba Masked Stride Purely numerical mapping; lacks interpretability
 (SSM) Reconstruction

FlowletFormer [22] Flowlet Behavioral Unit / Transformer Encoder MFM / FPT Black-box classifier; unable to output forensic
 Field Tokenization reasoning

B. LLMs for Network Security diverse vision-language tasks. mmTraffic draws the following
 Early applications of Large Language Models (LLMs) in insight: rather than relying on disparate training stages with
cybersecurity were primarily limited to plain text tasks, such as a frozen perception module, we align an active traffic encoder
threat intelligence aggregation [2], log parsing, and vulnerability with a language model through a lightweight MLP connector,
description summarization. However, recent study begun to empowering the LLM to perform encrypted traffic interpretation
explore domain-specific LLMs capable of directly interpret- with rigorous multimodal reasoning.
ing underlying telemetry data. TrafficLLM [7] represents a
significant attempt to bridge the modality gap. It employs a D. Explainability in Traffic Analysis
traffic-domain tokenizer to compress protocol fields by reducing Despite the strong empirical performance of deep traffic
token length to an approximately half. While TrafficLLM [7] classifiers, their black-box nature has motivated a growing
has demonstrated the feasibility of feeding continuous/discrete body of work on explainable AI (XAI) [5]. Post-hoc techniques
telemetry data into an LLM, this one-tower early fusion archi- such as SHAP [25], LIME [30], and Grad-CAM [31] provide
tecture suffers from an inherent structural vulnerability. Forcing feature-level attribution scores, but cannot produce protocolan LLM to simultaneously process discrete natural language level forensic evidence for security analysts. While attentiontokens and high-entropy, non-semantic numerical traffic tokens based mechanisms have been extended to model inter-modal
within the same attention layers frequently induces modality interactions [23] and structured multimodal representations [14],
interference. Consequently, in high-risk intrusion detection, these approaches remain confined to feature-level enhancethis architecture may neglect the authenticity of underlying ment without producing human-readable explanations. DISphysical bytes in order to maintain the fluency of the language, TILLER [1] proposed a multimodal multitask framework that
inevitably generating fictitious security alert logic. In contrast, jointly learns traffic representations and human-readable labels,
the proposed mmTraffic explicitly mitigates this limitation by but still lacks free-form natural language generation. mmTraffic
reformulating the architecture as an end-to-end multimodal addresses this gap by leveraging large language models to
framework, fundamentally bridges the modality gap, prevents produce structured, evidence-grounded forensic reports, moving
generative hallucinations, and forces the LLM to ground its beyond importance scores toward auditable reasoning chains.
reasoning in authentic physical bytes.
 III. BGTD B ENCHMARK FOR T RAFFIC R EASONING
C. Multimodal Alignment and Cross-Modal Fusion A. Overview
 The problem of bridging heterogeneous modalities is well- A benchmark that explicitly links raw traffic analysis data
studied in the vision-language domain. Early approaches to with expert-level semantic reasoning is a prerequisite for
cross-modal alignment include graph-based relational mod- training a multimodal traffic reasoning framework, but is
eling [15] and semantic-driven hashing for large-scale re- still unexplored. Therefore, we develop a Byte-Grounded
trieval [4], which established the importance of preserving Traffic Description (BGTD) benchmark, which, to the best
semantic correspondences across modalities. CLIP [27] demon- of our knowledge, bridges the data scarcity and persistent
strated that contrastive alignment between image and text data-knowledge gap in encrypted traffic interpretation for
encoders produces powerful transferable representations. Subse- the first time. To ensure the diversity of data distribution
quent works such as LLaVA [20] and InstructBLIP [8] extended and scenarios, the BGTD dataset integrates six authoritative
this paradigm by using lightweight projection connectors to map public traffic repositories, covering different network behaviors,
frozen visual encoders into the token space of large language application ecosystems, and encryption protocols. Specifically,
models, enabling instruction-following behavior over visual BGTD deeply integrates cross-platform mobile application
inputs. Flamingo [3] further showed that cross-modal fusion via traffic (i.e., CrossPlatform-Android [29] and CrossPlatformgated attention layers enables few-shot generalization across iOS [29]), cutting-edge TLS 1.3 encrypted web communication
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 4

 Category Extraction

 Split PCAPs
 Pcaps Extraction Dataset Generation Pipeline Script
 Head: First
 Target
 Class 1 Mid 6 Tail: Last Knowledge
 Class 2 Raw 2 Packets Packets 2 Packets Claude
 Base Prompt
 Traffic
 Header
 Opus-4.6
 category
 "class"： Trafficlabel
 5-Tuple Template
 Class 3 Class 4 Pcaps
 Session
 Byte-level
 Splitting Payload
 Global & Local "traits"：
 Features features
 Knowledge byte-level
 Global Stats Base "evidence"：
 supporting the
 Drop: Class < Min Samples
 Truncate: Random
 Packets List classification
 Sample to Max Cap
 NPY Fixed Length Natural
 Entropy & Global language
 Class 1
 64 byte Payload Statistical "description"：summary of
 traffic type and
 Class 3 Class 4 features and behavior
 Class 2
 96 byte Pattern Local Byte-level Related
 Match attributes "notes"： suggestions

 （a）Session Extraction and Class Balancing （b）Fixed-Length Truncation and NPY Array Generation （c）Automated Expert-Knowledge Generation Pipeline

Fig. 2. Pipeline of developing BGTD dataset: (a) session extraction and class balancing from raw PCAP files, (b) fixed-length 10 × 160 NPY array generation
via priority-based packet sampling, and (c) LLM-assisted ground-truth synthesis using Claude Opus-4.6 prompted as a senior network security expert.

(i.e., CSTNet-TLS1.3) [19], complex encrypted VPN tunnels  ' D W D V H W  & R P S R V L W L R Q   6 D P S O H  & R X Q W V  D Q G  & O D V V  ' L V W U L E X W L R Q
and anonymous routing networks (i.e., ISCXVPN2016 [11] and  7 U D L Q       
ISCX-Tor-2016) [17], and hybrid malware traffics containing         7 H V W
       

  1 X P E H U  R I  6 D P S O H V
multiple attack families (i.e., USTC-TFC-2016 [35]). The       
pipeline for the BGTD dataset is shown in Figure 2.       
              
              
    F O V
B. Session Extraction and Class Balancing     F O V
             F O V    F O V      F O V
      F O V
 As shown in Figure 2 (a), the raw PCAP files from various
datasets undergo a multi-stage preprocessing. First, each PCAP  
  & U R V V 3 O D W I R U P  & U R V V 3 O D W I R U P  , 6 & ; 9 3 1  , 6 & ;  7 R U  & 6 7 1 H W  8 6 7 &  7 ) &
file is partitioned into the standard five-tuple format (i.e., source  $ Q G U R L G  L 2 6            7 / 6         

IP address, destination IP address, source port, destination port,
 Fig. 3. Statistical overview of the BGTD dataset.
protocol). To mitigate the impact of the long-tail distribution,
the original dataset is filtered by category, with lower and
upper sample thresholds applied. Categories below the lower
 larger payloads typically carry richer application-layer
threshold are removed, while categories above the upper
 protocol fingerprints.
threshold are sampled according to the threshold. Specific
 • Dimension Alignment and Consistency Guarantee: To
processing methods for each dataset are provided in Sec. V-A1.
 ensure every sample has exactly K packets, the algorithm
The statistics of the BGTD dataset are shown in Figure 3.
 applies two strategies depending on the flow length n. If
 n ≥ K, the first two and last two packets are retained
C. Fixed-Length Truncation and NPY Array Generation as structural anchors, and the remaining K−4 slots are
 Each segmented flow from above step is treated as an filled by selecting packets from the middle region in
independent sample. To extract informative byte-level features descending order of payload size, prioritizing informationfrom the original traffic data, we implement a heuristic priority- rich packets. If the quota is still unmet, equidistant
based sampling algorithm, aiming to transform variable-length indices are computed via linspace(0, n−1, deficit) and
network flows into fixed-dimensional tensor features. This the corresponding packets are appended. If n < K, all
algorithm does not employ simple sequential truncation or packets are kept and the sequence is extended by cyclic
random sampling, but rather comprehensively considers the repetition, i.e., position j maps to packet j mod n, until
temporal structure and payload information of the flow. Its exactly K packets are obtained.
specific execution logic is as follows: Simultaneously, to ensure the consistency of the input
 • Temporal Keyframe Preservation: The algorithm dimensions for subsequent processing and focus on the critical
 forcibly preserves the first two packets and the last two protocol negotiation phase, each packet obtained by the packet
 packets in the flow sequence. Preserving the header sampling algorithm is truncated or padded to a fixed length of
 packets is to capture key metadata such as protocol 160 bytes. As shown in Figure 2 (b), the 160 bytes consists
 handshakes and control negotiations. Preserving the tail of a 64-byte header area (i.e., L3/L4 header used to capture
 packets helps record the state characteristics. protocol metadata) and a 96-byte payload area. Ultimately,
 • Payload Information Filtering: For packets in the middle each network stream is transformed into a fixed-dimensional
 of the stream, the algorithm sorts them in descending tensor X ∈ R10×160 containing a custom protocol ID byte,
 order based on the transport layer (L4) payload length a 63-byte processed header, and a 96-byte payload, which is
 and prioritizes packets with larger payloads to fill the then flattened into a 1600-dimensional continuous byte matrix.
 preset sampling number K (K = 10 in this paper). This Furthermore, to protect privacy and prevent the model from
 strategy is based on the assumption that packets with overfitting specific network identifiers, the system forcibly
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 5

masks the source and destination IP addresses at the network Multi-field Semantic “Label” Generation. Thirdly, upon
layer and uses a bucketing mechanism to map transport layer the above features and expert knowledge base, the dataset
ports into three categories: privileged ports, registered ports, andgeneration pipeline conducts a structured process to generate
dynamically private ports. This de-identification strategy forces fine-grained semantic labels (i.e., “Target” in Figure 2 (c)),
the model to focus on protocol semantics and payload sequence comprising 5 structured fields. The class field provides the
patterns, thereby improving the model’s generalization ability. ground-truth traffic category label, directly derived from the
Ultimately, for ease of development, the pre-processed traffic directory structure of the original dataset after session splitting
data is stored as NPY array. and class balancing. The traits field encodes five deterministic
 byte-level attributes extracted from the NPY array: a boolean
 indicating the presence of TLS record header patterns, a boolean
D. Automated Expert-Knowledge Generation Pipeline indicating the presence of plaintext HTTP tokens, and three
 To construct relationships between traffic data and reliable discretized bucket indicators for ASCII ratio, Shannon entropy,
analysis reports, we resort to large-scale language models to and zero-padding ratio, each categorized as low, mid, high based
conduct a structured process from low-level data to high-level on the 33rd and 66th percentiles of the full data distribution.
semantics [21], as shown in Figure 2 (c). The evidence field contains 2 to 4 natural language statements
 Global and Local Feature Extraction. Firstly, to capture constructed by combining the above byte-level traits and
interpretable reasoning evidence, we deploy a Dataset Gener- global features. Each statement describes a concrete, verifiable
ation Pipeline Script to extract global statistical features and observation grounded in the raw byte data (e.g., “High Shannon
local byte-level attributes from traffic analysis data X: entropy in non-zero payload regions indicates that the data
 is highly likely to have been encrypted or compressed”).
 • Global Statistical Features: This data includes the duration
 The description field provides a 2 to 3 sentence behavioral
 of traffic, average packet size, throughput (Bps), and summary that integrates byte-level observations with the expert
 the proportion of dominant protocols. These features knowledge base, depicting the protocol attribution, applicationare transformed into semantic descriptions by script. For layer characteristics, and typical communication behavior of
 example, an average packet length exceeding 800 bytes is the traffic. The notes field supplies a single security-relevant
 mapped to “large-volume data transmission sentence drawn from the knowledge base’s security context,
 characteristics”. highlighting potential misuse risks, recommended monitoring
 • Encryption and Payload Distribution Evaluation: For
 strategies, or distinguished indicators for anomaly detection.
 encrypted traffic, such as TLS 1.3 environments, the Ultimately, all five fields are serialized together as a struc-
 Shannon entropy of non-zero payload regions and the tured JSON object and stored in JSONL format, forming the
 proportion of printable ASCII characters are calculated. complete training target for the proposed mmTrafficframework.
 Based on the statistical distribution of the entire dataset,
 these continuous indicators are discretized into three levels:
 low, mid, and high, at the 33rd and 66th percentiles. For IV. T HE P ROPOSED MM T RAFFIC
 example, “low ASCII rate” combined with “high Shannon A. Overview of the Framework
 entropy” will serve as a strong signal of encrypted or The pipeline of mmTraffic is illustrated in Figure 4. It
 compressed data characteristics. comprises three highly-collaborative and jointly-optimized mod-
 • Deterministic Pattern Matching: Detect if the payload conules: Perception module, Alignment module, and Cognition
 tains obvious plaintext HTTP methods (e.g., GET, POST, module. First, the Perception module acts as the foundational
 etc.) or TLS record layer header features (e.g., 0x14-0x17 feature extractor. Unlike previous paradigms that freeze the
 with version number 0x03) via feature matching, providing traffic encoder, our encoder actively participates in the multihard logic support for classification. modal training phase, updating its parameters to learn language-
 Expert Knowledge Base Construction. Secondly, to address aligned representations directly from raw traffic bytes. Second,
the lack of rich semantic descriptions in traditional traffic the Alignment module bridges the dedicated traffic latent space
datasets, this study introduces a large language model (Claude and the natural language lexical space. To force this projected
Opus-4.6) to help construct a structured domain expert space to capture highly discriminative semantics autonomously,
knowledge base. For each traffic category in the dataset, we introduce an auxiliary classification head with a dedicated
according to preset Knowledge Base Prompt Template, LLM constraint loss. This ensures the continuous features possess
automatically generates an expert description containing three clear, linear-separable categorical boundaries before entering
dimensions: (1) a protocol hint that concisely defines the the language model. Finally, the Cognition module leverages
application or protocol to which the traffic belongs; (2) the aligned multimodal embeddings to perform autoregressive
behavioral characteristics describing 3 to 5 typical patterns reasoning. To ensure the generated traffic analysis report
of the traffic at the network level; (3) a security context remains logically rigorous, we propose a Semantic-Priority
that provides supplementary explanations from a network Guided Generation mechanism. This mechanism dynamically
security and traffic monitoring perspective, identifying the assigns higher optimization weights to the categorical tokens
key distinguishable features among easily confused categories. generated at the beginning of the sequence, compelling the
This knowledge base provides powerful domain knowledge for large language model (LLM) to perform accurate classification
subsequently constructing rich, multi-perspective training texts. before reasoning about verifiable chains of evidence. By
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 6

 Analysis Report
 Traffic Analysis report
 Analysis Class：VoIP
 Report and Behavioral Traits
 Category Auxiliary

 [traffic token] + The traffic has been classified
 True True
 Information Class label

 Large Language Models (LLMs)
 Cls False False
 Head ASCII Ratio Entropy TLS Zero Pad HTTP
 (High) (Low) Record (Mid) Method

 Evidence Chain

 Prompt

 as: VoIP + Prompt
 Synthesized as Excluded Web-
 Projection Plaintext based traf f ic;
 Unlike Chat

 Traffic Encoder
 (Irregular) or
 Connector Transmission (No Anchored by DNS
 Streaming
 Header Payload Encryption (100.0% ) as Audio
 (Unidirectional).
 Header Payload detected). Carrier.

 Header Payload
 Header Payload Description
 "Confirmed bi-directional real-time
 Header Payload Final
 audio stream. Dominant protocol
 Prediction：
 Header Payload identified as DNS (100.0% of bytes).
 VoIP Payload exhibits persistent plaintext
 Traffic Data accessibility."

 ⚠️ Risk: Unencrypted Plaintext (Eavesdropping)

 （a）Perception Module (b) Alignment Module with Auxiliary Classification （c）Cognitive Module

Fig. 4. Overview of the mmTraffic framework. (a) The frozen traffic encoder Tθ extracts high-dimensional features from raw traffic data. (b) The linear
connector Cω projects traffic features into the LLM token space, with the CGHF mechanism injecting a class-aware anchor token into the input sequence.
(c) The LLM Gϕ autoregressively generates a structured forensic report containing behavioral traits, evidence chain, and diagnostic description.

transitioning to an end-to-end joint optimization strategy, activation. Given the continuous traffic embedding Ttraffic from
mmTraffic empowers the LLM to intrinsically understand and the Perception module, the non-linear transformation of Cω is
classify non-semantic traffic sequences, successfully achieving formally defined as:
accurate classification and evidence-grounded interpretation
 Halign = Cω (Ttraffic ) = W2 σ(W1 Ttraffic + b1 ) + b2 (2)
within a unified framework.
 where σ(·) denotes the GELU activation function, and ω =
B. Perception Module {W1 , b1 , W2 , b2 } represents the learnable weight matrices
 and bias vectors of the connector. The resulting Halign bridges
 This module receives the raw byte sequence X preprothe dimensional gap, projecting the traffic features into the
cessed according to the BGTD protocol and performs a high-
 LLM’s lexical space.
dimensional non-linear mapping via the traffic encoder Tθ . Auxiliary Classification. During alignment, simply mapping
 High-dimensional Continuous Feature Embedding: The the dimensions is insufficient to guarantee that the projected
encoder Tθ processes X to automatically extract complex tokens carry explicit categorical semantics. To force the continspatial dependencies and structural patterns of protocol fields, uous feature space to capture highly discriminative information,
generating a dense feature tensor: we introduce an Auxiliary Classification Head, denoted as Aκ ,
 Ttraf f ic = Tθ (X) (1) atop the projection connector. Specifically, we first apply Global
 Average Pooling (GAP) across the sequence dimension L of the
where Ttraf f ic ∈ RL×dtraf f ic , L denotes the sequence length, aligned features Halign to obtain a condensed sequence-level
and dtraf f ic represents the feature dimension of the traffic semantic representation Hpool ∈ Rdh :
encoder.
 L
 End-to-End Optimization: In contrast to previous multi- 1 X (i)
 H pool = GAP(H align ) = H (3)
stage paradigms where the perception module is trained L i=1 align
independently and then strictly frozen to prevent catastrophic
forgetting, our framework treats Tθ as an active component where H(i) align represents the i-th token embedding in the
within a unified multimodal architecture. The parameters of sequence, and dh is the hidden dimension of the LLM.
the traffic encoder are unfrozen and updated during the joint This pooled representation is then processed by the auxiliary
training phase. By receiving gradient feedback backpropagated classification head Aκ to predict the discrete probability
from both the downstream auxiliary classification head Aκ and distribution pcls ∈ RC over C predefined traffic classes:
the cognitive language model, the encoder is explicitly guided
to map non-semantic raw bytes into a representation space that pcls = Aκ (Hpool ) = Softmax(Wcls Hpool + bcls ) (4)
is naturally aligned with language-based reasoning. where κ = {Wcls , bcls } are the learnable parameters of Aκ ,
 mapping the hidden dimension dh to the category space C.
C. Alignment Module with Auxiliary Classification Then we compute the auxiliary classification loss using the
 standard cross-entropy objective:
 To achieve implicit alignment between the dedicated traffic
latent space and the natural language lexical space, mmTraffic XC

deploys a lightweight projection connector Cω . For computa- Laux = − yc log(pcls,c ) (5)
tional efficiency, we employ a two-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron c=1

(MLP) equipped with a Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) where yc ∈ {0, 1} is the binary indicator of the ground-truth
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 7

class label, and pcls,c is the predicted probability for class Algorithm 1 The Training Pipeline of mmTraffic
c. During the joint training phase, Laux actively propagates Require: Traffic tensor X ∈ R10×160 , ground-truth label y,
gradient back through Cω and Tθ , strictly anchoring the chain of evidence annotation R = {r1 , . . . , rT } of BGTD,
representation space to the identity of a traffic sample. unfrozen encoder Tθ , connector Cω , auxiliary classification
 head Aκ , LLM Gϕ , task prompt P, auxiliary loss weight
D. Cognition Module λ, semantic boost weight γ, and threshold M .
 Ensure: Predicted traffic class ŷ and forensic report Rpred .
 With the auxiliary classification constraint enforcing
 // Step 1: Perception Module
category-aware features in the alignment stage, the Cognition
 1: Ttraffic ← Tθ (X) ▷ Extract embeddings via unfrozen
module calls the large language model Gϕ to perform autoreencoder
gressive inference directly from the aligned traffic features,
 // Step 2: Alignment Module & Auxiliary Constraint
without relying on hard-coded discrete labels. The full input
 2: Halign ← Cω (Ttraffic ) ▷ Project to LLM lexical space
sequence Ein of Gϕ is constructed by concatenating the aligned
 3: Hpool ← GAP(Halign ) ▷ Sequence-level global average
traffic tokens Halign and the task instruction prompt P:
 pooling
 Ein = [Halign ; P] (6) 4: pcls ← Aκ (Hpool ) ▷ Predict auxiliary class distribution
 5: ŷ ← arg max(pcls ) ▷ Traffic classification prediction
The LLM then autoregressively generates the diagnostic report
 // Step 3: Multimodal Construction
Rpred conditioned on this sequence:
 6: Ein ← [Halign ; P] ▷ Directly concatenate features and
 Rpred = Gϕ (Ein ) (7) prompt
 // Step 4: Cognition Module & Joint Optimization
 In the multi-modal report generation task, the correct 7: if training then
identification of the traffic category acts as the foundational 8: Laux ← − log(pcls,y ) ▷ Compute auxiliary
premise for all subsequent behavioral descriptions and evidence cross-entropy loss
chains. Standard negative log-likelihood (NLL) loss treats
all generated tokens equally, which may lead to the LLM 10:
 9:
 PT weights wt : 1 + γ if t ≤ M , else 1
 Compute dynamic
 Lgen ← − T1 t=1 wt log Pϕ,ω,θ (rt | Ein , r<t ) ▷
generating fluent but factually incorrect hallucinated reports Semantic-priority guided loss
if the core category is misidentified. To address this, we 11: Ltotal ← Lgen + λLaux ▷ End-to-end joint objective
propose a Semantic-Priority Guided Generation Loss. We 12: Update {θ, ω, κ, ϕ} via AdamW ▷ Jointly optimize all
assign an amplification weight to the prefix tokens of the modules
target sequence (which correspond to the primary categorical 13: else
decision in the JSON structure) to explicitly force the LLM to 14: Rpred ← Gϕ (Ein ) ▷ Autoregressive report generation
prioritize classification accuracy during the generative process. 15: Parse Rpred into JSON format:
The weighted generation loss over the expert evidence chains {class, traits, evidence, description, notes}
R = {r1 , r2 , . . . , rT } is formulated as: 16: end if
 T 17: return ŷ, Rpred
 1X
 Lgen = − wt log Pϕ,ω,θ (rt | Ein , r<t ) (8)
 T t=1

where r<t = {r1 , . . . , rt−1 } denotes all ground-truth tokens In summary, the proposed mmTraffic constructs a closed-loop
preceding position t, and wt is the dynamic positional weight analysis system from the underlying bit stream to the high-level
defined as: ( forensic report through a perception module (feature extraction),
 1 + γ, if t ≤ M an alignment module (cross-space mapping with auxiliary
 wt = (9)
 1, otherwise constraint), and a cognition module (logical reconstruction with
 semantic-priority guidance). This joint optimization empowers
where M defines the boundary of the critical categorical tokens the LLM to intrinsically understand non-semantic traffic
at the beginning of the sequence, and γ is the boost weight sequences, ensuring the reliability of the analysis report. To
factor applied to strictly penalize misclassifications in the clearly demonstrate the logical pipeline of the above procedure,
generated text. we summarize mmTraffic in Algorithm 1.
 Unlike previous paradigms that freeze the traffic encoder,
our mmTraffic framework enables end-to-end multimodal
 V. E XPERIMENTS
alignment. The overall objective function integrates both the
token-level generative comprehension and the sequence-level A. Experimental Settings
auxiliary classification constraint: 1) Data Preparation: We evaluate the proposed framework
 on six publicly available network traffic datasets, covering
 Ltotal = Lgen + λLaux (10)
 a wide range of traffic types, application ecosystems, and
where λ is a hyperparameter balancing the auxiliary classifica- encryption protocols. To reduce the impact of class imbalance,
tion task. During training, the parameters of the traffic encoder we apply a category filtering strategy to each dataset: classes
(Tθ ), projection connector (Cω ), auxiliary classification head with fewer than Nmin samples are removed, and classes
(Aκ ), and language model (Gϕ ) are jointly optimized. exceeding Nmax samples are randomly downsampled to Nmax .
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 8

 TABLE II <down_proj>), with an increased rank r = 32, scaling factor
 S TATISTICS OF THE SIX BENCHMARK DATASETS AFTER PREPROCESSING . α = 64, and a dropout rate of 0.1. Thus, the parameters of
 Tθ , Cω , Aκ , and the LoRA modules of Gϕ are jointly updated
 Dataset Classes Nmin Nmax Train Test
 during the end-to-end training.
 CrossPlatform-Android 212 50 2,000 31,029 7,644 For the multi-task optimization objectives, the balancing
 CrossPlatform-iOS 196 50 3,000 29,302 7,233
 ISCXVPN2016 7 200 6,000 33,600 8,400
 weight for the auxiliary classification loss is set to λ = 0.3.
 ISCX-Tor-2016 8 3,000 10,000 64,000 16,000 For the semantic-priority guided generation loss, we set the
 CSTNet-TLS1.3 120 0 6,000 37,148 9,224 categorical boundary threshold to M = 15 and the boost weight
 USTC-TFC-2016 12 3,000 6,000 53,112 13,276 factor to γ = 5.0, firmly anchoring the text generation to the
 physical traffic identity.
 All models are trained for 10 epochs using the AdamW [24]
All datasets are split into training and test sets at an 8:2 ratio. optimizer with a peak learning rate of η = 5 × 10−5 , a weight
Statistics of the six datasets after the above preprocessing are decay of 0.01, a linear warmup [12] over the first 10% of
shown in Tables II. Details of each dataset are as follows: training steps, and a gradient clipping threshold of 1.0. We
 • CrossPlatform-Android and CrossPlatform-iOS [29]: utilize BFloat16 [26] mixed-precision and distributed training
 These two datasets contain mobile application traffic via DeepSpeed ZeRO-2 [28]. The per-device batch size is set
 collected from Android and iOS devices across multiple to 3 with a gradient accumulation of 8 steps, yielding a global
 countries and network environments, covering 212 and batch size of 3 × 8 × 5 = 120 across 5 NVIDIA A800 GPUs.
 196 application categories respectively. We set Nmin = 50, 3) Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate mmTraffic from two
 Nmax = 2,000 for Android and Nmax = 3,000 for iOS, complementary perspectives: traffic classification and forensic
 resulting in 38,673 and 36,535 samples after filtering. report generation. The evaluation metrics include:
 • ISCXVPN2016 [11]: This dataset contains applica- • Classification Metrics. We report Accuracy to assess the
 tion traffic tunneled through VPN connections, cover- traffic identification performance of the perception module,
 ing 7 categories: Browsing, Chat, Email, FTP, measured as the proportion of correctly classified samples
 P2P, Streaming, and VoIP. VPN encapsulation adds over the full test set. We additionally report JSON Validity
 an additional encryption layer that obscures application- Rate (JSON Valid%), the proportion of model outputs
 layer signatures. We set Nmin = 200 and Nmax = 6,000, that can be successfully parsed as a valid JSON object
 yielding 42,000 samples. containing all required fields, which reflects whether the
 • ISCX-Tor-2016 [17]: This dataset contains traffic routed model has learned the structured output format.
 through the Tor anonymous network, covering 8 traffic cat- • Text Generation Metrics. To assess the quality of the
 egories. Tor’s multi-hop encryption substantially reduces generated evidence and description fields, we adopt two
 the discriminability of byte-level features, making it one complementary metrics: ROUGE-L [18] measures the F1
 of the most challenging benchmarks in encrypted traffic score of the longest common subsequence (LCS) between
 analysis. We set Nmin = 3,000 and Nmax = 10,000, the generated and reference texts, capturing lexical overresulting in 80,000 samples. lap and word-order consistency. BERTScore [37] com-
 • CSTNet-TLS1.3 [19]: This dataset contains web traffic putes token-level semantic similarity between generated
 encrypted exclusively with TLS 1.3, covering 120 website and reference texts using contextual embeddings from
 categories. Since TLS 1.3 removes observable handshake roberta-large (num_layers=17), loaded from a
 metadata, certificate-based identification is not applicable. local checkpoint to ensure reproducibility. We report
 The class distribution is relatively balanced, so Nmin = 0 the macro-averaged BERTScore F1 , computed as the
 and Nmax = 6, 000, yielding 46,372 samples. arithmetic mean of per-sample F1 scores (harmonic mean
 • USTC-TFC-2016 [35]: This dataset contains both benign of token-level precision and recall) over the full test set.
 application traffic and traffic from 12 malware families, Compared to ROUGE-L, BERTScore is more robust to
 making it the only dataset in our benchmark that includes lexical paraphrasing and stylistic variation between the
 adversarial network behavior. We set Nmin = 3,000 and ground-truth anchor (Claude Opus) and the prediction
 Nmax = 6,000, resulting in 66,388 samples. model (Qwen3-1.7B) [36], and thus a reliable indicator
 2) Implementation Details: The traffic encoder Tθ is in- of semantic fidelity when surface-level wording differs.
stantiated with NetMamba [34]. Unlike previous decoupled • Structural Consistency Metrics. Beyond lexical and
methods, Tθ is completely unfrozen and fully fine-tuned to semantic similarity, we evaluate the internal quality of
actively capture language-aligned semantic representations. generated reports using three reference-free metrics, which
The alignment connector Cω is implemented as a two-layer are visualized in the radar charts, computed solely over
MLP with GELU activation (mlp2x_gelu) and is also the model’s generated output, requiring no ground-truth
fully fine-tuned, alongside the newly introduced auxiliary text for evaluation. Let N denote the number of samples
classification head Aκ . The cognitive module Gϕ is instantiated with valid JSON predictions, and let ei , di denote the
with Qwen3-1.7B [36] and adapted via Low-Rank Adaptation predicted evidence and description fields of the i-th
(LoRA) [16]. LoRA is applied to all attention and feed-forward report, with ci = [ei ; di ] denoting their concatenation.
projection modules (specifically <q_proj>, <k_proj>, Evidence-Trait Consistency (ETC) measures whether the
<v_proj>, <o_proj>, <gate_proj>, <up_proj>, and generated evidence text is semantically coherent with
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 9

 TABLE III
 R ESULTS ON ISCX-T OR -2016, ISCXVPN2016, AND CSTN ET-TLS1.3. N ET M AMBA IS THE UNIMODAL CLASSIFIER (“–” MEANS NO GENERATION );
Z ERO - SHOT LLM FEEDS FEATURES DIRECTLY TO LLM WITHOUT TUNING ; VANILLA FREEZES THE ENCODER WITHOUT AUXILIARY CONSTRAINTS . B OLD
 INDICATES THE BEST PER COLUMN WITHIN EACH DATASET GROUP.

 Classification Generation Evidence Description
 Dataset Method
 Acc / JClsAcc% JSON Valid% ROUGE-L BERTScore ROUGE-L BERTScore
 NetMamba 0.9961 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0003 100.00% 0.1247 0.8322 0.1164 0.8469
 ISCX-Tor-2016
 Vanilla 0.7092 100.00% 0.6002 0.9217 0.5831 0.9266
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.9331 100.00% 0.8192 0.9641 0.7751 0.9481
 NetMamba 0.9917 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0004 100.00% 0.1121 0.8290 0.1252 0.8545
 ISCXVPN2016
 Vanilla 0.2987 100.00% 0.3597 0.8881 0.2020 0.8679
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.9902 100.00% 0.8436 0.9686 0.6975 0.9419
 NetMamba 0.8474 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0000 100.00% 0.2675 0.8780 0.1399 0.8492
 CSTNet-TLS1.3
 Vanilla 0.0148 100.00% 0.5224 0.9242 0.4346 0.9041
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.6448 100.00% 0.7188 0.9538 0.8007 0.9710

 the predicted byte-level trait values, verifying that the correctness in fine-grained settings, as the ground-truth
 model’s reasoning is grounded in the actual traffic features descriptions across categories share substantial protocolrather than generating plausible-sounding but ungrounded level vocabulary. This motivates the introduction of
 observations. It is computed as: reference-free structural consistency metrics.
 N
 1 X
 ETC = 1[KW(Ti ) ∩ ei ̸= ∅] (11) B. Main Results
 N i=1
 Tables III and IV present the comparison results with
 where 1[·] is the indicator function that equals 1 if the baselines. We report the linear head Accuracy (Acc) for Netcondition holds and 0 otherwise, KW(Ti ) denotes the Mamba, while the JSON Classification Accuracy (JClsAcc%)
 union of keyword sets of all predicted traits, and ei denotes
 extracted directly from the generated natural language reports
 the tokens of the predicted evidence text. for generative models (Zero-shot LLM, Vanilla, and ours).
 Quantitative Claim Rate (QCR) measures the proportion Evaluation of Classification Performance. NetMamba sets
 of reports containing at least one concrete numerical the upper-bound baseline for specialized unimodal classification.
 observation, such as byte counts, entropy values, or explicit
 As observed, the Zero-shot LLM and Vanilla paradigms
 ordinal descriptors. A high QCR indicates that the model suffer a catastrophic drop in classification capability, failing
 produces specific, verifiable reports rather than vague almost entirely on datasets like CSTNet-TLS1.3 (0.0148) and
 qualitative descriptions. It is computed as: CrossPlatform-iOS (0.0058). This collapse demonstrates that
 N without joint optimization, the semantic gap between physical
 1 X bytes and the lexical space is insurmountable. In contrast,
 QCR = 1[HasQuant(ci )] (12)
 N i=1 our proposed mmTraffic successfully bridges this gap. By
 unfreezing the encoder and applying the auxiliary classification
 where HasQuant(·) is true if ci contains any percentage,
 head, mmTraffic recovers robust JSON classification perforbyte quantity, multi-digit number, or ordinal descriptor
 mance (e.g., reaching 0.9902 on ISCXVPN2016 and 0.8865 on
 (high/mid/low), or the keyword ratio.
 CrossPlatform-iOS). While there is a slight inherent alignment
 Protocol Mention Rate (PMR) measures the proportion
 tax compared to the pure linear classifier (e.g., 0.9887 for
 of reports that explicitly reference at least one network
 NetMamba vs. 0.8624 for mmTraffic on USTC-TFC-2016) due
 protocol by name or identifier (e.g., TCP, TLS, HTTP,
 to the complexity of autoregressive text generation, it remains
 QUIC). Protocol attribution is a fundamental requirement
 highly competitive and overwhelmingly surpasses standard
 for reports, and a high PMR confirms the model reliably
 multimodal baselines (i.e., zero-shot LLM and Vanilla).
 grounds its analysis in appropriate protocol context.
 Evaluation of Generation Quality. Generating human-
 N readable and evidence-grounded reports is the core objective.
 1 X
 PMR = 1[P ∩ ci ̸= ∅] (13) Unimodal classifiers like NetMamba are fundamentally inca-
 N i=1
 pable of generating text. The Vanilla manages to produce
 where P is a predefined set of protocol keywords (e.g., fluent text but generates severe hallucinations due to its
 TCP, TLS, HTTP). inability to accurately identify the underlying traffic. Conversely,
 We note that reference-based metrics such as ROUGE- mmTraffic achieves a JSON validity rate of 100% across
 L and BERTScore exhibit insensitivity to classification all datasets, confirming that the LLM has fully mastered
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 10

 TABLE IV
R ESULTS ON C ROSS P LATFORM - I OS, C ROSS P LATFORM -A NDROID , AND USTC-TFC-2016. N ET M AMBA IS THE UNIMODAL CLASSIFIER (“–” MEANS NO
 GENERATION ); Z ERO - SHOT LLM FEEDS FEATURES DIRECTLY TO LLM WITHOUT TUNING ; VANILLA FREEZES THE ENCODER WITHOUT AUXILIARY
 CONSTRAINTS . B OLD INDICATES THE BEST PER COLUMN WITHIN EACH DATASET GROUP.

 Classification Generation Evidence Description
 Dataset Method
 Acc / JClsAcc% JSON Valid% ROUGE-L BERTScore ROUGE-L BERTScore
 NetMamba 0.9060 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0000 100.00% 0.1962 0.8509 0.1268 0.8503
 CrossPlatform-iOS
 Vanilla 0.0058 100.00% 0.2218 0.8591 0.1255 0.8535
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.8865 100.00% 0.6880 0.9387 0.5972 0.9283
 NetMamba 0.9104 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0000 100.00% 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.8405
 CrossPlatform-Android
 Vanilla 0.0027 100.00% 0.2107 0.8661 0.1283 0.8542
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.8654 100.00% 0.5482 0.9060 0.5605 0.9299
 NetMamba 0.9887 – – – – –
 Zero-shot LLM 0.0000 100.00% 0.1386 0.8377 0.1365 0.8536
 USTC-TFC-2016
 Vanilla 0.7002 100.00% 0.6383 0.9272 0.5447 0.9163
 mmTraffic (Ours) 0.8624 100.00% 0.8853 0.9769 0.7714 0.9527

the structured output format. On evidence and description  5 D G D U  & K D U W  $ Q D O \ V L V  R Q  . H \  0 H W U L F V
generation, mmTraffic demonstrates overwhelming superiority.  , 6 & ;  7 R U       , 6 & ; 9 3 1      & 3  $ Q G U R L G
  $ F F  $ F F  $ F F
For example, it achieves an Evidence ROUGE-L of 0.8436            
            
on ISCXVPN2016 and a Description BERTScore of 0.9710  3 0 5    
    
  ( Y  % 6  3 0 5    
    
  ( Y  % 6  3 0 5    
    
  ( Y  % 6

on CSTNet-TLS1.3. Across all six datasets, the BERTScore            

consistently remains above 0.90, proving that the generated evidence and behavioral descriptions maintain rigorous semantic  4 & 5  ' H V F  % 6  4 & 5  ' H V F  % 6  4 & 5  ' H V F  % 6

alignment with the ground-truth expert annotations.  ( 7 &  ( 7 &  ( 7 &
  2 X U V  9 D Q L O O D  0 / 0
 Evaluation of Structural Consistency. A critical observation in multimodal traffic analysis is the ”fluency trap”: models
 Fig. 5. Analysis on Structural Consistency Metrics. The semantic-priority
like Vanilla MLM might achieve moderate text generation constraints in mmTraffic ensure high logical rigor.
metrics (e.g., Ev-BS and Desc-BS) by memorizing common
vocabulary, even when their classification accuracy (Acc) Ablation Trajectory (ISCX-Tor-2016) Ablation Trajectory (ISCXVPN2016)
 1.00 Average ROUGE-L Average ROUGE-L V3 V3 Ours
completely collapses—as starkly visible in the ISCXVPN2016 Average BERTScore
 1.0
 Average BERTScore Ours
 Classification Accuracy (JClsAcc)

 0.95 V3 V3 Ours 0.9 V2 V2
and CP-Android radar charts. This reveals a fundamental 0.90 Ours
 V2 0.8
limitation of reference-based metrics in forensics—lexical 0.85 V2 0.7
overlap does not guarantee factual correctness. The radar 0.80 0.6

charts in Figure 5 provide a comprehensive picture of logical 0.75 0.5
 V1
 0.70 V1 0.4
rigorousness across six key dimensions. While Vanilla MLM 0.65 0.3
 V1
 V1
exhibits severely distorted performance profiles , our proposed 0.60 0.2
 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
mmTraffic maintains a robust, near-symmetrical shape that Average Generation Quality Score (ROUGE-L / BERTScore) Average Generation Quality Score (ROUGE-L / BERTScore)
pushes towards the outer boundaries (1.0) across all evaluated
datasets. Driven by our semantic-priority guided generation Fig. 6. Ablation analysis on ISCX-Tor-2016 and ISCXVPN2016, with respect
 to the classification and generation metrics for four variants from V1 to V4.
mechanism, mmTraffic ensures that its high structural consistency (ETC, QCR, PMR) is strictly anchored in correct
traffic identification, effectively eliminating the multimodal (4) V4 (mmTraffic Full): incorporating the semantic-priority
hallucinations prevalent in unconstrained architectures. guided generation mechanism (Lgen ).
 Breaking the Modality Barrier via Joint Optimization.
C. Ablation Study The initial transition from V1 to V2 in Figure 6 reveals
 To isolate the contribution of each proposed component in the fundamental bottleneck of cross-modal traffic analysis.
mmTraffic, we conduct an ablation study across two distinct In the Vanilla MLLM (V1) setting, the framework suffers a
domains: ISCX-Tor-2016 and ISCXVPN2016. As illustrated in catastrophic failure on ISCXVPN2016 (accuracy at 0.2987)
Figure 6, we systematically evaluate four configurations: (1) V1 and struggles at 0.7092 on ISCX-Tor-2016. Because raw cryp-
(Vanilla MLLM): freezing the NetMamba encoder and relying tographic traffic sequences lack the natural lexical alignments
solely on the standard Negative Log-Likelihood (NLL) loss; (2) found in visual-text data, a frozen encoder fundamentally fails
V2 (+ Unfrozen): unfreezing the traffic encoder for end-to-end to project these non-semantic bytes into the LLM’s sophistijoint optimization; (3) V3 (+ Auxiliary Head): introducing cated cognitive space. Unfreezing the encoder (+ Unfrozen)
the auxiliary classification head (Laux ) to the latent space; and opens the gradient bottleneck, allowing the perceptual backbone
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 11

 TABLE V TABLE VII
ISCX-T OR -2016 FOR SAMPLE #6227: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES USTC-TFC-2016 FOR SAMPLE #11786: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY
 THE CLASS . E VIDENCE AND DESCRIPTION FIELDS ARE ABBREVIATED . IDENTIFIES THE CLASS . E VIDENCE AND DESCRIPTION FIELDS ARE
 G REEN MEANS CORRECTLY INTERPRETED KEY CONTENT. ABBREVIATED . G REEN MEANS CORRECTLY INTERPRETED KEY CONTENT.

 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Ground Truth Field mmTraffic(Ours) Ground Truth
 Class CHAT ✓ CHAT Class Outlook ✓ Outlook
 Traits has tls: true has tls: true Traits has tls: true has tls: true
 has http: false has http: false has http: false has http: false
 ascii: low ascii: mid ascii: low ascii: low
 entropy: mid entropy: mid entropy: mid entropy: high
 zero pad: mid zero pad: mid zero pad: mid zero pad: low
 Evidence (1) TLS record header detected, in- (1) TLS record header detected, indi- Evidence (1) TLS record header detected, in- (1) TLS record header detected, indidicating an encrypted TLS session. cating an encrypted TLS session. dicating an encrypted TLS session. cating an encrypted TLS session.
 (2) TCP dominant (100%), consistent (2) TLS dominant (100%), consistent (2) TLS dominant (100%), consistent (2) Low ASCII with high entropy:
 with Tor CHAT profile. with Tor CHAT profile. with Outlook profile. encrypted payload.
 (3) Unlike Tor VOIP (codec-driven tim- (3) Unlike Tor VOIP (codec-driven tim- (3) Unlike Gmail (HTTP/2 and QUIC), (3) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk
 ing), Tor CHAT has irregular human- ing), Tor CHAT has irregular human- Outlook uses MAPI protocol. . . . data transfer.
 conversation-driven timing. . . . conversation-driven timing. . . . (4) TLS dominant (100%). . . .
 Description TLS record headers present, indicating TLS record headers present, indicating Description TLS record headers present, indicat- TLS record headers alongside highencrypted transport. Instant messaging encrypted transport. Instant messaging ing encrypted transport. Microsoft entropy payload confirm encrypted
 and chat protocols (AIM, ICQ, Face- and chat protocols (AIM, ICQ, Face- Outlook email client using HTTPS communication. Microsoft Outlook
 book Chat, Hangouts, Skype Chat) book Chat, Hangouts, Skype Chat) and MAPI. Dominant protocol: TLS email client using HTTPS and MAPI.
 tunneled through Tor onion routing. tunneled through Tor onion routing. (100%). . . . Dominant protocol: TLS (100%).
 Dominant protocol: TCP (100%). . . . Dominant protocol: TLS (100%).
 Notes Generally benign; verify connections Generally benign; verify connections
 Notes Chat over Tor hides who is commu- Chat over Tor provides metadata go to Microsoft ASN; anomalous sync go to Microsoft ASN; anomalous sync
 nicating with whom; message content anonymity; message content may still volumes may indicate data exfiltration. volumes or off-hours activity may inmay still be visible at exit nodes if not be visible at exit nodes if not end-to- dicate data exfiltration via email.
 end-to-end encrypted. end encrypted.

 TABLE VI hard, discriminative boundaries before the features ever reach
CSTN ET-TLS1.3 FOR SAMPLE #350: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES the LLM. This explicit concept anchoring effectively resolves
 THE CLASS . E VIDENCE AND DESCRIPTION FIELDS ARE ABBREVIATED .
 G REEN MEANS CORRECTLY INTERPRETED KEY CONTENT. perceptual ambiguity, propelling the classification accuracy
 to 0.9312 on ISCX-Tor-2016 and 0.9819 on ISCXVPN2016,
 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Ground Truth
 while maintaining strong generative performance.
 Class Steam ✓ Steam
 Synergistic Grounding via Semantic-Priority Generation.
 Traits has tls: true has tls: true
 has http: false has http: false The final transition to mmTraffic (Full) demonstrates that
 ascii: mid ascii: low our semantic-priority generation loss (Lgen ) is not merely a
 entropy: high entropy: high
 zero pad: low zero pad: low linguistic constraint, but a mechanism for cognitive synergy. In
 Evidence (1) TLS record header detected, in- (1) TLS record header detected, indi- standard unconstrained generation (V3), all tokens are treated
 dicating an encrypted TLS session. cating an encrypted TLS session.
 (2) High Shannon entropy: encrypted (2) Low ASCII with high entropy: equally, leaving the model susceptible to generating fluent but
 or compressed payload. encrypted payload. ungrounded priors. By dynamically assigning a heavy penalty
 (3) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk (3) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk
 data transfer. . . . data transfer. weight to the categorical prefix tokens, mmTraffic forces the
 (4) TCP dominant (84.2%). . . .
 LLM to commit strictly to a physical traffic identity first.
 Description TLS record headers alongside high- TLS record headers alongside highentropy payload confirm encrypted entropy payload confirm encrypted
 Remarkably, rather than acting as a restrictive trade-off, this
 communication. Valve Steam gaming communication. Valve Steam gaming strong semantic grounding mechanism stabilizes the reasoning
 platform for game downloads, updates, platform for game downloads, updates,
 and multiplayer services over TLS 1.3. and multiplayer services over TLS 1.3. chain, pushing the final classification accuracy to its peak
 Large avg. packet (858 bytes). . . . TCP dominant (84.2%). . . . across both domains (0.9331 on Tor and 0.9902 on VPN) and
 Notes Game distribution platform; monitor Game distribution platform; game
 for Steam account phishing; Workshop downloads are very large; monitor for
 maximizing the structural alignment of the generated evidence
 mods can contain malicious code. Steam account phishing. (Average BERTScore reaches 0.9561 on Tor and 0.9552 on
 VPN). This confirms that forcing logical rigorousness inherently
 enhances the overall multimodal reasoning reliability.
to dynamically adapt its feature extraction guided by the LLM’s
generation objective. This mechanistic bridge yields a massive
concurrent leap in both text fidelity (e.g., Average ROUGE-L D. Qualitative Evaluation on Traffic Reasoning
on Tor rises from 0.59 to 0.78) and classification accuracy Despite the quantitative evaluations, this section presents
(0.8674 on Tor and 0.9751 on VPN). qualitative analysis of traffic reasoning on three datasets: ISCX-
 Shaping the Latent Space with Auxiliary Constraints. Tor-2016, CSTNet-TLS1.3, and USTC-TFC-2016.
While unfreezing the encoder bridges the modality gap, relying Qualitative Evaluation. Tables V, VI, and VII present
exclusively on the LLM’s autoregressive text-generation loss high-quality correct classifications across three datasets: ISCXprovides weak and implicit supervision, which is insufficient to Tor-2016, CSTNet-TLS1.3, and USTC-TFC-2016. Despite the
disentangle highly overlapping encrypted traffic patterns. The diversity of encryption contexts, mmTraffic consistently procritical inflection point occurs in V3 with the introduction of duces forensically grounded reports that accurately characterize
the auxiliary classification head. By directly penalizing misclas- the underlying traffic behavior. The CHAT case from ISCXsifications at the feature bottleneck, Laux explicitly reshapes Tor-2016 (sample #6227) is particularly illustrative. Although
the continuous latent space. It forces the encoder to establish the predicted ascii bucket diverges slightly from the ground
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 12

 TABLE VIII
ISCX-T OR -2016 FOR SAMPLE #15750: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE VIDEO CLASS WHILE Vanilla VLM MISCLASSIFIES IT AS BROWSING.
 E VIDENCE AND DESCRIPTION FIELDS ARE ABBREVIATED . G REEN AND R ED MEAN CORRECT AND WRONG INTERPRETATIONS .

 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Vanilla VLM Ground Truth

 Class VIDEO ✓ BROWSING % VIDEO

 Evidence (1) Video streaming services (YouTube, Vimeo) tunneled via Tor (1) TLS record header detected, indicating encrypted session. (1) TCP dominant (100%), consistent with VIDEO profile.
 onion routing. (2) High zero-padding: short flow with small payload. (2) Unlike Tor AUDIO (moderate throughput), VIDEO requires
 (2) High throughput (49.8 MB/s) indicates active data exchange. (3) TCP dominant (100%), consistent with HTTPS browsing profile. significantly higher bandwidth.
 (3) Sustained download dominant over upload, consistent with video ... (3) Unlike Tor BROWSING (bursty), VIDEO maintains sustained highconsumption. . . . throughput download. . . .

 Description Mixed entropy and ASCII across packet slices. Video streaming TLS record headers indicate encrypted transport. HTTPS/SSL web Mixed entropy and ASCII across packet slices. Video streaming
 services (youtube.com, vimeo.com) tunneled via Tor onion routing. browsing tunneled through Tor hides both location and activities. services (YouTube HTML5, YouTube Flash, Vimeo) tunneled through
 TCP dominant. High throughput (498 KB/s). . . . High zero-padding suggests background activity. . . . Tor. Dominant protocol: TCP (100%).

 TABLE IX
CSTN ET-TLS1.3 FOR SAMPLE #4728: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE A D O B E WHILE Vanilla VLM MISCLASSIFIES IT AS B A I D U . C O M . U NDER
TLS 1.3, BYTE - LEVEL FEATURES ARE NEARLY IDENTICAL ACROSS ALL WEBSITES . G REEN AND R ED MEAN CORRECT AND WRONG INTERPRETATIONS .

 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Vanilla VLM Ground Truth

 Class Adobe ✓ baidu.com % Adobe

 Evidence (1) TLS record header detected. (1) TLS record header detected. (1) TLS record header detected.
 (2) High Shannon entropy: encrypted or binary payload. (2) High zero-padding: short flow with small payload. (2) Low ASCII with high entropy: encrypted payload.
 (3) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk data transfer. . . . (3) TCP dominant (68.5%), consistent with Baidu’s search and CDN (3) TLS dominant (55.6%), consistent with Adobe profile. . . .
 infrastructure. . . .

 Description TLS record headers alongside high-entropy payload confirm encrypted TLS record headers indicate active encrypted communication. Large TLS record headers alongside high-entropy payload confirm encrypted
 communication. Adobe creative software, cloud services, and volume of bulk control-plane packets over TCP. Baidu search and communication. Adobe creative software, cloud services, and
 document management platform over TLS 1.3. . . . CDN infrastructure. . . . document management platform over TLS 1.3. . . .

 TABLE X
 USTC-TFC-2016 FOR SAMPLE #10195: MM T RAFFIC CORRECTLY IDENTIFIES THE G EODO MALWARE FLOW WHILE Vanilla VLM MISCLASSIFIES IT AS
 H TBOT. B OTH ARE HTTP- BASED BOTNETS WITH SIMILAR BYTE SIGNATURES . G REEN AND R ED MEAN CORRECT AND WRONG INTERPRETATIONS .

 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Vanilla VLM Ground Truth

 Class Geodo ✓ Htbot % Geodo

 Evidence (1) High Shannon entropy: encrypted or binary payload. (1) HTTP tokens (GET/POST) indicate plaintext HTTP requests. (1) High zero-padding: short flow, small payload.
 (2) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk data transfer. (2) High ASCII: plaintext application-layer content. (2) TCP dominant (100%).
 (3) TCP dominant (100%). (3) Low zero-padding: sustained bulk data transfer. . . . (3) Unlike Zeus (banking only), Geodo also performs spam relay. . . .
 (4) Unlike Zeus (banking only), Geodo also performs spam relay.

 Description Mixed entropy and ASCII characteristics. Geodo/Emotet banking HTTP method tokens and readable ASCII confirm plaintext botnet- Mixed entropy and ASCII characteristics. Geodo/Emotet banking
 trojan and email spam botnet. Dominant protocol: TCP (100%). . . . driven web scraping or C&C command execution (Htbot). Low trojan and email spam botnet. Dominant protocol: TCP (100%).
 throughput suggests sparse traffic. . . .

truth, the generated description correctly identifies the traffic Qualitative Effect of Joint Optimization. Tables VIII, IX,
as instant messaging protocols tunneled through Tor onion and X present cases where mmTraffic correctly identifies the
routing, accurately attributing it to AIM, ICQ, Facebook Chat, traffic category while the Vanilla VLM produces an erroneous
Hangouts, and Skype Chat services. This suggests that the classification, revealing how joint optimization resolves the
joint optimization between the traffic encoder and the LLM semantic gap that a frozen encoder cannot bridge. Crucially, the
effectively compensates for trait-level uncertainty by grounding misclassifications are not random: the predicted category shares
generation in a semantically aligned feature space. A similar substantial byte-level similarity with the ground truth. On ISCXpattern is observed in the Outlook case from USTC-TFC- Tor-2016, VIDEO is confused with BROWSING because both
2016 (sample#11786). While the predicted entropy and zero- exhibit similar Tor-tunneled TCP flows and differ primarily
padding buckets differ from the ground truth, the generated in sustained throughput consistency rather than observable
description correctly identifies the traffic as Microsoft Outlook byte patterns. On CSTNet-TLS1.3, Adobe is misidentified
using HTTPS and MAPI, and accurately distinguishes it as baidu.com because TLS 1.3 eliminates all certificate
from Gmail by referencing Outlook’s exclusive connection metadata, leaving both flows with nearly identical TLS record
to Microsoft infrastructure. This decoupling between trait headers and entropy profiles that are indistinguishable at
accuracy and description quality demonstrates that the auxiliary the byte level with a frozen encoder. On USTC-TFC-2016,
classification head enforces categorical boundaries in the latent Geodo is confused with Htbot because both are HTTP-based
space, anchoring the LLM’s generation to the correct traffic botnets relying on similar C&C communication patterns. This
identity even when individual byte-level features are imprecise. systematic pattern demonstrates that a frozen encoder fails
The Steam case from CSTNet-TLS1.3 (sample #350) further to project fine-grained categorical boundaries into the LLM’s
reinforces this observation: under TLS 1.3 where all flows lexical space. By contrast, mmTraffic allows gradient feedback
share identical encryption overhead, mmTraffic produces a from the auxiliary classification head to actively reshape the
platform-specific description referencing Valve Steam’s game encoder’s feature space, forcing it to learn language-aligned
downloads and multiplayer services, going beyond what raw representations that carry explicit categorical semantics. The
byte features alone could support. downstream effect is consistent: without joint optimization, the
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 13

 TABLE XI TABLE XIII
 ISCX-T OR -2016 FOR SAMPLE #6622: MM T RAFFIC FAILS TO CLASSIFY. USTC-TFC-2016 FOR SAMPLE #4090: MM T RAFFIC FAILS TO CLASSIFY.
 R ED MEANS WRONG INTERPRETATIONS IN KEY SEMANTICS . R ED MEANS WRONG INTERPRETATIONS IN KEY SEMANTICS .

 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Ground Truth Field mmTraffic (Ours) Ground Truth
 Class BROWSING % FILE-TRANSFER Class Geodo % Htbot
 Traits has tls: false has tls: false Traits has tls: false has tls: false
 has http: false has http: false has http: false has http: false
 ascii: low ascii: mid ascii: high ascii: high
 entropy: mid entropy: low entropy: low entropy: low
 zero pad: mid zero pad: mid zero pad: mid zero pad: mid
 Evidence (1) TCP dominant (100%), consistent (1) TCP dominant (100%), consistent Evidence (1) High ASCII with low entropy: (1) High ASCII with low entropy:
 with profile. with FILE-TRANSFER profile. repetitive plaintext content. repetitive plaintext content.
 (2) Unlike direct HTTPS browsing, (2) Unlike Tor P2P (bidirectional), (2) DNS dominant (100%), consistent (2) DNS dominant (100%), consistent
 Tor browsing shows only Tor relay FILE-TRANSFER is predominantly with profile. with Htbot profile.
 IPs. unidirectional. (3) Unlike Zeus (banking only), Geodo (3) Unlike Miuref (click fraud), Htbot
 (3) More bursty than Tor AUDIO or (3) FILE-TRANSFER shows sustained also performs spam relay. . . . focuses on C&C command execution.
 VOIP. . . . throughput vs Tor BROWSING (bursty
 Description Substantial readable ASCII content Substantial readable ASCII content
 with idle gaps). . . .
 present. Geodo/Emotet banking tro- present. HTTP-based botnet using
 Description HTTPS/SSL web browsing tunneled Mixed entropy and ASCII character- jan and email spam botnet. Dominant web proxies for C&C (Htbot). Domithrough Tor onion routing, including istics. File transfer protocols (FTP, protocol: DNS (89.1%). Uses HTTP- nant protocol: DNS (100%).
 both direct Tor Browser usage and SFTP, Skype file transfer) tunneled based C&C more frequently than Zeus.
 gateway-proxied SSL browsing. Domi- through Tor onion routing. Dominant
 Notes High-risk banking trojan; block known Monitor for HTTP requests with unnant protocol: TCP. . . . protocol: TCP (100%).
 Geodo C&C IPs; inspect SMTP traffic usual headers; correlate with known
 Notes Tor browsing provides strong File transfer over Tor hides source and for spam relay. Htbot infrastructure.
 anonymity; exit node traffic is destination; commonly used to transfer
 unencrypted unless HTTPS is used sensitive documents.
 end-to-end.
 TFC-2016, Htbot is misclassified as Geodo because both
 TABLE XII are DNS-based botnets with nearly identical ASCII ratios,
 CSTN ET-TLS1.3 FOR SAMPLE #6404: MM T RAFFIC FAILS TO CLASSIFY. entropy profiles, and protocol distributions. In all three cases,
 R ED MEANS WRONG INTERPRETATIONS IN KEY SEMANTICS . the misclassification originates at the perceptual stage: even
 Field mmTraffic (Ours) Ground Truth with end-to-end joint optimization, the encoder fails to establish
 Class arXiv % Semantic Scholar sufficiently discriminative boundaries between classes that share
 Traits has tls: true has tls: true highly similar byte-level signatures. The erroneous categorical
 has http: false has http: false prediction then propagates into the cognitive module, producing
 ascii: low ascii: mid
 entropy: high entropy: high reports that are internally consistent with the predicted class
 zero pad: mid zero pad: mid
 rather than the ground truth. Despite the prediction errors, this
 Evidence (1) TLS record header detected. (1) TLS record header detected.
 (2) Low ASCII with high entropy: (2) High Shannon entropy: encrypted transparency remains an operational advantage: the cognitive
 encrypted payload. payload. module faithfully reflects the perceptual judgment, making
 (3) TCP dominant (96.8%), consistent (3) TCP dominant (97.9%), consistent
 with arXiv profile. with Semantic Scholar profile. the error visible and traceable in the generated report rather
 (4) Similar PDF download pattern to (4) More API-driven than traditional
 ACM and IEEE. . . . academic publishers. . . .
 than silently absorbed into an opaque label. For a network
 Description TLS record headers alongside high- TLS record headers alongside high- analyst, the evidence chain in the generated report can be
 entropy payload confirm encrypted entropy payload confirm encrypted independently verified against the raw traffic, and discrepancies
 communication. arXiv open-access communication. Semantic Scholar AIacademic preprint repository for powered academic paper search and between the reported behavior and observed network activity
 physics, math, and CS over TLS 1.3. knowledge graph over TLS 1.3. Large serve as a natural signal that the classification may warrant
 Large avg. packet (925 bytes). . . . avg. packet (964 bytes). . . .
 Notes Open academic repository; monitor for Allen Institute AI-operated academic
 further investigation. In security-sensitive applications such as
 automated bulk downloading indicating search; open access focus means fewer malware triage, encrypted traffic auditing, and network incident
 research scraping bots. paywall authentication flows.
 response, both high-fidelity generation under correct perception
 and transparent failure under incorrect perception represent a
 practical step toward interpretable traffic analysis.
generated reports describe the wrong traffic identity, producing
 Paradigm, Benchmark and Evaluation. While mmTraffic
forensically plausible but factually incorrect outputs.
 demonstrates strong performance across diverse encrypted
 traffic benchmarks, several aspects of the current design require
E. Limitation Analysis further investigation. The tight coupling between the perceptual
 Failure Cases. Tables XI, XII, and XIII present failure and cognitive layers also means that the traffic reasoning
cases where mmTraffic produces an incorrect classification. quality is inherently linked to the reliability of the traffic
On ISCX-Tor-2016, FILE-TRANSFER is misclassified as encoder. Exploring mechanisms that allow the cognitive layer
BROWSING because both categories produce similar TCP to express uncertainty or partially recover from perceptual errors
flows under Tor multi-hop encryption, without an observable represents a promising direction for future work. Additionally,
protocol marker to distinguish sustained file transfer from bursty the current benchmark construction pipeline relies on Claude
web browsing. On CSTNet-TLS1.3, Semantic Scholar Opus to generate reference reports from structured traffic
is misclassified as arXiv because both are open-access features. Although this pipeline can produce high-quality
academic platforms that share nearly identical TLS 1.3 byte annotations, its scalability to open-world applications with
signatures, making them fundamentally indistinguishable at new datasets or emerging traffic categories may be limited.
the byte level without application-layer metadata. On USTC- Finally, a more comprehensive traffic reasoning evaluation
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015 14

protocol is still a worthwhile avenue. [12] P. Goyal, P. Dollár, R. Girshick, P. Noordhuis, L. Wesolowski, A. Kyrola,
 A. Tulloch, Y. Jia, and K. He, “Accurate, large minibatch sgd: Training
 imagenet in 1 hour,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.02677, 2017.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [13] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with
 selective state spaces,” in First conference on language modeling, 2024.
 This paper addresses multi-modal traffic reasoning for [14] W. Guo, Y. Zhang, X. Cai, L. Meng, J. Yang, and X. Yuan, “Ld-man:
the first time, successfully bridging the gap between high- Layout-driven multimodal attention network for online news sentiment
 recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2020.
precision encrypted traffic classification and human-readable [15] G. Han, M. Lin, Z. Li, H. Zhao, and S. Kwong, “Text-to-image person reforensic report generation. By developing the foundational identification based on multimodal graph convolutional network,” IEEE
Byte-Grounded Traffic Description benchmark, i.e., BGTD and Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 26, 2024.
 [16] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
proposing a jointly optimized multi-modal traffic reasoning W. Chen et al., “Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.”
architecture with large language model (LLM), i.e., mmTraffic, Iclr, 2022.
we transform encrypted traffic analysis from a black-box [17] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in ISSP, vol. 2,
classification paradigm to an auditable generative paradigm 2017, pp. 253–262.
towards explainable traffic interpretations. Unlike previous [18] C.-Y. Lin, “Rouge: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries,”
decoupled pipelines that freeze the traffic encoder, mmTraffic in Text summarization branches out, 2004, pp. 74–81.
 [19] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “Et-bert: A
actively unfreezes the encoder and trains it synergistically with contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
the LLM. Extensive evaluations across six diverse benchmarks for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web
demonstrate that mmTraffic achieves high-fidelity, evidence- Conference 2022, 2022.
 [20] H. Liu, C. Li, Q. Wu, and Y. J. Lee, “Visual instruction tuning,” NeurIPS,
grounded traffic report generation, while maintaining highly vol. 36, pp. 34 892–34 916, 2023.
competitive classification accuracy, confirming its success in [21] J. Liu, C. Liu, P. Zhou, R. Lv, K. Zhou, and Y. Zhang, “Is chatgpt a
resolving the semantic gap between physical network bytes good recommender? a preliminary study,” arXiv, 2023.
 [22] L. Liu, R. Li, Q. Li, M. Hou, Y. Jiang, and M. Xu, “Flowletformer:
and human-understandable concepts. Network behavioral semantic aware pre-training model for traffic
 In future work, one key direction is to optimize inference classification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.19924, 2025.
latency to support real-time flow analytics and introduce [23] Y. Liu, W. Wei, D. Peng, X.-L. Mao, Z. He, and P. Zhou, “Depth-aware
 and semantic guided relational attention network for visual question
uncertainty quantification to allow the cognitive layer to answering,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 2022.
explicitly handle low-confidence perceptual predictions in [24] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
adversarial scenarios. Furthermore, a more scalable automated arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.
 [25] S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model
annotation process to efficiently extend the framework to emerg- predictions,” NeurIPS, vol. 30, 2017.
ing cryptographic protocols and open-world traffic categories [26] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, D. Garcia,
remains a worthwhile direction. B. Ginsburg, M. Houston, O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh et al., “Mixed
 precision training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.03740, 2017.
 [27] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
 R EFERENCES G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark et al., “Learning transferable
 visual models from natural language supervision,” in ICML, 2021.
 [1] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Distiller: Encrypted [28] S. Rajbhandari, J. Rasley, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Zero: Memory
 traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,” Journal of optimizations toward training trillion parameter models,” in SC20:
 Network and Computer Applications, vol. 183, p. 102985, 2021. international conference for high performance computing, networking,
 [2] E. Aghaei, X. Niu, W. Shadid, and E. Al-Shaer, “Securebert: A domain- storage and analysis. IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–16.
 specific language model for cybersecurity,” in international conference [29] J. Ren, D. Dubois, and D. Choffnes, “An international view of privacy
 on security and privacy in communication systems, 2022, pp. 39–56. risks for mobile apps,” Tech. Rep, 2019.
 [3] J.-B. Alayrac, J. Donahue, P. Luc, A. Miech, I. Barr, Y. Hasson, K. Lenc, [30] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should i trust you?”
 A. Mensch, K. Millican, M. Reynolds et al., “Flamingo: a visual language explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in ACM SIGKDD, 2016.
 model for few-shot learning,” NeurIPS, pp. 23 716–23 736, 2022. [31] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
 [4] Anonymous, “Semantic-driven interpretable deep multi-modal hashing D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
 for large-scale multimedia retrieval,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, gradient-based localization,” in ICCV, Oct 2017.
 vol. 23, 2021. [32] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust detection of
 [5] A. B. Arrieta, N. Dı́az-Rodrı́guez, J. Del Ser, A. Bennetot, S. Tabik, malicious encrypted traffic via contrastive learning,” IEEE Transactions
 A. Barbado, S. Garcı́a, S. Gil-López, D. Molina, R. Benjamins et al., on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 20, pp. 4228–4242, 2025.
 “Explainable artificial intelligence (xai): Concepts, taxonomies, opportu- [33] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
 nities and challenges toward responsible ai,” Information fusion, vol. 58, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
 pp. 82–115, 2020. neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
 [6] Y. Chen and Y. Wang, “Mpaf: Encrypted traffic classification with multi- [34] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “Netmamba:
 phase attribute fingerprint,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
 and Security, vol. 19, pp. 7091–7105, 2024. mamba,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11449, 2024.
 [7] T. Cui, X. Lin, S. Li, M. Chen, Q. Yin, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Trafficllm: [35] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 Enhancing large language models for network traffic analysis with generic classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 traffic representation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04222, 2025. learning,” in ICOIN, 2017, pp. 712–717.
 [8] W. Dai, J. Li, D. Li, A. Tiong, J. Zhao, W. Wang, B. Li, P. N. Fung, and [36] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao,
 S. Hoi, “Instructblip: Towards general-purpose vision-language models C. Huang, C. Lv et al., “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv, 2025.
 with instruction tuning,” NeurIPS, pp. 49 250–49 267, 2023. [37] T. Zhang, V. Kishore, F. Wu, K. Q. Weinberger, and Y. Artzi, “Bertscore:
 [9] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: The second- Evaluating text generation with bert,” arXiv, 2019.
 generation onion router,” 2004. [38] R. Zhao, M. Zhan, X. Deng, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Gui, and Z. Xue, “Yet
[10] W. Dong, J. Yu, X. Lin, G. Gou, and G. Xiong, “Deep learning and pre- another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based traffic transformer
 training technology for encrypted traffic classification: A comprehensive with multi-level flow representation,” in AAAI, vol. 37, 2023.
 review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 617, p. 128444, 2025. [39] Q. Zhou, L. Wang, H. Zhu, T. Lu, and V. S. Sheng, “Wf-transformer:
[11] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, Learning temporal features for accurate anonymous traffic identification
 “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,” in by using transformer networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information
 ICISSP, 2016, pp. 407–414. Forensics and Security, 2024.