This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 1

 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection in
 IIoT Using Spatial-temporal Dynamic Mask
 Diffusion Model
 Jing Bai, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhengyang Zhang, Zhuo Zhang, Tong Li, Member, IEEE,
 Zhu Xiao, Senior Member, IEEE, Licheng Jiao, Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—In recent years, multivariate time series anomaly
detection has become an important research topic in the field
of anomaly detection. In Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
systems, the collected data may be affected by internal failures,
external disturbances, or other adverse factors. In such cases,
appropriate anomaly detection methods are required to ensure
the stable operation of the system. However, existing methods
based on reconstruction, prediction, or hybrid approaches often
suffer performance degradation when anomalies are present
in large amounts of training data, as these anomalies can
negatively impact the training process. To address this challenge,
we propose a dynamic masking strategy in both temporal
and spatial dimensions. We develop a time series imputation
framework based on a diffusion model that integrates Graph
Neural Network (GNN) and Transformer architectures. This
framework, termed Spatial-Temporal Dynamic Mask Diffusion
for Anomaly Detection (STDMD-AD), incorporates a dynamic
masking mechanism: temporally, reconstruction errors are used
to mask data by randomly concealing values with higher errors;
spatially, attention is applied to mask channels that are more
likely to contain anomalies during training. Experiments on
five real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
outperforms existing benchmarks and achieves state-of-the-art Fig. 1. The framework for anomaly detection in IIoT is shown below in the
anomaly detection performance. line graph of detecting anomalies (highlighted in red) from multidimensional
 time series data obtained from sensors.
 Index Terms—multivariate time series, anomaly detection, Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), diffusion models, transformer.

 security traffic monitoring [4], cyberattack [5], infrastructure
 monitoring [6], and fault diagnosis and system defects in
 I. I NTRODUCTION the industrial field [7]. To address these issues and detect
 anomalies in the collected data, anomaly detection technology
I NDUSTRIAL Internet of Things (IIoT) [1]–[3] refers to
 the integration of internet technologies with the industrial
sector by applying IoT technologies to manufacturing, energy,
 has emerged.
 Anomaly detection techniques have applications in many
transportation, logistics, and other industrial fields to achieve fields and can be used to detect anomalies in data types such
interconnection of devices, systems, and factories. In the as images, graphs, and time series. The goal of these methods
operation of large-scale systems related to this technology, is to identify samples in the data that deviate significantly
the system heavily relies on the analysis of collected logs from other observations [8]. Multivariate time series anomaly
and other data. Internal failures or negative external impacts detection is used to identify anomalies, abnormal time periods,
may occur, leading to anomalies that make it difficult for the or sudden events in multivariate time series data. In IIoT,
system or program to achieve the expected performance in the anomaly detection framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. It
practical applications. This situation often arises in network primarily involves monitoring data through multiple sensors
 and performing anomaly detection on the acquired multidi-
 Manuscript received 2024 XX XX. mensional data to determine when anomalies occur. With the
 Jing Bai, Zhengyang Zhang, Zhuo Zhang and Licheng Jiao are with the Key rapid development of industrial intelligence, this method has
Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Image Understanding of Ministry of
Education, School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, been proven effective in enabling the timely detection and col-
China (e-mail: baijing@mail.xidian.edu.cn; zzy123@stu.xidian.edu.cn; lection of problems in data, thereby avoiding excessive losses.
zhangzhuo@stu.xidian.edu.cn; lchjiao@mail.xidian.edu.cn). By leveraging advanced algorithms, this approach enhances
 Tong Li and Zhu Xiao are with the College of Computer Science and Electronics Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, a system’s ability to respond to unexpected events, thereby
China (emails: {litong, zhxiao}@hnu.edu.cn). improving operational efficiency. Furthermore, the integration

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 2

 motivating example illustrating these limitations is presented in Fig. 2. Prediction-based methods often struggle
 with the intrinsic stochasticity of future observations,
 leading to deviations in normal regions or insensitivity
 to actual anomalies. Similarly, the Reconstruction panel
 demonstrates a generalization trap where the model learns
 to reconstruct the anomalous patterns alongside the normal data. Consequently, the reconstruction error remains
 low even during anomalies, causing missed detections.
 • The uneven distribution of anomalies within real-world
 IIoT data streams gives rise to the issue of anomaly
 concentration, which substantially complicates both data
 preprocessing and model training [3]. Owing to the
 impracticality of manual annotation for large-scale multivariate time series, anomaly detection models frequently
 depend on unsupervised learning paradigms. In such
 settings, the inadvertent inclusion of anomalous instances
 in the training set—such as contiguous fault sequences
 misleadingly treated as normal—can severely disrupt the
 learning dynamics, causing the model to assimilate abnormal patterns into its representation of normal behavior.
Fig. 2. A motivating example comparing failure modes of existing methods For instance, reconstruction-based methods are prone to
and our approach. Top two panels show prediction/reconstruction methods regenerating anomalous patterns—especially when such
failing due to stochasticity or overfitting anomalies. Bottom panel demonstrates our strategy effectively ignoring anomalies, restoring normal patterns, anomalies recur frequently during training. In contrast,
and creating a detectable error gap. as illustrated in the Imputation + Dynamic Mask panel
 of Fig. 2, this method proactively masks the suspected
 region. By forcing the model to infer the missing segment
of anomaly detection in IIoT systems facilitates predictive based solely on the surrounding spatial-temporal context,
maintenance, allowing proactive measures to be taken before it recovers the underlying normal pattern, effectively
issues escalate into significant failures. rejecting the anomalous inputs. This creates a distinct
 Currently, most research focuses on unsupervised meth- discrepancy between the predicted series and the true
ods, mainly because anomalies usually account for only a anomaly, thereby avoiding the generalization trap and
small proportion of the collected data and are difficult to significantly enhancing detection sensitivity.
label in large quantities [7]. Traditional approaches include To directly address the challenges, we propose the Spatioclustering-based and density estimation-based methods. How- Temporal Diffusion Model for Detection (STDMD). Our deever, these methods rely heavily on manually crafted features sign makes explicit, targeted improvements to the diffusion
and struggle to ensure model robustness when dealing with model framework to mitigate the specific issues of anomaly
increasingly complex data. In recent years, with the rapid reconstruction and model contamination. Mitigating Chaldevelopment of deep learning, anomaly detection methods lenge 1 (Complex Dependencies): Instead of prediction or
that integrate deep learning have achieved significant per- reconstruction-based approaches, which struggle with complex
formance improvements and demonstrated strong practical dependencies and often regenerate anomalies, our model is
effectiveness [9]. Those methods can generally be categorized built upon a time series imputation framework (Conditional
into three groups: reconstruction-based, prediction-based [10], score-based diffusion models, CSDI [13]). This foundation
and hybrid approaches [11]. Reconstruction-based methods provides a key advantage: by learning to accurately impute
determine anomalies by evaluating reconstruction errors, while masked normal values based on their highly correlated spatioprediction-based methods rely on deviations between pre- temporal context, the model learns a robust representation
dicted and actual data. Although these methods have achieved of the system’s healthy dynamics. To further enhance its
promising results, two major challenges remain in this task. capacity to capture intricate dependencies, we integrate a
 • The high-dimensional nature of Industrial Internet of Masked Graph Network and a Transformer as the feature
 Things (IIoT) data, accompanied by its intricate internal extraction backbone. This hybrid design explicitly models
 dependencies, necessitates the development of models the complex spatial relationships between sensors (via the
 with superior representational capacity. [12] Typical IIoT Graph Network) and long-range temporal patterns (via the
 systems employ a multitude of sensors that collectively Transformer), enabling the model to discern subtle deviations
 generate voluminous, uncertain, and highly correlated that constitute anomalies, rather than reconstructing them.
 multivariate time-series data. Conventional reconstruction Mitigating Challenge 2 (Anomaly Concentration): To preand prediction-based anomaly detection algorithms often vent the model from assimilating anomalies present in the
 exhibit limited efficacy in such challenging settings. A unsupervised training set, we introduce a novel Dual Dynamic

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 3

Masking Mechanism. The Temporal Dynamic Mask applied and deep learning approaches, with a specific focus on studies
to the input of the diffusion model randomly occludes con- modeling correlations between multi-sensor data.
tiguous segments of the time series. This prevents the model
from over-relying on any specific time period that might be A. Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
contaminated by a concentrated anomaly, forcing it to learn Multivariate time series anomaly detection has been a
a generalized representation of normality from the unmasked significant focus for researchers and the academic community.
context. The Spatial Dynamic Mask Attention mechanism In the realm of deep learning, methods in this field can be
operates on the feature level. It adaptively attenuates the primarily categorized into three types [7]: (1) Prediction-based
contribution of sensor channels (features) that exhibit large methods, which utilize models for forecasting time series
reconstruction errors during training. This dynamically reduces data, such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [14] and
the influence of potentially anomalous channels, preventing Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) [15], to predict future values
them from polluting the model’s latent representations. and compare them with actual values to detect anomalies.
 Through this dual strategy, we proactively preprocess po- (2) Reconstruction-based methods, which employ generative
tentially anomalous regions in both the temporal and feature models like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16]–
domains, thereby significantly mitigating their adverse effects [19] and Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [20], [21] to train
on model training and enhancing overall robustness. The core and reconstruct data, creating pseudo-samples that are then
architecture of our STDMD-AD is built on an existing condi- compared to real samples to identify anomalies. (3) Hybrid
tional denoising diffusion model originally designed for time methods, which typically combine the above two approaches,
series imputation, and all our contributions represent targeted using a fusion of results from various methods to obtain the
modifications, innovative component designs and systematic final outcome.
integrations rather than simple adoption of off-the-shelf mod- In recent literature, prediction and reconstruction-based
els, with each design tailored to the unique challenges of methods have become popular for their effectiveness in
multivariate time series anomaly detection. The contributions anomaly detection, with many typical works focusing on
of this paper are as follows: modeling multi-sensor correlations to enhance detection per-
 • We propose a novel anomaly detection framework, formance. For example, OmniAnomaly [22] combines GRU
 Spatial-temporal Dynamic Mask Diffusion Anomaly De- and VAE to form a stochastic recurrent neural network model,
 tection (STDMD-AD), which incorporates time series learning the normal patterns of multivariate time series and
 interpolation and leverages temporal and spatial dynamic using reconstruction probability for anomaly detection. GDN
 masks. The framework integrates Graph Neural Networks [23] constructs graph structures based on multi-sensor phys-
 (GNN), Transformers, and Denoising Diffusion Models ical connections and proposes a cross-network meta-learning
 to achieve precise anomaly detection. Anomalies are algorithm to aggregate inter-sensor information for few-shot
 identified by selectively masking regions with higher anomaly detection. MTAD-GAT [24] leverages Graph Attenanomaly likelihood and gradually denoising them to tion Networks to learn adaptive spatial correlations between
 recover the original signals. sensors and capture temporal trends, enhancing detection per-
 • We introduce a temporal dynamic masking method that
 formance through a joint prediction and reconstruction model.
 utilizes a Transformer-based encoder for data reconstruc- TranAD [25] incorporates an attention-based sequence encoder
 tion. The input data is preprocessed by masking values into the Transformer model to implicitly capture multi-sensor
 with large reconstruction errors, which are indicative of feature correlations via embedding fusion, combining adverpotential anomalies, to hide these regions before model sarial training to improve model accuracy. In addition, other
 training. This approach alleviates the negative impact of graph-based methods [26]–[29] have also been utilized by
 high anomaly concentrations on the training process. researchers for modeling inter-sensor dependencies in anomaly
 detection and have achieved promising results. However, these
 • We incorporate a dynamic mask attention mechanism
 methods either rely on prior physical knowledge for static
 into the spatial layer of the network to mask anomalous
 graph construction, ignore the dynamic coupling of spatial
 regions during training. This allows the model to focus
 and temporal dependencies between sensors, or suffer from
 on cleaner, more representative data, thereby improving
 interference of anomalous sensor segments when learning
 its learning efficiency and detection performance.
 valid correlations.
 The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: The The method proposed in this paper differs from the above
related work is presented in the Section II. The section III categories. It primarily utilizes time series interpolation and
provides a detailed introduction to the proposed STDMD-AD applies dynamic masking in both temporal and spatial
framework and each module, while the section IV includes dimensions to model multi-sensor spatiotemporal correlations
experimental results, comparisons, and analysis of ablation adaptively, which mitigates the interference of anomalous data
experiments. Finally, Section V summarizes the work. on dependency learning and thus enhance anomaly detection
 performance.
 II. R ELATED W ORK
 In this section, we briefly introduce the methods of mul- B. Diffusion model
tivariate time series anomaly detection based on prediction, In recent years, the emergence of denoising diffusion modreconstruction and diffusion models, including both traditional els [30] has brought about significant changes in the field

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 4

of image generation. Their powerful generative capabilities
have made them perform excellently in downstream tasks
such as text generation, audio generation, and image anomaly
detection. In the field of image generation, Wolleb et al.
[31] proposed a weakly supervised anomaly detection method
based on the denoising diffusion implicit model, which is used
to generate abnormal maps of regions affected by disease in
patients. Wyatt et al. incorporated multi-scale (multi-octave)
simplex noise into the diffusion model, replacing the original
Gaussian noise, ultimately introducing AnoDDPM [32] for the
detection of anomalies in medical images.
 In the field of time series data generation, Kong et al.
[33] introduced a universal diffusion probabilistic model called
DiffWave for original audio synthesis, which can generate Fig. 3. Line chart of an example of multivariate time series anomaly detection
high-quality audio signals for conditional and unconditional task. The multidimensional time series is represented by blue and green lines,
 and all anomalies are represented by red shaded areas.
waveform generation tasks. Currently, there are several denoising diffusion model-based methods in time series research that
also explore multi-sensor correlation modeling for imputation ues of D features. Our goal is to detect outliers in the dataset,
and anomaly detection. For example, Alcaraz et al. [34] com- i.e., samples that are far from the majority of observations
bined the diffusion model with structured state space models, in the feature space. These outliers may represent underlying
proposing a new time series imputation method for multi- issues or anomalous events.
dimensional sensor data. Xiao et al. [35] extracted normal To solve this problem, we can use an anomaly detection
observations using a density ratio-based selection strategy model M that maps each sample si to an anomaly score adi ,
and then used a conditional weighted incremental diffusion indicating the level of anomaly of sample si . Typically, we
model to estimate missing values of multi-sensor time series. expect higher adi to indicate a higher likelihood of sample si
Chen et al. [36] designed a raster mask strategy to create being an outlier. As shown in the Fig. 3, our ultimate goal is
missing values in the data and used ImTransformer with a to identify which points or segments in the data are considered
spatial Transformer layer to capture inter-sensor correlations, anomalies, thus completing the anomaly detection task.
training the diffusion model for time series imputation and In our paper, We frame anomaly detection as a selfsubsequent anomaly detection tasks. Zeng et al. [37] pro- supervised imputation task, where a binary mask matrix M ∈
posed a wireless anomaly detection algorithm AE-DDPMs {0, 1}T ×D is applied to the original series S to generate the
for wireless communication security, based on an improved masked input Smasked = S ⊙ M. The model is then trained
denoising diffusion probabilistic model to model correlations to reconstruct the masked values from the observed context.
among wireless sensor data. These methods have achieved Unlike standard random masking, our mask M is dynamically
high performance on public datasets but adopt fixed modeling constructed by integrating two strategies detailed in Section
or masking strategies for multi-sensor dependencies, lacking III-B: the Temporal Dynamic Mask, which conceals time
dynamic adaptation to anomalous data segments. steps with high reconstruction errors, and the Spatial Dynamic
 To the best of our knowledge, while our method is not Mask, which targets channels exhibiting anomalous patterns.
the first to use diffusion models for multivariate time series This targeted masking strategy forces the model to recover
anomaly detection, our approach to data masking is more likely anomalies rather than random missing values, thereby
comprehensive. We perform dynamic masking operations learning more robust representations of normal dynamics.
in both temporal and spatial dimensions to adaptively
focus on clean and representative multi-sensor spatiotemporal B. Spatial-temporal dynamic mask
correlations, which makes the modeling of inter-sensor depen- Due to the presence of unlabeled outliers or segments in the
dencies more robust to anomalous data compared with existing training dataset, in order to minimize their negative impact on
diffusion-based methods. model training, this paper proposes two mask strategies from
 both temporal and spatial dimensions: temporal dynamic mask
 III. M ETHODOLOGY and Spatial dynamic mask.
 In this section, we first briefly discuss the issues of mul- 1) Temporal dynamic mask: In terms of the time dimension
tivariate time series anomaly detection. Then, we provide a masking strategy, we first utilize a Transformer encoder to
detailed explanation of the space-temporal dynamic masking reconstruct the original data and compute the reconstruction
mechanism. After that, we elaborate the Space-temporal dy- error with the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss between the renamic mask Diffusion for Anomaly Detection (SDMD-AD) constructed and original data. A threshold is then derived from
framework and its process. the reconstruction error, and points with values exceeding this
 threshold are considered more likely to be anomalous. Finally,
A. Problem Overview a masking ratio is set to randomly conceal data with larger
 Given a multivariate time series dataset S = s1 , s2 , ..., sN , reconstruction errors. This strategy serves as a preprocessing
where each si is a D-dimensional vector representing the val- step for the input data in the temporal dimension.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 5

 Specifically, during the training phase, the raw data are fed 2) Spatial dynamic mask: For the spatial dimension maskinto the encoder network, which outputs a pseudo-sample of ing strategy, we develop a dynamic mask attention mechanism
the same dimensionality. To robustly identify potential anoma- applied to the channels. Since certain channels may contain a
lies without relying on fixed error thresholds, we employ a higher proportion or density of anomalous data, this attention
confidence-based ranking mechanism. First, we compute the mechanism is integrated into the diffusion model. The proceelement-wise reconstruction error (MSE) and transform it into dure is as follows: first, each channel is treated as a node in a
a confidence score S, formulated as: graph; second, the attention feature of each node is computed;
 1 and finally, the overall mean and standard deviation of these
 S= (1) features are calculated. Channels with feature values lower the
 1 + LM SE (x, x̂)
 sum of the mean and one standard deviation are then masked.
where a higher reconstruction error corresponds to a lower Given the input feature map X ∈ RC×D , where C is
confidence score. Subsequently, we sort these scores and the number of channels and D is the feature dimension.
derive a dynamic threshold based on the α-quantile. Points Unlike standard global attention which computes a C × C
falling into the bottom 5% of confidence scores are flagged as dependency map, we focus the query solely on the target
potential anomalies and selected as candidates for masking. channel to evaluate its relationship with all other channels. We
 Multivariate anomalies in IIoT systems typically manifest first generate the query vector for the target channel (qtarget ),
as persistent shifts in system states rather than instantaneous, and the key (K) and value (V) matrices for all channels
isolated outliers. To capture this temporal continuity, we through linear projections:
extend the masking mechanism to adjacent time points that
exhibit similar spatial patterns. Let xt ∈ RD denote the feature qtarget = xtarget WQ , K = XWK , V = XWV (3)
vector of a candidate anomaly at time t, where D represents where WQ , WK , WV are learnable weight matrices. We then
the number of sensor channels. To delineate the effective range compute the raw attention scores vector z ∈ RC by performing
of this dependency, we introduce a temporal search radius the dot product between the target query and all keys:
w. Consequently, the identification of potential neighbors is
constrained to the window [t−w, t+w] centered at the anomaly qtarget KT
 z= √ (4)
candidate. For each neighboring time step t′ within this local dk
window, we quantify the structural similarity between the where dk is the scaling factor. Each element zi in z represents
candidate xt and the neighbor xt′ using the Pearson correlation the relevance of the i-th channel to the target channel.
coefficient. A high correlation implies that the system state at To mask channels that contain anomalies or provide irt′ mirrors the anomalous profile at t, thereby necessitating its relevant information, we introduce a dynamic thresholding
inclusion in the mask. The Pearson correlation coefficient [38] strategy. We calculate a threshold θ based on the statistical
is calculated across the feature dimension as follows: distribution of the attention scores z:
 PD
 d=1 (xt,d − x̄t )(xt ,d − x̄t )
 v
 ′ ′ C u C
 rt,t′ = qP qP 1 X u1 X
 d = 1D (xt,d − x̄t )2 d = 1D (xt′ ,d − x̄t′ )2 θ = mean(z) + std(z) = zi + t (zi − z̄)2 (5)
 C i=1 C i=1
 (2)
where xt,d represents the value of the d-th channel at time Channels with scores below this threshold are deemed un-
 1
 PD
t, and x̄t = D d=1 xt,d denotes the spatial average across
 informative. Consequently, we define a set of valid channel
all channels at that specific timestamp. This metric robustly indices Set to serve as the effective receptive field for the
evaluates the similarity of the multivariate distribution shapes target channel:
between the two time steps, ensuring that the masked region
 Set = {i | zi ≥ θ, i ∈ 1, . . . , C} (6)
covers the entire duration of the anomalous event.
 Finally, simply masking all points identified by the error We then calculate the normalized attention weights ai only
and correlation criteria might lead to excessive information for the channels within the valid set using the Softmax
loss, making model convergence difficult. To balance this, function:
we introduce a stochastic sampling strategy controlled by exp(zi )
a masking ratio parameter γ. From the expanded candidate ai = P , ∀i ∈ Set. (7)
 j∈Set exp(zj )
set obtained in the previous steps, we randomly select γ
proportion of points to generate the final binary mask. This Finally, we reconstruct the feature of the target channel
 ′
stochasticity acts as a regularization technique, preventing the P aggregating the values from the valid set: vtarget =
 by
model from overfitting to specific masking patterns. i∈Set ai vi . To integrate this reconstructed feature back into
 The T-Encoder network used for reconstruction consists the multivariate time series without altering the non-target
of one encoder layer from our Spatial-Temporal Transformer channels, we employ a channel-wise concatenation operation
and a simple decoder layer. Although the dynamic masking followed by a linear projection WO :
strategy may occasionally conceal non-anomalous values, it
 Y = WO · Concat(v′ target, Vothers) (8)
effectively reduces the negative impact of anomalous data on
model training and enhances the model’s robustness and gener- where Vothers denotes the projected features of the non-target
alization, thereby improving anomaly detection performance. channels, and Concat(·) splices the reconstructed target feature

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 6

with the original features of the remaining channels. This
design ensures that the model selectively repairs the anomaly √ √
using only high-confidence spatial contexts. st = ᾱt s0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, with ϵ ∼ N (0, I). (10)
 Then, based on equation (10), the forward noise addition
C. STDMD-AD
 formula can be derived as follows:
 1) Overview: The overall architecture of STDMD-AD, as
shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that our framework is mainly r s !
divided into three parts: training of the diffusion model based √ 1 1
 st+1 = st + ᾱt+1 − st
on the spatial-temporal transformer, offline validation of the ᾱt+1
 ᾱt
model and the main framework of the spatial-temporal trans- s r ! (11)
former, including the structure of its two main feature extrac- √ 1 1
 + ᾱt+1 −1− − 1 ϵθ (st , t) .
tion layers: the spatial layer and the temporal layer. Moreover, ᾱt+1 ᾱt
Table I presents a comparison of hyperparameters between
 Reverse diffusion processes differs from DDPMs, where the
STDMD-AD and the baseline models. It can be observed
 reverse process is still a Markov chain that depends on the
that both STDMD-AD and the baselines utilize the Spatial-
 Bayesian formula. The time step must be the same as the
temporal Transformer and share the same settings for several
 forward process to generate samples step by step. However, in
hyperparameters such as the number of feature extraction
 DDIMs, the sampling process does not depend on the Bayesian
layers, batch size, time embedding dimension, feature embedformula. The defined generation process is:
ding dimension, diffusion steps, and window size. However,
a notable difference lies in the adoption of dynamic masks:   
STDMD-AD incorporates both temporal dynamic mask and  N f (1) (s1 ) , σ12 I if t = 1;
 (t) θ
spatial dynamic mask, while the baseline models do not pθ (st−1 | st ) = 
 (t)
  (12)
  qσ st−1 | st , fθ (st ) otherwise.
employ these dynamic mask mechanisms.
 Based on the derivation in the DDIMs paper, the formula
 TABLE I for st can be obtained as:
 C OMPARISON OF C OMPONENTS AND H YPERPARAMETERS BETWEEN
 STDMD-AD AND BASELINES
 √
 √ st − 1 − ᾱt ϵθ (t) (st )
  
 Model st−1 = ᾱt−1 √
 Hyper parameters
 STDMD-AD Baselines ᾱt (13)
 q
 (t)
 Spatial-temporal Transformer ✓ ✓ + 1 − ᾱt−1 − σt2 ϵθ (xt ) + σt ϵt
 Temporal dynamic mask ✓ x
 where ϵt ∼ N (0, I) is standard Gaussian noise,
 Spatial dynamic mask ✓ x
 σ ϵ
 pt t represents random
 p noise, and when σt =
 Feature extraction layers 4 4 (1 − āt−1 )/(1 − āt ) 1 − āt /āt−1 for all t, the forward
 Batch size 32 32 process becomes a Markov process and the reverse process
 Time embedding dim 128 128 becomes the process of DDPMs; when σt = 0, the reverse
 Feature embedding dim 16 16 process becomes the deterministic sampling process in
 DDIMs.
 Diffusion steps 50 50
 For the optimization objective of this time series impu-
 Window size 100 100 tation task, we also use the MSE loss for training, following the loss calculation approach from the CSDI. During
 2) Denoising Diffusion Model: The Denoising Diffusion
 training, the observed values sco 0 are used as conditional
Implicit Models (DDIMs) is a more efficient iterative implicit
 inputs, while sta 0 represents the imputation target, i.e., the
probabilistic model, building upon the Denoising Diffusion
Probabilistic Models (DDPMs) while maintaining the same
 masked √ missing values.
 √ The known  noise ground truth is ϵ,
 and ϵθ ᾱt sta
 0 + 1 − ᾱ t ϵ, t | s co
 0 is the noise predicted by
training process. DDIMs enables the generation of high-quality
 the model. The MSE loss is then computed between these
samples with fewer iteration steps, significantly speeding up
 predicted and true values to train the model:
the sampling process. The sample generation procedure in
DDIMs primarily involves two key stages: the forward dif-
 √ √  2
fusion process and the reverse diffusion process. L := ϵ − ϵθ ᾱt sta
 0 + 1 − ᾱt ϵ, t | sco
 0 2
 , with ϵ ∼ N (0, I). (14)
 Forward noise addition process is consistent with that in
DDPMs, continuously adding Gaussian noise to data, which 3) Spatial-temporal Transformer Backbone: To effeccan be represented as: tively model the complex dependencies in multivariate time
  p  series, we employ a Spatial-Temporal Transformer as the
 q (st | st−1 ) := N st ; 1 − βt st−1 , βt I (9) denoising backbone, replacing the standard U-Net architecture
 typically used in diffusion models. As illustrated in Fig. 4(a),
 T
where {βt }t=1 is the variance of the Gaussian noise. Subse- the framework processes data through a sequential pipeline of
quently, according
 Qt to the definition in the paper: at := 1 − βt embedding injection, spatio-temporal feature extraction, and
and āt := s=1 as , the formula for st can be obtained as: signal reconstruction.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 7

Fig. 4. The overall framework diagram of the spatial-temporal dynamic mask diffusion for anomaly detection. It showcases three parts: the training and
testing process, and the general structure of the network model.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 8

 The network first accepts the masked noisy input projected ployed for the training and testing phases. While the dynamic
into a high-dimensional space. To preserve context during the mask is crucial for learning robust features during training, we
iterative denoising process, we fuse the input with auxiliary adopt an equal interval mask for the testing phase, as shown
embeddings. Specifically, we introduce a Diffusion Embedding in the right panel of Fig. 5. This approach avoids the comto indicate the current noise level and a joint spatio-temporal putational overhead associated with the dynamic mechanism,
embedding that encodes temporal positions and channel iden- significantly reducing inference complexity.
tifiers. The testing process of the framework is shown in the
 These embeddings are then processed by the core extraction middle block of Fig. 4. Specifically, the data is first processed
unit, which consists of stacked Temporal Layers and Spatial with equal interval mask, generating two inputs with identical
Layers. The Temporal Layers utilize self-attention mechanisms masking intervals. These inputs are then independently fed into
to capture long-range dependencies along the time axis. Subse- the model for time series interpolation, allowing it to capture
quently, the Spatial Layers model inter-variable correlations at the spatial and temporal correlations in the data and accurately
each time step. Notably, our proposed Spatial Dynamic Mask reconstruct the masked values. The two outputs are subse-
Attention is integrated within these spatial layers to explicitly quently concatenated to form the complete prediction, thereby
suppress anomalous channels. improving reconstruction quality. Finally, an anomaly score is
 To facilitate gradient propagation and feature integration, computed based on the difference between the reconstructed
we employ a global residual connection that fuses the input output and the ground truth. By applying the computed threshfeatures with the processed representations. Finally, a 1 × 1 old to these scores, the framework determines whether each
convolutional projection layer maps the hidden features back data point is anomalous, thereby enabling effective detection
to the original data dimensions, yielding the predicted noise of abnormal events.
or reconstructed signal.
 4) Training and Testing Process of STDMD-AD: The
training process of our method is illustrated in the top block of IV. E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
Fig.4. First, data preprocessing is performed using the Tempo-
 A. Datasets
ral Dynamic Mask. The input is fed into a Transformer encoder
for reconstruction, and masking positions are determined based We collect five real-world datasets to test our method. The
on the MSE loss between the reconstructed and original data, following is a description of the five experimental datasets [3]:
along with correlations between adjacent points. Noise is then Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) and Soil Moisture Active
added to the unmasked data, and combined with the masked Passive (SMAP) [39]: The Mars Science Laboratory and Soil
data to form the model input. Gaussian noise is applied to Moisture Active Passive satellites are public datasets provided
train the spatial-temporal Transformer, which gradually learns by NASA. The Mars Science Laboratory dataset consists of
to denoise and predict the masked values. Finally, the loss is 55 dimensions, while the Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite
computed between the predicted and true values to optimize dataset consists of 25 dimensions. These datasets include
the model in inferring the masked normal data. telemetry anomaly data reported by the spacecraft detection
 system, known as incident unexpected anomalies (ISA).
 Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [22]: The SMD dataset was
 collected at a large Internet company over a five-week period.
 It consists of 38-dimensional multivariate time series data.
 Pool Server Metrics (PSM) [5]: PSM is collected from
 multiple application server nodes within eBay. It contains data
 from 26 dimensions.
 Safe Water Treatment (SWaT) [6]: The SWaT dataset includes data from 51 sensors that are continuously operating
 in critical infrastructure systems, particularly water treatment
 facilities.

 B. Experimental setup
 The STDMD-AD framework is implemented based on Py-
 Torch version 3.8 and is trained and tested on an NVIDIA
 Titan Xp device. The batch size is set to 32, with each data
Fig. 5. Explanation of Masking Strategy in Training and Testing Phases: sample having a length of 100. A random masking ratio
The left side shows the result processed with temporal dynamic mask in the of 0.7 is applied, and the diffusion model’s time step is
training phase, while the right side shows the result processed with equal
interval mask in the testing phase. The T-Encoder consists of one encoder set to 50. During training, a random search method is used
layer from our Spatial-Temporal Transformer and a simple decoder layer. to find the optimal combination of hyperparameters, while
 other comparison models follow the settings specified in their
 As illustrated in Fig. 5, distinct masking strategies are em- respective original papers.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 9

C. Evaluation Metrics
 Anomaly detection is a critical task in various domains,
requiring robust methods to identify outliers or abnormal patterns within datasets. Evaluating the performance of anomaly
detection models involves specific metrics tailored to assess
their effectiveness in identifying anomalies. The primary evaluation metrics used in anomaly detection include Precision,
Recall, and F1-Score.
 Precision measures the proportion of true anomalies correctly identified by the model out of all the instances it
classified as anomalies. It is defined as:
 True Positives
 Precision = (15)
 True Positives + False Positives
 A high precision indicates that the model has a low false
positive rate, meaning it does not incorrectly label normal data Fig. 6. The model’s performance parameters P, R, and F1 as the mask
as anomalous frequently. probability changes on the dataset.
 Recall, also known as Sensitivity or True Positive Rate,
measures the proportion of actual anomalies that are correctly
identified by the model. It is defined as: 4.14 percentage points, respectively. These results validate
 the importance of spatial masking in capturing multivariate
 True Positives
 Recall = (16) dependencies and processing anomalous features across chan-
 True Positives + False Negatives nels. Overall, the ablation results confirm the rationality and
 A high recall indicates that the model successfully identifies effectiveness of our model design and provide a solid basis
most of the actual anomalies present in the dataset, minimizing for further optimization.
the false negatives. Moreover, in terms of efficiency, the dynamic masking
 F1-Score is the harmonic mean of Precision and Recall, strategy only increases the training time per epoch by approviding a single metric that balances both aspects. It is proximately 14.2% to 22.7% compared to static masking,
particularly useful when dealing with imbalanced datasets primarily due to the iterative reconstruction process and
where the number of normal instances far outweighs the adaptive threshold computation. However, even with dynamic
anomalies. The F1-Score is defined as: masking, the maximum total training time across all datasets
 Precision × Recall remains within 120 minutes. Furthermore, during the inference
 F1-Score = 2 × (17) phase, we employ fixed-interval masking (static masking) for
 Precision + Recall
 data preprocessing to ensure stable and consistent anomaly
 The F1-Score ranges from 0 to 1, where a higher value
 detection results. Consequently, the dynamic masking strategy
indicates a better balance between precision and recall.
 has negligible impact on inference efficiency.
 2) Masking probability: In our experiments, we conduct
D. Ablation experiment an ablation study to evaluate the impact of varying mask
 In this section, we conduct an ablation study to system- probabilities on the performance of our STDMD-AD model.
atically investigate the impact of various components and Mask probability refers to the fraction of data points that are
hyperparameters on the performance of our proposed model. randomly masked during training. We test mask probabilities
By isolating and modifying specific aspects of the model, we ranging from 0.1 to 0.9 and analyzed the results in terms of
aim to understand their contributions and effectiveness in the precision, recall, and F1-score across PSM datasets. It can be
context of anomaly detection in time series data. seen from the Fig. 6 that as the mask probability increases, the
 1) Model components: The results of the ablation studies performance of the model continues to improve until the mask
in Table II indicate that our STDMD-AD model consistently probability reaches 0.7, at which point the performance begins
performs well across all five datasets. Specifically, the tem- to decline. This is because increasing the mask probability
poral and spatial dynamic masking strategies are critical for obscures more anomalous information in the data, and a higher
enhancing model performance. The removal of the temporal mask probability may cause the model to lose more important
dynamic mask resulted in a significant decrease in F1 scores information during training, thereby affecting its ability to
across all datasets. In the MSL, SMAP, PSM, SMD, and recognize true positives.
SWaT datasets, the performance dropped by 5.20, 4.52, 5.45, 3) Diffusion steps: The sensitivity experiment and the
5.12, and 7.97 percentage points, respectively. The findings results in Fig. 7 reveal significant differences in the model
demonstrate the key role of the temporal dynamic mask in performance of various indicators as the diffusion step size
improving the accuracy of time series anomaly detection. increases from 10 to 80. Initially, from 10 to 50 steps, the
Similarly, removing the spatial dynamic mask also led to model showed a significant improvement in F1 and Recall.
substantial performance degradation, particularly in the MSL, However, as the diffusion steps further increased, the perfor-
SMAP, and PSM datasets, with decreases of 6.44, 4.53, and mance gains became less noticeable, and there might even be

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 10

 E. Comparative experiment

 We conduct a comparative evaluation of our STDMD-AD
 model against various existing models on five common publicly available anomaly detection datasets: MSL, SMAP, PSM,
 SMD, and SWaT. The performance metrics evaluated include
 Precision (P), Recall (R), and F1-Score (F1). Furthermore, we
 compare the STDMD-AD model with seven state-of-the-art
 methods based on prediction, reconstruction, and diffusion
 models, using evaluation metrics including Precision (P),
 Recall (R), and F1-Score (F1): (1) Isolation Forest (IForest)
 detects anomalies by isolating anomalous data points from
 the rest. (2) LSTM-VAE leverages Long Short-Term Memory
 networks and Variational Autoencoders to reconstruct data and
 detect sequence anomalies through reconstruction error analysis. (3) TranAD employs Transformer architectures to capture
Fig. 7. The model’s performance parameters P, R, and F1 as the diffusion
steps changes on the dataset. broader temporal trends in the data for anomaly prediction.
 (4) MTAD-GAT utilizes Graph Attention Networks to model
 multivariate time series (MTS) and combines prediction-based
 and reconstruction-based approaches to enhance representation
 learning. (5) GDN proposes a Graph Neural Network-based
 method to aggregate information among sensors for anomaly
 detection. (6) ImDiffusion designs a raster mask strategy to
 create missing values in the data and leverages diffusion
 models for prediction and anomaly detection. (7) DDMT
 integrates denoising diffusion models with Transformers for
 multivariate time series anomaly detection.
 The selected baselines fully cover the three mainstream
 methodological paradigms in anomaly detection: predictionbased (TranAD, MTAD-GAT), reconstruction-based (LSTM-
 VAE, GDN) and diffusion-based (ImDiffusion, DDMT), enabling a systematic evaluation of our STDMD-AD model
 against the core research directions of the field. This setup not
 only highlights the superior performance of our method over
Fig. 8. The model’s performance parameters P, R, and F1 as the window
sizes changes on the dataset.
 traditional prediction and reconstruction-based approaches
 with inherent limitations elaborated in Sections 1 and 2,
 but also demonstrates its notable improvements over statea slight decline after 50 steps. Specifically, the model showed of-the-art emerging diffusion-based techniques. In terms of
an average precision increase of about 18% between 10 and 50 representativeness, the first five methods (IForest, LSTM-VAE,
steps. Beyond 50 steps, while the model maintained a stable TranAD, MTAD-GAT, GDN) are well-recognized benchmark
performance level, the rate of precision improvement slowed models widely adopted in top international conferences and
down, indicating potential overfitting or convergence to a local prestigious journals, while the two diffusion-based models
optimum through excessive iteration. Therefore, to balance (ImDiffusion, DDMT) represent the latest research advances
model stability and efficiency, the optimal number of diffusion published in ICML and ICLR during 2022–2023, ensuring
steps is 50, ensuring performance in anomaly detection while the representativeness and cutting-edge nature of the commaximizing computational efficiency and resource utilization parative experiments. In addition, the selected baselines span
in practical applications. the entire performance spectrum of anomaly detection meth-
 4) Window size: The size of the window is also an impor- ods, ranging from classical statistical approaches (IForest) to
tant parameter that affects the performance of the model. For modern deep learning architectures covering prediction-based,
the PSM dataset, we conduct experiments on STDMD-AD reconstruction-based and diffusion-based types, which offers
using different window sizes (mainly 25, 50, 75, and 100). readers a clear overview of the developmental progression of
As shown in Fig. 8, it can be seen that as the window size the anomaly detection field and an intuitive understanding
increases, the anomaly detection performance of the model of the relative performance positioning of our STDMD-AD
gradually improves. The experiment shows that window size model.
has a significant impact on the final result and cannot be As shown in the results of Table III, for the MSL dataset, our
ignored. A window that is too small will reduce the amount model STDMD-AD achieves the highest F1 score of 94.72. In
of information in each sample, thereby affecting the model’s contrast, the best performing model after SDMD-AD is DDMT
learning of features. (F1: 94.26). For the SMAP dataset, the F1 score is 97.00,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 11

 TABLE II
T HE ABLATION EXPERIMENT RESULTS OF BASELINE AND OTHER MODULES ON FIVE COMMON PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ANOMALY DETECTION DATASETS ,
 INCLUDING MSL, SMAP, SMD, PSM, AND SWAT.

 MSL SMAP PSM SMD SWaT
 Model
 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
 STDMD-AD 91.32 98.37 94.72 99.44 94.68 97.00 99.06 98.28 98.67 88.93 80.91 84.73 95.37 93.03 94.19
 Temporal mask 90.05 87.32 89.52 94.10 89.45 92.48 97.41 89.37 93.22 86.42 73.79 79.61 92.80 80.51 86.22
 Spatial mask 87.13 89.46 88.28 97.95 87.57 92.47 98.64 90.75 94.53 83.30 81.72 82.50 97.84 80.63 88.41

 TABLE III
 C OMPARATIVE EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF STDMD-AD AND OTHER MODELS ON FIVE COMMON PUBLICLY AVAILABLE ANOMALY DETECTION
 DATASETS , INCLUDING MSL, SMAP, SMD, PSM, AND SWAT.

 MSL SMAP PSM SMD SWaT
 Model P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1 P R F1
 STDMD-AD 91.32 98.37 94.72 99.44 94.68 97.00 99.06 98.28 98.67 88.93 80.91 84.73 95.37 93.03 94.19
 IForest [40] 50.44 55.03 52.65 54.15 58.95 55.26 49.22 56.98 52.51 41.32 77.56 52.60 45.04 79.59 57.52
 LSTM-VAE [41] 77.40 93.23 84.58 81.57 45.18 58.15 97.03 39.30 55.94 75.22 85.45 80.01 40.58 83.10 54.53
 TranAD [25] 89.52 99.99 93.73 86.21 56.96 68.60 96.70 73.22 83.34 85.18 80.45 82.75 90.72 79.06 84.48
 MTAD-GAT [24] 85.93 93.12 89.38 47.49 99.99 64.39 90.67 88.38 89.51 75.76 84.40 79.85 82.62 80.11 81.35
 ImDiffusion [36] 92.76 89.65 91.17 97.95 87.57 92.47 93.48 98.71 96.02 83.30 81.72 82.50 99.99 65.73 79.32
 DDMT [42] 91.03 97.73 94.26 93.43 99.11 96.19 95.42 97.50 96.45 88.07 81.50 84.66 90.03 82.51 86.11
 GDN [43] 85.84 93.12 89.33 81.04 99.99 89.52 97.59 39.09 55.82 70.85 99.78 82.85 99.99 64.25 78.24

 TABLE IV SMAP, and MSL have relatively lower dimensionalities (25-26
 C OMPARISON OF THE AVERAGE VALUES OF EVALUATION INDEXES OF dimensions), while SMD contains 38 dimensions and SWaT
 STDMD - AD AND OTHER MODELS ON FIVE DATA SETS .
 has 51 dimensions. This explains why all models, including
 Average both our approach and the baseline methods, demonstrate
 Model P R F1
 relatively poorer performance on the SMD dataset compared to
 others. However, the superior performance of STDMD-AD on
 STDMD-AD 94.82 93.05 93.86
 SWaT, despite its high dimensionality, may be attributed to the
 IForest 48.03 65.62 54.10 concentrated nature of anomalies in SWaT, as opposed to the
 LSTM-VAE 74.36 69.25 66.64 more sparse and scattered anomaly distribution in SMD. These
 TranAD 89.66 77.93 82.58 factors collectively contribute to the performance differences
 MTAD-GAT 76.49 89.20 80.89 observed across the five datasets.
 ImDiffusion 93.49 84.67 88.29 In Table IV, the evaluation results demonstrate the excellent
 DDMT 91.59 91.67 91.53 performance of our STDMD-AD model across various met-
 GDN 87.06 79.24 79.15 rics. Specifically, the STDMD-AD model achieves an average
 precision of 94.82, an average recall of 93.05, and an average
 F1 score of 93.86 across all five datasets. Compared to other
 models, STDMD-AD shows significantly better performance
making it the best performing dataset. The closest competitor in multivariate time series anomaly detection. IForest performs
is DDMT (F1: 96.19). For the PSM dataset, our model poorly across all metrics, particularly in F1 score, reflecting its
achieves an F1 score of 98.67, the highest among all models. limitations in handling complex time series data. The LSTM-
The second best performing model is DDMT (F1: 96.45). For VAE model, while showing decent precision, has low recall,
the SMD dataset, STDMD-AD achieves an F1 score of 84.73, leading to a lower F1 score and limiting its effectiveness
making it one of the best performing datasets. For the SWaT in anomaly detection. TranAD and MTAD-GAT outperform
dataset, our model increases the F1 score to 94.19, making IForest and LSTM-VAE on some datasets but still fall short of
it one of the best performing models. DDMT performs the STDMD-AD. TranAD, though close in precision, lags behind
best with an F1 score of 86.11. The observed performance in recall and F1 score, while MTAD-GAT achieves better recall
variation across datasets can be attributed to differences in but remains weaker in precision and F1 score. The ImDiffusion
their inherent characteristics. Generally, achieving significant model demonstrates good precision and recall, but its overall
performance improvements becomes more challenging as the F1 score is still below that of STDMD-AD. DDMT and GDN
dimensionality of the data increases. For instance, PSM, perform relatively well but do not reach the comprehensive

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 12

capability of STDMD-AD. we will develop adaptive mechanisms that allow the model to
 In summary, our proposed STDMD-AD model, especially dynamically adjust masking ratios and diffusion steps based
with the spatial-temporal masking mechanism, consistently on real-time noise levels and device resource availability.
achieves the best or near-best performance across all five
datasets. This mechanism enhances robustness by mitigating
 R EFERENCES
the impact of anomalous data during training, thereby improving anomaly detection and increasing precision, recall, and F1 [1] S. Villamil, C. Hernández, and G. Tarazona, “An overview of internet
score. These results highlight the robustness and generalization of things,” Telkomnika (Telecommunication Computing Electronics and
 Control), vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 2320–2327, 2020.
capability of our approach in real-world multivariate time se-
 [2] M. Soori, B. Arezoo, and R. Dastres, “Internet of things for smart
ries anomaly detection tasks. In particular, the proposed graph factories in industry 4.0, a review,” Internet of Things and Cyberattention-inspired spatiotemporal Transformer and dynamic Physical Systems, vol. 3, pp. 192–204, 2023.
spatial-temporal masking strategy enable precise and adaptive [3] A. A. Cook, G. Mısırlı, and Z. Fan, “Anomaly detection for iot timeseries data: A survey,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 7, no. 7,
modeling of complex spatiotemporal dependencies between pp. 6481–6494, 2019.
multiple sensors, which is the key to the superior performance [4] M. Abbasi, A. Shahraki, and A. Taherkordi, “Deep learning for network
of STDMD-AD on high-dimensional multi-sensor time series traffic monitoring and analysis (ntma): A survey,” Computer Communications, vol. 170, pp. 19–41, 2021.
anomaly detection, and provides a new perspective for multi- [5] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asynsensor dependency modeling in related fields. chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,”
 in Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge
 discovery & data mining, 2021, pp. 2485–2494.
 V. CONCLUSION [6] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: A water treatment testbed
 for research and training on ics security,” in 2016 international workshop
 In this paper, we develope the Spatial-Temporal Dynamic on cyber-physical systems for smart water networks (CySWater). IEEE,
 2016, pp. 31–36.
Mask Diffusion for Anomaly Detection (STDMD-AD) frame-
 [7] A. Blázquez-Garcı́a, A. Conde, U. Mori, and J. A. Lozano, “A review on
work, designed to enhance anomaly detection in multidi- outlier/anomaly detection in time series data,” ACM computing surveys
mensional time series data. Our method integrates a Spatial- (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1–33, 2021.
Temporal Transformer with a dynamic masking strategy, ef- [8] G. Pang, C. Shen, L. Cao, and A. V. D. Hengel, “Deep learning for
 anomaly detection: A review,” ACM computing surveys (CSUR), vol. 54,
fectively mitigating the impact of anomalous data during no. 2, pp. 1–38, 2021.
training and significantly improving the model’s robustness [9] K. Shaukat, T. M. Alam, S. Luo, S. Shabbir, I. A. Hameed, J. Li,
and generalization capabilities. S. K. Abbas, and U. Javed, “A review of time-series anomaly detection
 techniques: A step to future perspectives,” in Advances in Information
 Comprehensive experiments conduct on five real-world and Communication: Proceedings of the 2021 Future of Information
datasets—SMD, PSM, MSL, SMAP, and SWaT—demonstrate and Communication Conference (FICC), Volume 1. Springer, 2021,
that our model outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. pp. 865–877.
 [10] R. Xu, Y. Cheng, Z. Liu, Y. Xie, and Y. Yang, “Improved long short-term
Specifically, the proposed STDMD-AD achieves an average memory based anomaly detection with concept drift adaptive method for
precision of 94.82, a recall of 93.05, and an F1-score of 93.86 supporting iot services,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 112,
across all datasets, highlighting its effectiveness in accurately pp. 228–242, 2020.
 [11] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly
detecting anomalies in complex time series data. The success detection in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE
of our approach is largely attributed to the dynamic masking access, vol. 9, pp. 120 043–120 065, 2021.
mechanism, which reduces the prevalence of anomalous data [12] H. Xu, W. Chen, N. Zhao, Z. Li, J. Bu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, D. Pei,
 Y. Feng et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational autoduring training, thereby enhancing the model’s ability to learn encoder for seasonal kpis in web applications,” in Proceedings of the
normal patterns and effectively detect deviations. Furthermore, 2018 world wide web conference, 2018, pp. 187–196.
the integration of spatial and temporal features through the [13] Y. Tashiro, J. Song, Y. Song, and S. Ermon, “Csdi: Conditional scorebased diffusion models for probabilistic time series imputation,” Ad-
Spatial-Temporal Transformer allows our model to capture vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 24 804–
intricate relationships within the data, further boosting its 24 816, 2021.
performance. [14] A. Graves and A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” Supervised
 sequence labelling with recurrent neural networks, pp. 37–45, 2012.
 Despite these improvements, the iterative nature of diffusion [15] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of
sampling and the complexity of the Transformer architec- gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” arXiv preprint
ture pose challenges for real-time deployment on resource- arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
 [16] Y. Sun, W. Yu, Y. Chen, and A. Kadam, “Time series anomaly detection
constrained IIoT edge devices. Consequently, future work will based on gan,” in 2019 sixth international conference on social networks
focus on three strategic directions to bridge this gap. First, analysis, management and security (SNAMS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 375–
we will investigate model compression techniques, including 382.
knowledge distillation and network quantization, and explore [17] Y. Li, X. Peng, J. Zhang, Z. Li, and M. Wen, “Dct-gan: dilated
 convolutional transformer-based gan for time series anomaly detection,”
Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) to reduce computational IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, vol. 35, no. 4,
complexity while preserving representation capability. Second, pp. 3632–3644, 2021.
to facilitate scalable and secure deployment in distributed [18] A. Geiger, D. Liu, S. Alnegheimish, A. Cuesta-Infante, and K. Veeramachaneni, “Tadgan: Time series anomaly detection using generative
industrial networks, we aim to extend STDMD-AD to a adversarial networks,” in 2020 ieee international conference on big data
Federated Learning (FL) paradigm. Drawing inspiration from (big data). IEEE, 2020, pp. 33–43.
efficient aggregation protocols like LSFL [44], we plan to in- [19] L. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, and Y. Jin, “Anomaly detection of time series
 with smoothness-inducing sequential variational auto-encoder,” IEEE
corporate lightweight secure aggregation to ensure robustness transactions on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 32, no. 3,
against bandwidth constraints and Byzantine attacks. Finally, pp. 1177–1191, 2020.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3692551

 13

[20] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. Roberts, [42] C. Yang, T. Wang, and X. Yan, “Ddmt: Denoising diffusion mask
 “Anomaly detection for time series using vae-lstm hybrid model,” in transformer models for multivariate time series anomaly detection,”
 ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08800, 2023.
 and Signal Processing (ICASSP). Ieee, 2020, pp. 4322–4326. [43] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
[21] Z. Niu, K. Yu, and X. Wu, “Lstm-based vae-gan for time-series anomaly in multivariate time series,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
 detection,” Sensors, vol. 20, no. 13, p. 3738, 2020. artificial intelligence, vol. 35, no. 5, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
[22] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly [44] Z. Zhang, L. Wu, C. Ma, J. Li, J. Wang, Q. Wang, and S. Yu, “Lsfl: A
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural lightweight and secure federated learning scheme for edge computing,”
 network,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 18, pp.
 conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2019, pp. 2828– 365–379, 2022.
 2837.
[23] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly
 detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proceedings of the Web
 Conference 2021, 2021, pp. 2448–2456.
[24] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
 J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
 graph attention network,” in 2020 IEEE international conference on data
 mining (ICDM). IEEE, 2020, pp. 841–850.
[25] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2201.07284, 2022.
[26] S. He, G. Li, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Fusion graph structure learningbased multivariate time series anomaly detection with structured prior
 knowledge,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
 vol. 19, pp. 8760–8772, 2024.
[27] H. Liu, W. Luo, L. Han, P. Gao, W. Yang, and G. Han, “Anomaly
 detection via graph attention networks-augmented mask autoregressive
 flow for multivariate time series,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2024.
[28] X. Ma, J. Wu, S. Xue, J. Yang, C. Zhou, Q. Z. Sheng, H. Xiong, and
 L. Akoglu, “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection with
 deep learning,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
 vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 12 012–12 038, 2021.
[29] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, G. Feng, and X. Li, “Practical cyber attack
 detection with continuous temporal graph in dynamic network system,”
 IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2024.
[30] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
 Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 6840–
 6851, 2020.
[31] J. Wolleb, F. Bieder, R. Sandkühler, and P. C. Cattin, “Diffusion models
 for medical anomaly detection,” in International Conference on Medical
 image computing and computer-assisted intervention. Springer, 2022,
 pp. 35–45.
[32] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “Anoddpm:
 Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
 simplex noise,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 650–656.
[33] Z. Kong, W. Ping, J. Huang, K. Zhao, and B. Catanzaro, “Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for audio synthesis,” arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2009.09761, 2020.
[34] J. M. L. Alcaraz and N. Strodthoff, “Diffusion-based time series imputation and forecasting with structured state space models,” arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2208.09399, 2022.
[35] C. Xiao, Z. Gou, W. Tai, K. Zhang, and F. Zhou, “Imputation-based timeseries anomaly detection with conditional weight-incremental diffusion
 models,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
 Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023, pp. 2742–2751.
[36] Y. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Ma, Y. Liu, R. Ding, B. Li, S. He, S. Rajmohan,
 Q. Lin, and D. Zhang, “Imdiffusion: Imputed diffusion models for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.00754,
 2023.
[37] J. Zeng, X. Liu, and Z. Li, “Radio anomaly detection based on improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” IEEE Communications
 Letters, 2023.
[38] I. Cohen, Y. Huang, J. Chen, J. Benesty, J. Benesty, J. Chen, Y. Huang,
 and I. Cohen, “Pearson correlation coefficient,” Noise reduction in
 speech processing, pp. 1–4, 2009.
[39] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric
 dynamic thresholding,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
 international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2018,
 pp. 387–395.
[40] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. H. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly
 detection,” Acm Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, vol. 6,
 no. 1, pp. 1–39, 2012.
[41] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schonborn, and S. Roberts, “Anomaly
 detection for time series using vae-lstm hybrid model,” IEEE, 2020.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.