IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 3723

 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection Using
 Learnable Spatial-Temporal Graph Ordinary
 Differential Equations Network
 Shiming He , Qingqing Guo , Keyao Feng, Diqing Liang , Kun Xie , Member, IEEE,
 and Pradip Kumar Sharma , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Multivariate time series anomaly detection (MTSAD) Index Terms—Multivariate time series, graph neural networks,
plays a critical role in the Internet of Things (IoT) by identifying IoT security, anomaly detection, spatial-temporal graph ordinary
malfunctions and attacks. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have differential equation network, graph structure learning.
been widely employed in MTSAD to capture spatial features but
require predefined and explicit graph structures. Graph Structure
Learning (GSL) addresses this limitation by jointly learning the I. INTRODUCTION
graph structure and downstream tasks. However, existing GSLbased MTSAD methods fail to effectively leverage prior knowledge N THE Internet of Things (IoT), attacks can cause physical
and struggle with insufficient GNN depth, limiting their ability
to capture long-range dependencies. To address these challenges,
we propose a multivariate time series anomaly detection method
 I damages to life-dependent physical processes. IoT attack detection approaches typically analyze three primary data sources:
based on a learnable spatio-temporal graph ordinary differential sensor data [1], network traffic [2], [3], [4], and Supervisory
equation network (STGODE), named MAD-ODE. Our approach Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) execution context [5].
leverages hybird graph learning, which includes two types of graph Among these, sensor data directly reflects deviations in observed
structures: a static similarity graph and a learnable graph. The physical states from expected behaviors, making it a critical
static similarity graph is constructed using prior knowledge and
provides a stable, interpretable representation of sensor depenresource for detecting anomalies. Various sensors continuously
dencies. In contrast, the learnable graph captures complex re- generate large volumes of time series data to monitor the critical
lationships between sensors by optimizing its structure through infrastructures. This data, collected from multiple sensors, is
backpropagation. This hybird graph learning effectively incorpo- referred to as multivariate time series (MTS). Abnormal changes
rates both prior knowledge and learned dependencies, ensuring in MTS often indicate not only system attacks but also equiprobust and flexible modeling of sensor relationships. Furthermore,
we design a STGODE predictor, which operates on both graph
 ment failures. If these anomalies are not detected and mitigated
structures and employs continuous graph convolutional networks, promptly, they can lead to catastrophic system failures, resulting
enabling it to capturing long-range spatio-temporal dependencies in significant economic losses [6], [7]. Given the importance of
for forecasting the next timestamp. Extensive experiments con- timely anomaly detection, this paper focuses on sensor data, as
ducted on five datasets demonstrate that MAD-ODE achieves the it offers a direct and reliable means of monitoring deviations in
best average performance and maintains stable results compared
to existing methods.
 physical processes.
 For example, the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed
 consists of six interconnected processes (P1–P6): raw water supply and storage, chemical dosing, ultrafiltration (UF),
 Received 20 March 2025; revised 23 November 2025; accepted 30 Novem- dechlorination, reverse osmosis (RO), and RO permeate transber 2025. Date of publication 4 December 2025; date of current version 12 fer and UF backwash, as shown in Fig. 1. Each process is
March 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62025201 and Grant 62272062, in part by the equipped with several sensors, which are named based on their
Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province under Grant corresponding functions and processes. For instance, the sen-
2023RC3139, and in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province sor AIT-202 monitors the level of contaminants in the water.
under Grant 2025JJ50373. (Corresponding author: Kun Xie.)
 Shiming He, Qingqing Guo, Keyao Feng, and Diqing Liang are with Initially, the value of AIT-202 exceeded 7.05. However, at
the School of Computer Science and Technology and the Hunan Provin- 12:04:10 on 28 June 2015, an attacker manipulated the sencial Key Laboratory of Intelligent Processing of Big Data on Trans- sor value and set it to 6. This malicious action caused the
portation, Changsha University of Science and Technology, Changsha
410114, China (e-mail: smhe_cs@csust.edu.cn; guoqingqing@stu.csust.edu.cn; chemical dosing pump P-203 to shut down, thereby disrupting
kyfeng@stu.csust.edu.cn). the chemical dosing process and adversely impacting water
 Kun Xie is with the College of Computer Science and Electronics Engineering, quality. Therefore, multivariate time series anomaly detection
the Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of “Fusion Computing of Supercomputing and Artificial Intelligence,”, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China (MTSAD) plays an essential role in ensuring the reliability and
(e-mail: xiekun@hnu.edu.cn). security of IoT systems [8].
 Pradip Kumar Sharma is with the Department of Computing Sci- In IoT systems, sensors are interdependent and interact with
ence, University of Aberdeen, AB24 3FX Aberdeen, U.K. (e-mail:
Pradip.sharma@abdn.ac.uk). one another. Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) [9] have
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3640165 been introduced into MTSAD to capture the relationships
 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3724 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 1. Example of an IoT anomaly on a Water Treatment System. The Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed consists of six interconnected processes (P1–P6).
Each process is equipped with several sensors, which are named based on their corresponding functions and processes. For instance, the sensor AIT-202 monitors
the level of contaminants in the water. Initially, the value of AIT-202 exceeded 7.05. However, at 12:04:10 on 28 June 2015, an attacker manipulated the sensor
value and set it to 6. This malicious action caused the chemical dosing pump P-203 to shut down, thereby disrupting the chemical dosing process and adversely
impacting water quality.

between sensors. However, GNNs require an explicit graph node representations by merely increasing the number
structure, which is typically constructed using domain knowl- of layers. Practical evidence shows that GCNs typically
edge. Existing GNN-based anomaly detection methods, such as achieve their best performance with just two layers, as
MTAD-TF [10], MTAD-GAT [11], Arvalus [12], MDGAT [13], deeper GCNs suffer from the over-smoothing problem.
DVGCRN [14], and GReLeN [15], rely on fixed graph structures Over-smoothing causes all node representations to
designed by experts. Unfortunately, in real-world scenarios, sen- converge to the same value, rendering deeper GCNs
sor dependencies or graph structures are often hidden, difficult ineffective. These limitations severely restrict the depth
to infer, or expensive to acquire. of GCNs, making it challenging to capture rich spatial
 Graph Structure Learning (GSL) [16] offers a promising solu- features and long-distance dependencies, ultimately
tion for these challenges when expert knowledge is unavailable, hindering anomaly detection performance.
sensor dependencies are unknown, or access costs are pro- To address these challenges, we propose MAD-ODE, a
hibitive [17]. GSL learns an optimal graph structure to capture novel framework to enhance MTSAD by dynamically learning
the dependencies between sensors and align with downstream graph structures and modeling long-distance dependencies using
anomaly detection tasks. Although GSL-based methods have spatio-temporal GCNs based on ordinary differential equations
shown potential in learning sensor relationships [18], existing (ODEs). The key contributions of MAD-ODE are summarized
GSL-based MTSAD methods [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], as follows:
[25], [26], [27], [28], [29], [30], [31], [32], [33] face the follow- r Enhanced representation through hybrid graph learning:
ing challenges: To better capture and enrich the dependencies between
 r Existing methods focus solely on graph structure learn- sensors, we exploit two kinds of graph structures: a static,
 ing and fail to utilize partial known information: Current knowledge-driven similarity graph and a fully parame-
 GSL-based anomaly detection methods primarily rely on terized learnable graph. This hybrid graph learning sigunknown graph structures during the learning process, nificantly enhances the model’s representational capacity,
 ignoring the potential benefits of incorporating partially leveraging both learned and prior knowledge.
 known information. As a result, these methods engage r Capturing long-distance spatio-temporal dependencies:
 in a largely blind learning process, leading to suboptimal We introduce spatio-temporal graph ODE network
 outcomes. (STGODE) instead of discrete GCNs, which operates on
 r Existing methods suffer from insufficient depth in both the static similarity graph and the learned graph for
 graph neural networks, limiting their ability to prediction and anomaly detection. This approach effeccapture long-distance dependencies between sensors: tively captures long-distance spatio-temporal dependen-
 Most GSL-based anomaly detection methods employ cies with continuous-time model, improving the model’s
 spatio-temporal prediction models that separately model resilience and enabling more accurate and robust multispatial and temporal patterns without accounting for variate time series predictions.
 their interactions, which significantly limits their r Extensive evaluation on real-world datasets: We conrepresentational capacity. Furthermore, Graph Convo- ducted comprehensive experiments on five publicly availlutional Networks (GCNs) struggle to achieve deep able real-world datasets. MAD-ODE achieves the best
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3725

 average performance and maintains stable results com- Beyond LSTM, other recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are
 pared to existing methods. This underscores the robustness also applied in MTSAD. For example, OmniAnomaly [39]
 and reliability of MAD-ODE across diverse datasets and aims to learn the normal representation of time series data,
 anomaly detection tasks. The code of this work is publicly and then calculate reconstruction errors to effectively identify
 available at https://github.com/AIOps-tech/MAD-ODE. anomalous points that deviate from the normal patterns, while
 The rest sections of this paper are arranged as fol- DAGMM [40] combines a deep self-encoding mechanism with
lows. Section II provides an overview of the related work. a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) to generate low-dimensional
Section III introduces some preliminary knowledge and defines representations and reconstruction errors for anomaly detection.
the problem. Section IV explains our proposed approach in Neural ordinary differential equations (ODEs) [41] define a
detail, including a general overview and the functionality of in- vector field, enabling the continuous transformation of hidden
dividual components. In Section V, we analyze the performance states. As an emerging family of neural networks, Neural ODEs
and efficiency of the model through extensive experiments. have demonstrated significant potential in modeling the dynam-
Finally, our work is concluded with a summary of our findings ics of temporal data. Motivated by this, models such as LSTMand a discussion on future work in Section VI. ODE and latent-ODE [42] integrate the strengths of LSTM,
 VAE, and Neural ODEs to effectively detect anomalies in MTS
 data, addressing challenges posed by sparsity and irregularity.
 II. RELATED WORK Recently, diffusion models have gained attention in MTS
 In addition to MTS sensor data, network traffic and SCADA anomaly detection due to their generative capabilities. For inexecution context are also utilized to enhance the safety and stance, MadSGM [43] utilizes the probability flow ODEs of
security of IoT systems. For instance, Kitsune [2], EULER [3], score-based generative models to synthesize samples and idenand HyperVision [4] focus on network traffic and encrypted traf- tify anomalies. Similarly, TimeADDM [44], a diffusion-based
fic analysis for intrusion detection in IoT environments. These anomaly detection framework, accelerates the reverse denoismethods have demonstrated high effectiveness in traffic-based ing process by employing an ODE solver, efficiently recoveranomaly detection. On the other hand, SCAPHY [5] combines ing latent features from noise to enhance anomaly detection
SCADA execution context with physical sensor states to address performance.
security issues in industrial control and cyber-physical systems. While these methodologies are rooted in temporal features,
By integrating these complementary data sources, SCAPHY they often do not take account of the intricate correlations
provides a comprehensive approach to detecting and mitigating inherent in time series data [19].
threats in complex industrial environments.
 Research on MTSAD can be categorized into three principal B. Spatial Feature-Based Anomaly Detection
classes. The first class primarily utilizes temporal features to
 Spatial feature-based methods leverage the relationships bedetect anomalies, whereas the second class focuses on the spatial
 tween sensors to enhance anomaly detection. GNNs, particfeatures of MTS. The third class addresses anomaly detection
 ularly Graph Attention Networks (GATs), are pivotal for exin cases where the spatial relationships are unknown.
 tracting features from graph-structured data, capturing both
 inter-sensor relationships and time-varying dependencies. For
A. Temporal Feature-Based Anomaly Detection instance, MTAD-TF [10] combines multi-scale convolution
 networks with GAT to model temporal and spatial patterns,
 Temporal feature-based methods focus on capturing sequenwhile MTAD-GAT [11] leverages GAT to uncover correlations
tial patterns in time series data. Among these, Long Short-Term
 among univariate time series and their temporal dependencies,
Memory (LSTM) networks have been widely adopted due to
 integrating prediction and reconstruction for anomaly detection.
their ability to model temporal dependencies. For example,
 Similarly, Arvalus [12] models system components as nodes and
LSTM-NDT [34] leverages LSTM to achieve superior predictive
 their interdependencies as edges, improving anomaly detection
performance while maintaining system interpretability by emprecision. MDGAT [13] employs multi-head dynamic attention
ploying a nonparametric, dynamic, and unsupervised thresholdto capture sensor dependencies across temporal and spatial
ing technique for anomaly detection. In contrast, MSCRED [35]
 domains. DVGCRN [14] focuses on uncertain interrelations
constructs a multi-scale feature matrix and uses conv-LSTM
 in MTS data using reconstruction-based anomaly detection.
neural architectures to encode inter-sensor correlations, enabling
 Lastly, GReLeN [15] utilizes Variational Autoencoders (VAE)
anomaly detection and diagnosis via a residual feature matrix.
 and Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN) to learn relationships
Additionally, MAD-GAN [36] employs LSTM as the backbone
 in MTS data, reconstruct graphs, and detect anomalies.
within a Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) framework.
 Although GNNs are effective in modeling spatial relation-
LSTM-DAE [37] proposes a two-stage framework, first idenships, they rely on predefined graph structures, which are often
tifying outlier candidates using operational cycle signals and
 unavailable or expensive to obtain in real-world scenarios.
then analyzing temporal coherence in sensor data to detect
abnormalities. In contrast, LSTM-VAE [38] incorporates multi-
 C. Unknown Spatial Relationship-Based Anomaly Detection
modal observations and temporal dependencies into a latent
space, reconstructs distributions, and evaluates anomalies using When explicit spatial relationships are unavailable, GSL proreconstruction-based scores. vides a solution by learning the underlying graph structure
3726 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

directly from the data. GSL-based methods can be broadly intermittent water supply, and halting of chemical dosing to
categorized into node feature-based similarity approaches and raw water. For example, an attacker may target the elevated
fully parameterized approaches [45]. reservoir (e.g., 2_LT_002) by manipulating the tank’s draining
 Node feature-based similarity approaches model graph struc- and filling speeds. Additionally, the attacker could alter the
tures by computing node-wise similarity using metric learn- readings of water quality sensors (e.g., 1_AIT_001), causing the
ing functions, such as cosine similarity or dot product. These raw water tank to drain unnecessarily. These coordinated actions
methods rely on the inherent features of nodes to measure can disrupt the normal operation of the system and compromise
their pairwise relationships. GDN [19] learns inter-sensor re- its safety and reliability.
lationships based on adaptive node features to detect anoma- We assume that adversaries cannot manipulate their behavior
lies from expected distributions. HGTMAD [20] integrates to evade detection, as the primary target of these attacks involves
GCNs and transformers to extract spatial and temporal fea- physical processes. Unlike purely cyber attacks, physical attacks
tures, while FuSAGNet [21] models interrelations using a fused inherently produce observable changes in sensor data, making
sparse self-encoder graph for anomaly predictions and recon- them detectable when effective anomaly detection mechanisms
structions. TS-GAT [22] leverages prior data knowledge to are in place. This assumption simplifies the threat model by
constrain graph learning, and methods like MEGA [23] and focusing on identifying deviations in physical system behaviors
DPGLAD [24] adopt unidirectional graph learning. Addition- caused by malicious activities. The sensor data collected for
ally, GSC-MAD [25] employs graph updating with smooth and training represents benign states without the presence of attacks.
sparse constraints, while ACGSL [26] creates dynamic graph This ensures that the model learns normal system behavior and
representations through subsequence-based learning. can effectively detect anomalies caused by malicious activities.
 In contrast, fully parameterized methods treat each element
of the adjacency matrix as a learnable parameter. This param-
 B. Multivariate Time Series
eterization allows the model to directly optimize the graph
structure, providing greater flexibility to capture complex and Multivariate time series data consists of a large number of
latent relationships within the graph. GTA [27] use transformers regularly spaced and uninterrupted samples, which are characfor predictions, identifying anomalies by evaluating the disparity terized by N indicators and M timestamps. It is denoted by
between predicted and actual values. GLAD [28] combines X = (x1 , x2 , . . ., xM )T ∈ RM ×N . The i-th indicator is defined
GATs with transformers to extract global and local features, MG- as xi = (xi1 , xi2 , . . ., xiM ). The t-th timestamp encompasses N
CLAD learns inter- and intra-signal correlations using directed indicator values, which is defined as xt = (x1t , x2t , . . ., xN
 t ) .
 T

graphs, and MEGLAD [29] employs multiple GSL variations for The history window on timestamp t with length ω is defined as
diverse correlations. Lastly, GSLAD [33] uses diffusion graph a subsequence Xt = (xt−ω , xt−ω+1 , . . ., xt−1 )T ∈ Rω×N .
convolution networks to detect anomalies. For anomaly detection, when the label yt is 1, it means that
 Node feature-based similarity methods often rely on simple there is an anomaly at timestamp t. When the label yt is 0, it
K-nearest neighbors (KNN) graphs with degree constraints, means that timestamp t is normal.
whereas fully parameterized GSL methods provide greater
flexibility. However, transformer-based methods such as GTA,
 C. Graph Structure Learning
GLAD, and MGCLAD significantly increase computational
complexity, which can be a limiting factor in large-scale For a given multivariate time series X ∈ RM ×N , the purpose
applications. of graph structure learning is to construct a graph G = (V, E)
 and its corresponding graph topology or adjacency matrix AL ∈
 III. THREAT MODEL AND PROBLEM DEFINITION RN ×N . Nodes (V ) in the graph are the sensors that produce
 the indicators, and the hidden relationships between sensors are
 This paper focuses on anomaly detection in MTS of sensor considered as edges (E).
data. Below, we first give the threat model and define the fundamental concepts of MTS, graph structure learning and hybird AL = GSL(X), (1)
graph learning-based MTSAD.
 where GSL() indicates graph structure learning function. The
A. Threat Model binary adjacency matrix (AL ) stores the edge information in
 We adopt a threat model similar to those used in existing works the graph. AL i,j is 1, which indicates an edge between node i
on MTS of sensor data in industrial IoT, such smart water plant. and node j. On the contrary, AL i,j is 0, which indicates no edge
In this model, the attacker can maliciously manipulate critical between node i and node j.
components such as the motorized valve, flow indication trans- The constructed graph is subsequently fed into the downmitter, pump, and consumers, or directly modify sensor readings. stream anomaly detection model, enabling a joint update of
These attacks can lead to severe physical consequences, in- parameters in both the detection model and the graph structure
cluding overflow of the primary tank, increased chemical levels learning model. Through this process, the graph structure is
in the water, manipulation of tank draining and filling speeds, iteratively refined. This iterative parameter update scheme endisruption of water supply to consumers, contamination-induced sures that the graph structure progressively adapts to the specific
drainage of the primary grid, water leakage and pipe bursts, requirements of the downstream anomaly detection task.
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3727

 IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
 A. Overview
 To enrich and exploit the dependencies between sensors while
 capturing long-distance spatio-temporal relationships, we propose MAD-ODE.
 MAD-ODE exploits hybrid graph learning, integrating a
 fully parameterized learnable graph with a static, knowledgedriven similarity graph. This hybrid graph learning enhances
 the model’s representational capacity by leveraging both learned
Fig. 2. The framework of hybird graph learning-based multivariate time series and prior knowledge. Consequently, MAD-ODE comprises two
anomaly detection. key graph components: the static similarity graph structure
 generator and the graph structure learner.
 To effectively model long-distance spatio-temporal dependencies, MAD-ODE employs a continuous-time model
 STGODE as the predictor, replacing traditional discrete GCNs.
D. Hybird Graph Learning-Based Multivariate Time Series
 STGODE operates on both the static similarity graph and the
Anomaly Detection
 learned graph and to predict future values. The prediction errors
 Hybrid graph learning-based MSTAD operates in a semi- are then used as anomaly scores.
unsupervised manner (only normal time series instances are MAD-ODE consists of four key modules: the static similargiven in the training set). Hybrid graph learning incorporates two ity graph structure generator, the graph structure learner, the
types of graph structures: the static similarity graph (AS ) and the STGODE [46] predictor, and the anomaly score and threshold
learnable graph (AL ), as shown in Fig. 2. The static similarity selection module, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
graph AS is constructed based on similarities derived from the r Static similarity graph structure generator: This module
raw data, providing a stable and interpretable representation of generates a static graph structure based on cosine similarity
relationships among nodes. In contrast, the learnable graph AL is between nodes (indicators), denoted as ACOS . It calculates
generated through GSL, enabling the model to adaptively cap- the cosine distance between indicators and selects the top-k
ture complex dependencies. Given the historical subsequence most similar nodes as neighbors for each node. The fixed
Xt , the model leverages both graph structures to predict the cosine graph structure provides a stable and complemensubsequent value x̂t . The prediction error between the actual tary graph structure to the learned graph structure, enhancvalue xt and the predicted value x̂t is treated as the anomaly ing the model’s robustness and improving the accuracy of
score, denoted as st . An anomaly is deemed to have occurred anomaly detection.
at timestamp t if the anomaly score st exceeds a predefined r Graph structure learner: This module generates a learnthreshold T . able graph structure, denoted as AF P M . Firstly, the fully
 The process can be formally described as follows: parameterized graph structure learner treats each element
 of the adjacency matrix as an independent and learnable parameter. In addition, the graph learning process is guided by
 AS = Similarity(X), (2) a dynamic time warping (DTW) distance [47] prior graph.
 The DTW prior graph effectively measures the similarity
 x̂t = f (Xt , AS , AL ), (3) between time series by capturing delay correlations and
 st = ϕ(xt , x̂t ), (4) ensuring invariance to time shifts.
 
 r STGODE predictor: This module predicts the next times-
 1, if st > T, tamp value in the time series with the static graph ACOS
 ŷt = (5)
 0, if st ≤ T, and the learned graph AF P M . It uses a continuous GCN
 with residual connections to address the issue of excessive
 smoothing in traditional GCNs, which can cause node
where Similartiy() indicates the similarity function, f () denotes representations to converge to identical values. The prethe prediction function, x̂t represents the prediction value of xt dictor takes sub-sequences of the multivariate time series
at timestamp t, ϕ is the function used to calculate the anomaly (generated using a sliding window), and the adjacency
score, and T stands for the threshold. matrices of the static graph and the learned graph as input
 This hybrid approach effectively combines prior knowledge to predict the value at the next timestamp.
(captured by AS ) and dynamically learned relationships (cap- r Anomaly scores and threshold selection: This module identured by AL ) to enhance the detection of anomalies in complex tifies anomalies based on the prediction error. Anomaly
multivariate time series. By leveraging these complementary scores are derived from the prediction error between the
graph structures and prediction task, the MSTAD framework predicted values and the ground truth. A higher anomaly
achieves robust and accurate anomaly detection without requir- score indicates a higher likelihood of an anomaly. A
ing labeled data. threshold is selected to distinguish between normal and
3728 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 3. The framework of MAD-ODE. MAD-ODE consists of four key modules: the static similarity graph structure generator, the graph structure learner, the
STGODE predictor, and the anomaly score and threshold selection module. MAD-ODE exploits hybrid graph learning, which integrates a fully parameterized
learnable graph with a static, knowledge-driven similarity graph, enhancing the model’s representational capacity. MAD-ODE employs STGODE as the predictor
to effectively model long-distance spatio-temporal dependencies. STGODE operates on both the learned graph and the static similarity graph to predict future
values. The prediction errors are then used as anomaly scores.

 anomalous sub-sequences. If the anomaly score exceeds using cosine distance. The formula for cosine similarity is:
 the threshold, the prediction timestamp is classified as an
 anomaly; otherwise, it is considered normal.   xi • xj
 cos xi , xj = , (6)
 In the following subsections, we give the details of each xi  • xj 
components.
 where cos(·) denotes cosine distance calculation function, r
 denotes dot product,  ·  denotes magnitude, and xi denotes
B. Static Similarity Graph Structure Generator i-th sensor values.
 The purpose of this module is to leverage known information For each sensor i, the module selects the top k most similar
from the raw time series data to construct a static graph structure sensors as its neighbors. k can adjust the sparsity of the static
ACOS . This graph captures the relationships (similarities) be- graph’s adjacency matrix and reduce the training cost.
tween sensors, which is essential for downstream tasks such as   
anomaly detection. It calculates the similarity between sensors ACOS
 i,j = 1, j ∈ topk cos xi , xj , (7)
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3729

where ACOS
 i,j represents the connection between sensors i and j, we utilize the DTW distance [47] to construct prior graph and
 ˙
and topk() selects the top k most similar sensors for each sensor guide the graph learning process.
i. Given two time series Y = (y1 , y2 , . . ., yn ) and Z =
 The static similarity graph structure offers a stable and in- (z1 , z2 , . . ., zm ), a cost matrix D ∈ Rn×m is introduced, where
terpretable representation of the relationships between sensors. Di,j = |yi − zj |.
This static graph serves as a complementary component to the
 Dc (i, j) = Di,j + min(Dc (i − 1, j), Dc (i, j − 1),
dynamically learned graph structure discussed in Section IV-C,
providing a robust foundation for capturing inherent sensor Dc (i − 1, j − 1)), (10)
dependencies.
 DTW(Y, Z) = Dc (n, m), (11)
C. Graph Structure Learner where Dc is the cumulative cost matrix computed by dynamic
 Graph structure learner obtains a suitable graph A FPM
 for programming.
anomaly detection task by jointly training with the downstream The DTW distance is used to compute the similarity matrix
task. It consists of two main parts: the fully parameterized graph S DT W ∈ RN ×N for all pairs of sensors:
structure learner and the DTW prior graph. Firstly, the fully DT W
 Si,j = DTW(xi , xj ), (12)
parameterized graph structure learner treats each element of the
adjacency matrix as an independent and learnable parameter. where xi , xj represent the time series of sensors i and j,
In addition, the graph learning process is guided by the DTW respectively.
distance prior graph ADT W . This guidance allows the model The adjacency matrix of DTW prior graph ADT W is conto incorporate meaningful structural information, improving its structed by thresholding the similarity matrix:
ability to model complex spatio-temporal dependencies.
 
 1) Fully parameterized graph structure learner: It is a flexible 1, Si,j
 DT W
 <ε
 DT W
 Ai,j = , (13)
learner and treats the elements in adjacency matrix as free 0, otherwise
learnable parameters. These parameters are updated through
backpropagation, enabling the generation of a customized and where ε is a parameter to determine the sparsity of adjacency
optimal graph structure tailored to the specific requirements matrix.
of downstream tasks. However, since adjacency matrices are
typically binary (composed of 0 s and 1 s), gradient-based D. STGODE Predictor
optimization becomes challenging.
 To address this, the Gumbel-Softmax technique [48] is em- Traditional GCNs adopt a discrete formulation, where inforployed to convert discrete parameters into continuous ones, mation is aggregated from n-order neighbors using n layers.
enabling backpropagation. The Gumbel-Softmax trick is used However, such discrete GCNs face two significant limitations:
to sample from a categorical distribution while maintaining (1) they suffer from over-smoothing when stacking multiple
differentiability. The process of Gumbel-Softmax is defined as layers, and (2) they struggle to effectively capture long-distance
follows: dependencies due to limited receptive fields.
 To address these issues, we employ the STGODE model [46]
 g = − log(− log(u)), u  Uniform(0, 1), (8) as the predictor. Unlike traditional Spatio-Temporal GCNs,
    STGODE leverages temporal convolutional networks and a conexp log π1i,j +g i,j /τ tinuous GCN formulation based on ODEs. This continuous forz1i,j =    , (9) mulation allows the model to capture long-range spatio-temporal
 v∈{0,1} exp log πvi,j +g i,j /τ dependencies more effectively. The STGODE predictor operwhere u represents the sample extracted from a Uniform(0,1) ates on both the learned graph and the static similarity graph,
distribution, g i,j follows a Gumbel distribution, and π1i,j denotes combining the advantages of dynamically learned structural
the values of the i-th row and j-th column of the probability information and stable, knowledge-driven priors to enhance
matrix π1 ∈ RK×K which signifies the probability that node i is prediction accuracy and robustness.
connected to node j in the graph. Here, τ serves as a temperature 1) Neural ODEs: Neural ODEs [41] consider a continuousparameter. As τ approaches 0, z1i,j tends towards 0 or 1, making time (depth) model,
the distribution more discrete.  t  t
 dx
 Ultimately, the i-th row and j-th column in the adjacency x(t) = x(0) + dτ = x(0) + f (x(τ ), τ )dτ, (14)
 0 dτ 0
matrix AF PM
 i,j are assigned the value of z1i,j , causing AF PM
 i,j to
 i,j
be set to 1 with the probability of π1 . where f (x(τ ), τ ) will be parameterised by a neural network to
 2) DTW prior graph: Due to delay correlation in time se- model the hidden dynamic. We can backpropagate the process
ries, there may be noise in the prior graph by the Euclidean through an ODE solver without any internal operations, which
distance [49]. Compared with the Euclidean distance and cosine allows to build it just as a block for the whole neural network.
distance, DTW distance can capture delay correlations and en- 2) Continuous GCN with ODE: Inspired by Neural ODEs,
sure invariance to time shifts. Therefore, according to Ref. [32], the continuous GCN with ODE can be represented in tensor
3730 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

formate [50] as follows: To enhance the caliber of the fully parameterized graph struc-
  s+1 ture, we use DTW prior graph to guide the graph learning.
 H(s) = H0 ×1 Aτ ×2 U τ ×3 W τ dτ, (15) The graph learning loss lossg is introduced to improve the
 0 quality of the fully parameterized graph structure (AF P M ) by
 α 1 1 incorporating the DTW distance graph (ADT W ). It is defined as
 A= (I + D− 2 AD− 2 ), (16)
 2 the cross-entropy between the two adjacency matrices:
  
where H0 denotes the initial input, ×i denotes the tensor matrix lossg = −ADT W
 log AF PM
 − 1 − ADT W
 i,j i,j i,j
multiplication on mode i, W and U are learnable parameter ij
matrices, and s is a continuous variable of layer n in discrete  
GCN. D is the degree matrix of A, A is the regularized adjacency × log 1 − AF PM
 i,j . (21)
matrix, and α ∈ (0, 1) is a hyperparameter. The ODE formula- The total loss function combines the prediction loss and the
tion allows the model to capture long-distance dependencies and graph learning loss, weighted by a regularization parameter.
avoid over-smoothing by integrating information continuously
across layers. The ODE can get an analytical solution by the loss = lossp + λ1 lossg , (22)
ODESolver. where paramete λ1 is the regularization amplitude parameter
 3) STGODE structure: A STGODE block [46] consists of two that controls the influence of the graph learning loss on the total
temporal convolutional networks (TCN) layers and an ODES- loss.
olver with a “sandwich” structure. It can extract spatio-temporal
features and capture long-distance dependencies. F. Anomaly Scores and Threshold Selection
 
 Xt ,l = 0 The purpose of anomaly detection is to identify the abnormal
 l
 Htcn = , (17)
 σ(W l ∗dl Htcn
 l−1
 ) , l = 1, 2, . . . , L situation that deviates from the normal behavior by comparing the ground truth and prediction. Initially, anomaly scores
 dH(s)
 H(s) = ODESolver , H0 , s , (18) are computed separately for every sensor. Subsequently, these
 ds individual scores are aggregated to derive the anomaly scores
 dH(s) corresponding to each specific timestamp. Once the anomaly
 = H(s)×1 (A − I) + H(s)×2 (U − I) score at timestamp t exceeds the predetermined threshold, the
 ds
 system flags the corresponding timestamp as anomalous.
 + H(s)×3 (W − I) + H0 , (19)
 For each sensor i at timestamp t, the prediction error Erri (t)
where Xt is the input of TCN, Htcn l
 is the output of the l-th is calculated as the absolute difference between the ground truth
layer of TCN, W denotes the l-th convolution kernel, dl = 2l−1
 l (xit ) and the predicted value (xit ) :
denotes exponential dilation rate. Erri (t) = xit − xit (23)
 To take full advantage of known dependency and learned
dependency, we design a STGODE predictor with hybrid graph This error quantifies how much the predicted value deviates
learning (two kinds of graphs) for predicting future behavior: from the true observed value. Larger errors indicate a potential
the static similarity graph and the learned graph. The input of anomaly.
the STGODE predictor consists of the above static and learned To maintain uniformity among sensors with varying value
adjacency matrices ACOS , AF P M and the multivariate time scales, the prediction errors undergo a standardization proceseries subsequence Xt . After passing two STGODE layers, dure. This normalization rescales the errors into a standard
max-pooling aggregates information. Finally, the output is fed metric using the mean (μi ) and standard deviation (σi ) of the
into a multilayer perceptron (MLP) layer to obtain the final errors for sensor i:
single-step prediction result (xt ). Erri (t) − μi
 si (t) = (24)
 σi
E. Loss Function This step ensures that sensors with larger ranges do not dominate
 The total loss function includes two components: the predic- anomaly detection, enabling fair comparisons between sensors.
tion loss and the graph learning loss. To compute the overall anomaly score at a given timestamp
 The prediction loss lossp measures the discrepancy between t, the system selects the maximum normalized error across all
the predicted values and the ground truth for the MTS prediction sensors:
task. It is defined as the average absolute error (MAE) across all s(t) = max si (t) (25)
 i
sensors:
 K
 This approach assumes that the most anomalous sensor at a given
 1 timestamp determines the timestamp’s overall anomaly score.
 lossp = xi − xit , (20)
 K i=1 t Grid search technology is pivotal for determining the optimal
 threshold. In grid search, the upper and lower bounds of the
where xit and xit represent the prediction and the ground truth of threshold are defined as the maximum and minimum values
the i-th sensor at timestamp t, severally. of s(t), respectively. All possible thresholds are exhaustively
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3731

searched with a step size of 0.01. For each threshold, the resulting TABLE I
 DATASET DESCRIPTION
predictions are compared to the ground truth to compute the F1
score. The threshold yielding the highest F1 score is selected
as the optimal threshold. In addition, we use the point adjustment strategy for anomaly scores to improve anomaly detection
accuracy.

G. Complexity Analysis
 normal operations, while the remaining 4 days include multiple
 In the MAD-ODE framework, the construction of graph attack scenarios.
structures plays a critical role in determining the performance The Water Distribution (WADI) dataset is an extension of
and efficiency of the model. Therefore, we analyze the time the SWaT platform and represents a more comprehensive water
complexity of generating the static similarity graph, the DTW treatment, storage, and distribution. This dataset contains data
distance graph, and the learned graph. from 127 sensors and actuators, collected over 16 days. Of these,
 r Static Similarity Graph: The static similarity graph is
 14 days represent normal operations, while the remaining 2
 constructed based on the cosine similarity between nodes days simulate attack scenarios, making it suitable for anomaly
 (indicators). For a pair of sensors with a sequence length detection tasks.
 of M , the time complexity of cosine similarity is O(M ). The Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) dataset includes 55
 For a graph with N nodes, the cosine similarity must be indicators from 27 entities on NASA’s Mars rover, while the Soil
 computed for each pair of nodes. Since there are N × N Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) dataset contains 25 indicators
 node pairs, the time complexity of generating the static from 55 entities, representing soil and telemetry data collected
 similarity graph is O(N 2 M ). by NASA. Each dataset consists of a training subset and a testing
 r DTW Distance Graph: The DTW distance graph is consubset, with anomalies in both testing subsets explicitly labeled.
 structed by calculating the DTW similarity between pairs The sample interval for both datasets is set to 1 minute. To
 of sensors. For a pair of sensors with a sequence length of preserve privacy, the timestamp information has been removed.
 M , the time complexity of the DTW distance is O(M 2 ) In the MSL dataset, the training sequences of 27 entities range
 due to the need for dynamic programming to compute from 179 to 4048, while the testing sequences span from 1096
 the cumulative cost matrix. For N × N sensor pairs, the to 6100. Similarly, in the SMAP dataset, the training sequence
 overall time complexity for constructing the DTW distance lengths of 55 entities vary between 52 and 2621, and the testing
 graph is O(N 2 M 2 ). sequence lengths range from 7244 to 8640.1
 r Learned Graph: The fully parameterized graph structure
 The Server Machine Dataset (SMD) is a 5-week-long dataset
 treats each element of the adjacency matrix as a freely from a large Internet company collected and made publicly
 learnable parameter. The adjacency matrix is of size N × available [51]. It contains data from 28 server machines each
 N , and during training, the parameters are updated itera- one monitored by 38 metrics. SMD is divided into two subsets
 tively. The time complexity of updating these parameters of equal size: the first half is the training set and the second half
 is proportional to the number of parameters, resulting in a is the testing set.
 time complexity of O(N 2 ) for fully parameterized graph For the SWaT and WADI datasets, raw data is down-sampled
 structure learning. to a time resolution of 10 seconds. The median value within
 Combining these three components, the overall time com- each 10-second interval is extracted to ensure robustness against
plexity of generating the graph structures in the MAD-ODE noise. Anomalies in the SWaT and WADI datasets are tagged
framework is dominated by the DTW distance graph and is based on ground truth labels provided in the datasets.
O(N 2 M 2 ).
 B. Experimental Setup
 V. EXPERIMENT AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 1) Metrics: To evaluate the performance of the proposed
 method and compare it with baseline methods, three key metrics
A. Datasets are employed: precision (Prec), recall (Rec), and the F1 score
 In this section, five publicly available real-world datasets are (F1). These metrics are defined as follows:
utilized for evaluating the performance of the anomaly detection TP
framework. Key statistics about these datasets are summarized Prec = , (26)
 TP + FP
in Table I. All the training sets only include normal time series
 TP
instances. Below is a detailed description of each dataset: Rec = , (27)
 The Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) dataset originates from TP + FN
a water treatment test bench supervised by the Singapore Public Prec ∗ Rec
 F1 = 2 ∗ , (28)
Utilities Bureau. This dataset captures 11 days of continuous Prec + Rec
24-hour operation, during which network traffic and data from
51 sensors and actuators were recorded. The first 7 days represent 1 https://github.com/khundman/telemanom
3732 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

where TP, TN, FP, and FN are the number of true positives, true TABLE II
 METHOD PARAMETERS
negatives, false positives, and false negatives.
 2) Baselines: The proposed method is compared with 16
baseline methods, including machine learning and deep learning
approaches, to assess its effectiveness. Below is a summary of
these methods:
 r Autoencoder (AE): It reconstructs the input data using
 an autoencoder and uses the reconstruction error as the
 anomaly score.
 r Isolation Forest (IF): It is a tree-based anomaly detection
 algorithm that effectively identifies anomalies or outliers
 information loss. Additionally, it uses an extended prior
 in datasets that differ significantly from the majority.
 r DAGMM [40]: This method combines deep autoencoders graph generating method to adaptively select neighbors by
 enhancing the weights of highly correlated nodes.
 with Gaussian mixture models to capture the underlying r FuGLAD [31]: This method employs three kinds of typical
 distribution of normal data and identify anomalies based
 graph structure learners to capture as many relationship
 on reconstruction errors.
 r LSTM-NDT [34]: This method utilizes LSTM to capture types among sensors as possible and exploits the prior
 similarity to evaluate the importance of all learned graphs
 contextual information and dependencies in sequential data
 and adaptively learn the fusion weight instead of the direct
 for anomaly detection.
 r LSTM-VAE [38]: This method projects multimodal obser- average weight.
 r MSTGAD [32]: MSTGAD uses dynamic time warping
 vations and time dependencies into a latent space and redistance as prior knowledge to effectively capture delay
 constructs the expected distribution using an LSTM-based
 correlations and designs an ensemble predictor to ensure
 VAE.
 r MAD-GAN [36]: This method uses LSTM as the underly- high prediction accuracy and stable anomaly scores.
 3) Experimental Parameter Setting: The experimental paing model in a GAN framework to capture the time series
 rameter configurations are detailed in Table II. All experiments
 data’s temporal correlation.
 r OmniAnomaly [39] aims to learn the normal representation were conducted using Python 3.8, PyTorch 1.10, and CUDA
 version 11.3, on a server equipped with an Intel (R) Xeon
 of time series data, and then calculate reconstruction errors
 (R) Platinum 8255c CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.
 to effectively identify anomalous points that deviate from
 According to Ref. [19], the k in static graph is set to 10, window
 the normal patterns.
 r USAD [52]: This method trains an encoder–decoder frame- size w is set to 12. According to Ref. [32], the in DTW distance
 graph is set to 0.6.
 work in an adversarial manner to achieve fast and efficient
 4) Baseline Method Parameter Setting: For the baseline
 training.
 r MTAD-GAT [11]: This method treats the relationships methods, we set the sliding window size ω in GDN and FuSAG-
 Net to 5, and GTA to 60. The baseline is configured according
 between indicators as a complete graph and employs a GAT
 to the source code or open-source code.
 to detect anomalies.
 r GDN [19]: This method constructs a graph structure using
 pairwise cosine similarities between nodes, utilizes GAT
 to learn dependencies between time series and perform C. Detection Performance and Efficiency
 prediction. As shown in Table III, our method achieves either the best
 r FuSAGNet [21]: This method learns the graph structure or the second-best performance on individual datasets and
 using the pairwise cosine similarity between recursive consistently achieves the best average performance across all
 sensor embeddings. It obtains a sparse representation of datasets. This demonstrates the robustness and generalization
 the input data by a sparse autoencoder and integrates it capability of our approach in handling diverse anomaly detection
 into a GAT to perform sensor behavior prediction. tasks. While MGCLAD demonstrates the best performance on
 r GTA [27]: This method automatically learns the graph the WADI dataset, its performance is significantly weaker on
 structure through a direct approach and employs graph con- the other four datasets. Similarly, MSTGAD achieves superior
 volution combined with a transformer-based architecture results on the SWaT and SMAP datasets but performs poorly
 to capture temporal dependencies. on WADI. In contrast, our method introduces a hybrid graph
 r MGCLAD [29]: This method achieves anomaly detection learning approach that incorporates a static graph structure to
 by concurrently learning intra- and inter-signal graph struc- enhance the robustness of anomaly detection models. By levertures, capturing temporal context and dependencies be- aging the STGODE predictor, our approach effectively captures
 tween signals. It performs anomaly detection by comparing long-distance dependencies between sensors, producing more
 inputs and reconstructing outputs. representative predictions. This design not only improves the
 r MEGLAD [30]: This method employs an alternate mul- model’s adaptability to diverse datasets but also ensures stable
 tiple graph structure learning approach to capture sen- and accurate anomaly detection performance across varying
 sor relationships from various perspectives, minimizing scenarios. To filter false positives and enhance precision, our
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3733

 TABLE III
 PRECISION, RECALL, AND F1 SCORE ON THE DATASETS

 TABLE IV significantly reducing the time required for experimentation and
 PERFORMANCE AND EFFICIENCY ACROSS DATASETS
 enabling faster progress. We also include the inference time of
 our system in Table IV to provide a clear measurement of the
 overall detection latency, i.e., the time from anomaly onset to
 alarm generation. The most time-consuming component of the
 system is the ODEs module. This is due to the computational
 complexity involved in solving the equations to model dependencies in the data.

model could be further processed using density-aware clustering
or voxel-based neighborhood analysis [53], [54]. D. Ablation Experiment
 The performance of all methods on the WADI dataset is
 To validate the effectiveness of the hybrid graph learning
lower compared to other datasets. This is because the WADI
 (the static and learned graph structures), we conduct ablation
dataset has a longer sequence length, more indicators, and a
 experiments. First, the STGODE predictor is evaluated using
lower anomaly rate, as shown in Table I. However, on the WADI
 only the static graph (Only COS) or only the learned graph (Only
dataset, with the help of the static similarity graph structure
 FPM). Additionally, we introduce a self-adaptive graph learnand the graph structure learning module, we enrich and uncover
 ing structure (ADP) [55] to replace one of these components.
dependencies between sensors. By leveraging long-distance de-
 ADP+COS indicates that the STGODE predictor is supported
pendency relationships captured by the STGODE-based predicby both the static graph and the self-adaptive graph learning
tor, our method continues to demonstrate superior performance
 structure. Similarly, ADP+FPM means that the STGODE precompared to other baseline methods. This demonstrates that our
 dictor is supported by both the fully parameterized learned graph
method is effective in handling high-dimensional time series and
 and the self-adaptive graph learning structure.
scenarios with sample imbalance, making it suitable for practical
 The adjacency matrix of the self-adaptive graph is defined as
applications.
 follows:
 The performance metrics, Area Under the Curve (AUC) and
Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve (AUPR), are critical for
evaluating the predictive accuracy and precision of the model   
without the need for manual threshold setting. These metrics AADP = SoftMax ReLU E1 E2T , (29)
provide a robust and threshold-independent assessment of model
performance, making them particularly suitable for anomaly
detection tasks with imbalanced datasets. As shown in Table IV, where E1 , E2 ∈ RN ×e represent two node embedding dictiothe results show that all datasets achieve high AUC and AUPR naries initialized with learnable parameters.
values, indicating strong model performance across different The experimental results are presented in Table V. Using
data characteristics. only the static graph or the fully parameterized graph results
 As shown in Table IV, the training time required for all in a decline in model performance. This demonstrates that both
datasets is remarkably short, with a maximum of 30 epochs. graph structures are indispensable and play a critical role in
Specifically, the MSL dataset has the shortest training time, the model’s performance. Moreover, when either of these graph
while the WADI dataset requires the longest training time. structures is replaced with the self-adaptive graph learning struc-
Nevertheless, even for WADI, the training time of epoch is only ture, the model’s performance decreases. This further confirms
119.8 seconds. This efficiency in training is highly advantageous the effectiveness of our proposed static graph structure and fully
for experimental workflows and iterative model development, parameterized graph structure.
3734 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE V
 ABLATION EXPERIMENT

 TABLE VI
 PERFORMANCE WITH NOISE AND MISSING VALUES

Fig. 4. The impact of window size. Fig. 5. The impact of prediction weight parameter.

 F. Robustness
E. Parameter Influence
 To address concerns regarding the system’s performance un-
 To evaluate the stability of our method under different pa- der real-world conditions, we conduct experiments to evaluate
rameter settings, we analyze the impact of hyperparameters on the robustness of our anomaly detection framework. Specifically,
model performance. we introduce the following perturbations to simulate practical
 1) Window Size: In this experiment, we set the window size challenges. Gaussian noise with a standard deviation of 0.1 is
w to 6, 12, 15, 21, and 30. The performance of models with added to the sensor data to simulate measurement inaccuracies.
different window sizes is shown in Fig. 4. Portions of the data are randomly removed at rates of 1%, 2%,
 For the SMAP, MSL and SMD datasets, the window size has and 5% to mimic sensor outages or communication failures.
a negligible impact on the detection results. However, for the As shown in Table VI, the results demonstrate that the per-
SWaT and WADI datasets, increasing the window size tends to formance of our framework is largely unaffected by noise and
degrade the model’s performance. This is because larger window missing data in the MSL and SMD datasets. However, a slight
sizes may obscure short anomalies, making accurate detection performance degradation is observed in the SWaT, WADI, and
more challenging. SMAP datasets. These results highlight the robustness of our
 2) Graph Loss Regularization Parameter: We analyze the framework under typical real-world perturbations.
impact of the graph loss regularization parameter λ1 , which is set
to 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20, across the five datasets. The experimental
results are shown in Fig. 5. Excessively large values of λ1 can G. Case Study
lead to overfitting in the graph structure learning, negatively As shown in Fig. 6, we conduct a case study to reveal the
affecting the model’s performance. On the other hand, smaller meaning of the learned graph structure. Fig. 6 (Left)presents
values of λ1 tend to yield more stable experimental results. a subset of the graph structure learned by our method, while
Therefore, it is recommended to choose smaller values for the Fig. 6 (Right) displays the predicted results of the corresponding
graph loss regularization parameter. sensor values. Specifically, during the timestamps from 1180
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3735

Fig. 6. Left: Partial graph structure learned on SWaT dataset. Right: Understand the relationship between sensors with ground truth and prediction.

to 1237, sensor AIT-202 was subjected to an attack, which we [3] I. J. King and H. H. Huang, “Euler: Detecting network lateral movement via
highlighted in red in the graph. In the water treatment process, scalable temporal graph link prediction,” in Proc. 29th Annu. Netw. Distrib.
 Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Apr. 2022, pp. 1–36. [Online].
sensors interact with one another. Due to these interactions, Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/auto-draft-227/
the attack on AIT-202 caused the dosing pump P203 to cease [4] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
operation. As the subsequent water treatment steps progressed, in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. 30th Annu.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, Feb./Mar. 2023,
the permeability conductivity analyzer AIT-501 was ultimately pp. 1–18 [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndssaffected at timestamp 1530, as shown in Fig. 6 (Right). paper/detecting-unknown-encrypted-malicious-traffic-in-real-time-via-
 Our model accurately predicts the changes in AIT-501, flow-interaction-graph-analysis/
 [5] M. Ike, K. Phan, K. Sadoski, R. Valme, and W. Lee, “Scaphy: Detecting
demonstrating its effectiveness. Additionally, Fig. 6 (Left) pre- modern ICS attacks by correlating behaviors in SCADA and physical,”
cisely captures the dependency relationships among the three in Proc. 44th IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, San Francisco, CA, USA,
sensors involved in this case study. May 2023, pp. 20–37, doi: 10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179411].
 [6] S. He, Z. Li, J. Wang, and N. N. Xiong, “Intelligent detection
 for key performance indicators in industrial-based cyber-physical sys-
 VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK tems,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 5799–5809,
 Aug. 2021.
 In this work, we propose the multivariate time series anomaly [7] J. Liu et al., “A generic framework for finding special quadratic elements
 in data streams,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3269–3284,
detection method based on learnable STGODE. Our approach Aug. 2024.
employs an STGODE-based predictor with hybrid graph learn- [8] S. He et al., “Fine-grained multivariate time series anomaly detection in
ing, which integrates both the static graph structure and the iot,” Comput., Mater. Continua, vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 5027–5047, May 2023.
 [9] J. Zhou et al., “Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applicafully parameterized learned graph structure. This hybrid design tions,” AI Open, vol. 1, pp. 57–81, 2020.
enables the model to effectively capture long-distance dependen- [10] Q. He, Y. Zheng, C. Zhang, and H.-Y. Wang, “MTAD-TF: Multivariate
cies among sensors, accurately forecast future sensor behaviors, time series anomaly detection using the combination of temporal pattern
 and feature pattern,” Complexity, vol. 2020, pp. 1–9, 2020.
and significantly improve the F1 score. Compared to baseline [11] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
methods, MAD-ODE demonstrates superior and stable perfor- attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020,
mance in detecting anomalies across multivariate time series pp. 841–850.
 [12] D. Scheinert, A. Acker, L. Thamsen, M. K. Geldenhuys, and O. Kao,
data. By leveraging the complementary strengths of static and “Learning dependencies in distributed cloud applications to identify and
learnable graph structures, MAD-ODE ensures both robustness localize anomalies,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Workshop Cloud Intell., 2021,
and adaptability in complex IoT environments. In future work, pp. 7–12.
 [13] L. Zhou, Q. Zeng, and B. Li, “Hybrid anomaly detection via multihead
a promising direction is to incorporate false-positive filtering dynamic graph attention networks for multivariate time series,” IEEE
mechanisms as a post-processing step. We aim to extend this Access, vol. 10, pp. 40967–40978, 2022.
approach to diagnose anomalies in IoT systems, enabling a [14] W. Chen, L. Tian, B. Chen, L. Dai, Z. Duan, and M. Zhou, “Deep
 variational graph convolutional recurrent network for multivariate time
deeper understanding of their root causes and further enhancing series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022,
system reliability. pp. 3621–3633.
 [15] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
 REFERENCES Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
 [16] Y. Zhu et al., “A survey on graph structure learning: Progress and oppor-
 [1] S. He et al., “A joint matrix factorization and clustering scheme for tunities,” 2021, arXiv:2103.03036.
 irregular time series data,” Inf. Sci., vol. 644, 2023, Art. no. 119220. [17] D. Chai, L. Wang, and Q. Yang, “Bike flow prediction with multi-graph
 [2] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An en- convolutional networks,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGSPATIAL Int. Conf. Adv.
 semble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Geograph. Inf. Syst., 2018, pp. 397–400.
 25th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, [18] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for mul-
 Feb. 2018, pp. 1–15 [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-symposium. tivariate time series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas.,
 org/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/ndss2018_03A-3_Mirsky_paper.pdf vol. 73, 2024, Art. no. 2509510.
3736 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[19] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in [41] T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural
 multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, ordinary differential equations,” in Proc. 31st Annu. Conf. Adv. Neural
 pp. 4027–4035. Inf. Process. Syst., S. Bengio, H. M. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman,
[20] R. Gao, W. He, L. Yan, D. Liu, Y. Yu, and Z. Ye, “Hybrid graph transformer N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett, Eds., Montréal, Canada, Dec. 2018, pp.
 networks for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” J. Supercomput., 6572–6583.
 vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 642–669, 2024. [42] J. H. Fririksson and E. Ågren, “Neural ordinary differential equations for
[21] S. Han and S. S. Woo, “Learning sparse latent graph representations for anomaly detection,” Master Degree Thesis, Kungliga Tekniska högskolan,
 anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Jan. 4, 2022.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2977–2986. [43] H. Lim, S. Park, M. J. K. Lee, S. Lim, and N. Park, “MADSGM: Multivari-
[22] W. Zhang, P. He, C. Qin, F. Yang, and Y. Liu, “A graph attention ate anomaly detection with score-based generative models,” in Proc. 32nd
 network-based model for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., I. Frommholz, F. Hopfgartner, M.
 J. Supercomput., vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 8529–8549, 2024. M. Lee, M. Oakes, M. L. Zhang, and R. L. T. Santos, Eds., Birmingham,
[23] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet graph U.K., Oct. 2023, pp. 1411–1420.
 autoencoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. [44] R. Hu, X. Yuan, Y. Qiao, B. Zhang, and P. Zhao, “Unsupervised anomaly
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 2502911. detection for multivariate time series using diffusion model,” in Proc.
[24] S. He, G. Li, J. Wang, K. Xie, and P. Sharma, “UNI-directional graph IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Seoul, Republic of Korea,
 structure learning-based multivariate time series anomaly detection with Apr. 2024, pp. 9606–9610.
 dynamic prior knowledge,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern., vol. 16, pp. [45] Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, D. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Peng, and S. Pan, “Towards
 267–283, May 2024. unsupervised deep graph structure learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf.,
[25] Z. Zhang, Z. Geng, and Y. Han, “Graph structure change-based anomaly Lyon, France, Apr. 2022, pp. 1392–1403, doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512186.
 detection in multivariate time series of industrial processes,” IEEE Trans. [46] Z. Fang, Q. Long, G. Song, and K. Xie, “Spatial-temporal graph ODE
 Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6457–6466, Apr. 2024. networks for traffic flow forecasting,” in Proc. 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf.
[26] H. Pang et al., “Asymptotic consistent graph structure learning for mul- Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, Virtual Event, Singapore, Aug. 2021, pp.
 tivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., 364–373.
 vol. 73, 2024, Art. no. 2509510. [47] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
[27] Z. Chen, D. Chen, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and X. Cheng, “Learning graph for spoken word recognition,” IEEE Trans. Acoust., Speech, Signal Prostructures with transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detec- cess., vol. ASSP-26, no. 1, pp. 43–49, Feb. 1978.
 tion in iot,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 9179–9189, [48] E. Jang, S. Gu, and B. Poole, “Categorical reparameterization with
 Jun. 2022. gumbel-softmax,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, Toulon,
[28] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global-local association discrep- France, Apr. 2017, pp. 24–26. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
 ancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,” IEEE Internet forum?id=rkE3y85ee
 Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, Apr. 2024. [49] K. Choi, J. Yi, C. Park, and S. Yoon, “Deep learning for anomaly detection
[29] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multiview graph contrastive learning in time-series data: Review, analysis, and guidelines,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 for multivariate time-series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE Internet pp. 120043–120065, 2021.
 Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023. [50] L. A. C. Xhonneux, M. Qu, and J. Tang, “Continuous graph neural
[30] S. He, G. Li, Q. Guo, and K. Xie, “Multi-graph structure learning-based networks,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., Jul. 2020, vol. 119,
 multivariate time series anomaly detection with extended prior knowl- pp. 10432–10441.
 edge,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperative Work Des., [51] Y. Su, C. Zhao, R. N. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly detection
 2024, pp. 109–114. for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural network,”
[31] S. He, G. Li, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Fusion graph structure learning- in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, A. V.
 based multivariate time series anomaly detection with structured prior Teredesai, Y. K. Li, R. Rosales, E. Terzi, and G. Karypis, Eds. Anchorage,
 knowledge,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 8760–8772, AK, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 2828–2837.
 2024. [52] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, “USAD:
[32] S. He, Q. Guo, G. Li, K. Xie, and P. K. Sharma, “Multivariate time series Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” in Proc.
 anomaly detection based on multiple spatio-temporal graph convolution,” 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp.
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, Art. no. 3500714. 3395–3404.
[33] S. He et al., “Graph structure learning-based multivariate time series [53] B. A. AlAhmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A
 anomaly detection in Internet of Things for human-centric consumer ap- qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” in
 plications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5419–5431, Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., K. R .B. Butler and K. Thomas, Eds.,
 Aug. 2024. Boston, MA, USA, Aug. 2022, pp. 2783–2800. [Online]. Available: https:
[34] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom, //www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/alahmadi
 “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMS and nonparametric dy- [54] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ML-based
 namic thresholding,” in Proc. Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
 Discov. Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395. in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., W. Meng, C. D.
[35] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detec- Jensen, C. Cremers, and E. Kirda, Eds. Copenhagen, Denmark, Nov. 2023,
 tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. pp. 1005–1019, doi: 10.1145/3576915.3616631.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, pp. 1409–1416. [55] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph wavenet for
[36] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: deep spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative Intell., S. Kraus, Ed., Macao, China, Aug. 2019, pp. 1907–1913.
 adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019,
 pp. 703–716.
[37] K.-J. Jeong, J.-D. Park, K. Hwang, S.-L. Kim, and W.-Y. Shin, “Twostage deep anomaly detection with heterogeneous time series data,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 10, pp. 13704–13714, 2022.
[38] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational au- Shiming He received the BS degree in information
 toencoder,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, security and the PhD degree in computer science and
 Jul. 2018. technology from Hunan University, China, in 2006
[39] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly and 2013, respectively. She is currently a Professor
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural with the School of Computer Science and Technolnetwork,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data ogy, Changsha University of Science and Technology,
 Mining, 2019, pp. 2828–2837. Changsha, China. Her research interests include ma-
[40] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- chine learning, data analysis, AIOps, and anomaly
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, detection.
 2018, pp. 1–19.
HE et al.: MULTIVARIATE TIME SERIES ANOMALY DETECTION USING LEARNABLE SPATIAL-TEMPORAL GRAPH ORDINARY 3737

 Qingqing Guo received the BS degree from Hu- Kun Xie (Member, IEEE) received the PhD denan Agricultural University, in 2022. He is currently gree in computer application from Hunan Univerworking toward the MS degree in computer technol- sity, Changsha, China, in 2007. She has authored or
 ogy with the Changsha University of Science and coauthored more than 100 articles in major journals
 Technology. His research interests include deep learn- and conference proceedings, including journals such
 ing, data analysis, and anomaly detection. as IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, IEEE
 Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on Computers, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,IEEE Transactions on
 Wireless Communications, and IEEE Transactions on
 Services Computing, and conferences, including SIG-
 MOD, INFOCOM, ICDCS, SECON, DSN, and IWQoS. Her research interests
 include cover network measurement, network security, Big Data, and AI.

 Pradip Kumar Sharma (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree in CSE from the Seoul National
 Keyao Feng received the BS degree from East China University of Science and Technology, South Korea,
 Jiaotong University in 2023. She is currently working in 2019. He was a postdoctoral research fellow in
 toward the MS degree in software engineering with the Department of Multimedia Engineering with the
 the Changsha University of Science and Technology. Dongguk University, South Korea. He was a software
 Her research interests include deep learning, graph engineer with MAQ Software, India, and involved on
 structure learning, and anomaly detection. variety of projects, proficient in building largescale
 complex data warehouses, OLAP models, and reporting solutions that meet business objectives and align
 IT with business. He is currently an assistant professor
 of Cybersecurity in the Department of Computing Science with the University of
 Aberdeen, U.K. He has authored or coauthored many technical research papers
 in leading journals from IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, and MDPI. Some of his
 research findings are authored or coauthored in the most cited journals. His
 current research interests are focused on the areas of Cybersecurity, Blockchain,
 Edge computing, SDN, and IoT security. He has been an expert reviewer for
 IEEE TRANSACTIONS, Elsevier, Springer, and MDPI journals and magazines.
 He is listed in the world’s Top 2% scientists for citation impact during the
 calendar year 2019 by Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA. He has also
 Diqing Liang received the PhD degree in computer been invited to serve as the technical programme committee member and the
 software and theory from Central South University, chair in several reputed international conferences such as IEEE DASC 2021,
 China, in 2017. He is currently a Senior Engineer with IEEE CNCC 2021, CSA 20202, IEEE ICC2019, IEEE MENACOMM’19, and
 the Information Construction Management Depart- 3ICT 2019. He is also an associate editor for Peer-to-Peer Networking and
 ment of the Changsha University of Science & Tech- Applications, Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences, Electronics
 nology, Changsha, China. His research interests in- (MDPI), and Journal of Information Processing Systems journals. He is a guest
 clude artificial intelligence, Big Data, and cyberspace editor of international journals of certain publishers such as IEEE, Elsevier,
 security. Springer, MDPI, and JIPS. He was the recipient of the top 1% reviewer in
 computer science by Publons Peer Review Awards 2018 and 2019, Clarivate
 Analytics.