IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 1005

 Multiview Spatial–Temporal Interaction Attention-
 Based Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
 for Distributed Industrial Control Networks
 Kai Cui , Liangbin Gao , Xianjun Deng , Senior Member, IEEE, Shenghao Liu , Member, IEEE,
 Lingzhi Yi , Shibo He , Senior Member, IEEE, and Hongwei Lu

 Abstract—Artificial Intelligence-empowered Industrial Control to adaptively capture the relevant context for relation-aware
Networks coordinate massive heterogeneous devices and con- representations. On this basis, both types of aware clues are
tain multi-node spatial-temporal information. Multivariate Time further integrated by the dual attention-enhanced contrastive
Series Anomaly Detection (MTS-AD) can discover data-fault reconstruction, which can enrich the cross-aware fusion reprebehaviors for ensuring the security of distributed networks. sentations and generate the local and global outputs through a
However, existing studies tend to rely heavily on single tem- cross-view contrastive learning strategy. Experiments conducted
poral features or neglect the rich spatial-temporal correlations, on six benchmark datasets demonstrate the superiority of our
which leads to the serious underutilization of interactive embed- MSTIA-Net over state-of-the-art baselines.
dings between the time and space domains. In this article, a
novel Multiview Spatial-Temporal Interaction Attention Network Index Terms—Anomaly detection, distributed industrial con-
(MSTIA-Net) scheme is proposed for the unsupervised MTS- trol networks, multivariate time series, spatial-temporal depen-
AD task to better tackle these challenges. MSTIA-Net focuses dency learning, parallel-attention mechanism.
on jointly modeling the comprehensive spatial-temporal dependencies by means of incorporating complex interactive contents I. I NTRODUCTION
and dynamic relations from multiview patterns. To fully leverage
the content-oriented interactions, a spatial-temporal interactions
aggregation module is presented to explicitly learn content-aware
representations with a parallel-attention mechanism and a low-
 D RIVEN by the continuous progress [1], [2], [3] in
 intelligent manufacturing systems, the deep integration
 of massive terminal devices and the widespread deployment
rank bilinear fusion manner. Simultaneously, considering the of diverse industrial applications have facilitated an explosive
potential correlations among different variables as contextual growth of multi-source data. Based on a type of distributed
cues, a spatial-temporal correlations learning module is developed
 architecture, the Industrial Control Networks [4] can coordinate the sensing data and instructions among multiple nodes.
 Received 21 March 2025; revised 17 July 2025 and 3 September 2025; To achieve device interconnection and data sharing, the Indusaccepted 11 September 2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ET-
WORKING Editor R. Zhang. Date of publication 8 October 2025; date trial Control Systems (ICS) [5] have gradually evolved into a
of current version 5 January 2026. This work was supported in part by core paradigm of distributed networks, which is capable of
the National Key Research and Development Program of China under monitoring industrial data and managing production equip-
Grant 2022YFE0138600; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U24B20153, Grant 62272182, Grant 62472442, ment in the infrastructure scenarios, such as the smart nuclear
Grant 62202181, and Grant 62202197; in part by Hubei Provincial Natural power plants. Typically, the ICS architecture incorporates
Science Foundation of China under Grant 2023AFB998; in part by the enormous amounts of sensory devices from physical, control,
Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST) under Grant 2025JYCXJJ060; supervisory, and corporate layers, as shown in the upper
and in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant part of Fig. 1. However, some anomalous behaviors in the
JCYJ20220530161004009. (Kai Cui and Liangbin Gao are co-first authors.) industrial time-series data may pose the potentially serious
(Corresponding author: Xianjun Deng.)
 Kai Cui and Liangbin Gao are with Hubei Key Laboratory of Distributed threats to the reliability services and new quality security
System Security, Hubei Engineering Research Center on Big Data Security, of intelligent systems. Towards the heterogeneous multi-node
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science data generated from ICS operations, Multivariate Time Series
and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: cuikai eric@hust.edu.cn;
lgao24@hust.edu.cn). Anomaly Detection (MTS-AD) [6], [7], [8] as an unsupervised
 Xianjun Deng, Shenghao Liu, and Hongwei Lu are with Hubei Key learning task aims to accurately identify abnormal samples
Laboratory of Distributed System Security, Hubei Engineering Research and node malfunctions, which is crucial for maintaining the
Center on Big Data Security, School of Cyber Science and Engineering,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, application security of distributed networks.
and also with Shenzhen Huazhong University of Science and Technology Currently, many pioneering studies have made remarkable
Research Institute, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: dengxj615@hust.edu.cn; progress in the MTS-AD task based on deep learning methliushenghao@hust.edu.cn; luhw@hust.edu.cn).
 Lingzhi Yi is with the School of Information Engineering, Zhongnan ods, and explored the spatial-temporal information from the
University of Economics and Law, Wuhan 430073, China (e-mail: following perspectives. 1) Most studies mainly attempted to
lzyi@zuel.edu.cn). model the single-domain temporal or spatial dependencies.
 Shibo He is with the State Key Laboratory of Industrial Control Technology,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: s18he@zju.edu.cn). For example, Su et al. [9] proposed a stochastic Recurrent
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3614179 Neural Network (RNN) to learn the robust representations of
 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1006 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 tions from multiple perspectives. 2) MTS data concurrently
 depend on the inherent characteristics of both the time-domain
 and space-domain, so how to fully integrate the spatialtemporal interactive features is critical to better learn the
 content-based dependency. 3) Since the potential relationships among different variables are relatively dynamic, it can
 be considered as the contextual clues of the relation-based
 dependency to adaptively capture spatial-temporal correlations. Accordingly, the core solution for ICS platform is to
 simultaneously ensure that the two perceptual embeddings are
 aggregated in a parallel learning strategy.
 To address these aforementioned challenges, in this article,
 we present a MTS-AD approach based on a Multiview Spatial-
 Temporal Interaction Attention Network (MSTIA-Net). As
 depicted in Fig. 1, our objective is to model the overall spatialtemporal dependencies of the interactive contents and dynamic
Fig. 1. Illustration of main challenges of the MTS-AD task towards distributed
industrial control networks.
 relations from the multiview feature patterns in a collaborative
 manner. In particular, multiview feature extraction module is
temporal dependence. Besides, Deng and Hooi [10] adopted a first utilized to characterize temporal patterns for the local and
Graph Neural Network (GNN) to model the spatial relations global features. To jointly explore the rich spatial-temporal
among multiple variables. These methods heavily rely on the information, we then introduce a spatial-temporal interactions
single-domain feature and ignore the interactions of spatial- aggregation module using a parallel self-attention Transformer
temporal clues to model the complete feature dependencies. and a low-rank fusion method, and simultaneously exploit
2) A lot of efforts have also been made to initially explore a spatial-temporal correlations learning module by stacking
mining rich spatial-temporal interactions. For instance, Qin multilayer Graph Attention Network (GAT). Ultimately, the
et al. [11] presented a multiview contrastive learning scheme obtained content-aware and relation-aware representations are
to model intra-signal and inter-signal relations, but seriously both further fused through the local-global cross-attention
lacks the exploration of cross-view correlation patterns. Addi- mechanism, and dual attention-enhanced contrastive recontionally, Ding et al. [12] developed a graph structure learning struction is developed to generate the dual-stream outputs via a
mechanism to capture the spatial-temporal correlations, and cross-view contrastive learning strategy as an auxiliary means.
Kang and Kang [13] exploited a variable temporal Transformer In summary, the main contributions can be listed as follows:
to model the spatial-temporal dependencies. However, they • A novel MSTIA-Net scheme is proposed to detect
were unable to leverage content-aware and relation-aware anomalies of time-series data in the distributed industrial
dependencies in a unified model. networks. MSTIA-Net explicitly models the spatial-
 Despite the promising previous works [14], [15], [16], there temporal dependencies of multiview patterns and learns
are still certain limitations that need to be addressed. Existing the interactions between local-global contents and relastudies often ignore the deep mining of multi-node rela- tions.
tions, and fail to effectively capture the rich spatial-temporal • To uniformly integrate content-aware representations,
dependencies between different sensing nodes. Considering a spatial-temporal interactions aggregation module is
that massive time-series data are generally obtained from constructed with the parallel-attention mechanism and
multiple sensing nodes in the ICS platforms, the heterogeneous low-rank fusion manner. Meanwhile, a spatial-temporal
data distribution tends to show a certain degree of spatial correlations learning module is designed to adaptively
or temporal inconsistency. Due to complex changes in the capture the dynamic relations among time and variable
external distributed environment, it is a tough challenge to sequences.
fully learn the spatial-temporal correlations of multi-node data. • The dual attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction is
On this basis, we aim to explore an adaptive multi-dependency further built to refine cross-aware representation and geninference structure to enhance the interactive perception of erate dual-stream outputs through constractive learning.
spatial-temporal clues from each node. The lower part of Fig. 1 • Extensive experiments are conducted to evaluate MSTIAillustrates our major motivation, which is to design a dual- Net model on six real-world datasets, and results
channel correlations learning strategy for capturing dynamic demonstrate that MSTIA-Net achieves significant perfordependencies of time-domain and space-domain variables. mance compared to several state-of-the-art methods.
 In this work, we concentrate on jointly mining the
spatial-temporal dependencies of contents and relations from II. R ELATED W ORK
multiview feature patterns, which especially considers the Recently, benefiting from the powerful ability of deep
following issues. 1) In general, multivariate local and global learning in feature representation and model generalization,
information in different positions of sequences can reflect MTS-AD task based on the unsupervised deep learning framediverse abnormal behavior patterns, and it is necessary to works have received widespread research attention. Existing
explore uniformly modeling more comprehensive representa- works on deep learning-based MTS-AD models can be broadly
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1007

categorized into two paradigms: prediction-based methods TABLE I
[10], [17], [18] and reconstruction-based methods [9], [19], S UMMARY OF THE M AIN N OTATIONS
[20]. The basic idea is how to use the learned normal temporal
features to predict future data or reconstruct the original timeseries, and the deviation of predicted or reconstructed data
from the actual data represents the MTS anomaly degree.
 Prediction-based methods predicts future time series data
from past data and identifies anomalies based on the prediction errors. For instance, Hundman et al. [17] presented an
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) based network to forecast
future data of input time series in a non-parametric dynamic
thresholding manner. Besides, Graph Deviation Network [10]
(GDN) designed an attention-based GNN model to learn the
relationships and predict the future behaviors of each variable 
for detecting anomalies in MTS data by temporal deviation. xt = x1t , x2t , · · · , xMt ∈ RM is an M -dimensional vector,
 Reconstruction-based methods reconstructs the original which indicates the observation with M variable values at time
data in a latent space and detects anomalies based on recon- point t. Considering the dependence of a data point t at a time
struction errors. For example, Park et al. [21] proposed an sample, we use the sliding windows of set value w to obtain a
LSTM-based Variational Autoencoder (LSTM-VAE) to project fixed-length input, denoted as Xt = {xt−w+1 , · · · , xt−1 , xt }.
the temporal dependencies and reconstruct data distributions. For each t < w, we use replication padding manner at the end
Li et al. [22] combined the Generative Adversarial Network of window Xt to ensure that the length of each window is
(GAN) and LSTM-RNN models to learn latent interactions. w. The original long-range sequence TT is transformed into a
CAE-AD [23] introduced the multi-grained contrastive AE sub-sequence set as X = {X1 , X2 , · · · , XNs }, and each slice
scheme to learn dynamic behaviors of time and frequency is taken as training inputs, where Ns is the number of subsets.
domains. Different from the AE-based methods, it can be fur- Definition 1 (MTS Anomaly Detection): Given a training
ther divided into the graph-based and attention-based models. set Xtrain ∈ RM ×T and a testing set Xtest ∈ RM ×T̂ , the goal
For instance, Shi et al. [24] adopted a Graph Convolutional  detection is to predict an anomaly outputs vector
 of anomaly
Network (GCN) method to capture the temporal correlations ytest = y1 , y2 , · · · , yT̂ ∈ RT̂ , where yt denotes the anomaly
between different variables by an LSTM-based reconstruction. label of each data point t. Here, for an unseen observation xt ,
In addiction, He et al. [25] presented a variate associated we can use a binary label yt ∈ {0, 1} to determine whether the
domain adaptation method based on the GDN model to allevi- t-th time stamp is anomalous or not, where yt = 1 indicates
ate the cross-domain distribution shift. As for attention-based the data point is an anomaly, and yt = 0 otherwise. Due to the
models, Bai et al. [26] designed a dual attention Transformer scarcity of anomaly labels in ICS data, the MTS-AD is usually
scheme to capture the temporal relevancies from global and regarded an unsupervised task, and we adopt the training set
local patterns. Ma et al. [27] designed a multi-patch Trans- without ground-truth labels for unsupervised learning.
former structure, which can model the contextual patterns of Definition 2 (MTS Anomaly Diagnosis): Given the above
both inter-patch and intra-patch view via contrastive learning. training and testing sets, anomaly diagnosis is a qualitative
Besides, Lin et al. [28] developed a hierarchical context analysis of each dimension based on the detected results.
representation learning method to extract the spatial-temporal To analyze the severity of anomaly in each anomalous time
relations and generate robust multi-scale representations. Qiu period, we need to produce the diagnostic outputs Ytest =
 M
 y1 , y2 , · · · , yT̂ ∈ RM ×T̂ , where yt ∈ {0, 1} represents
 
et al. [29] presented a unified detection benchmark, which
integrates deep learning models on multiple domains. which specific modes of the t-th time stamp are anomalous.
 However, they ignore the multiview interactions of com- In this work, we aim to tackle unsupervised MTS anomaly
prehensive spatial-temporal dependencies. In contrast, we are detection with an automatic encoder-decoder model P, which
committed to fully learn spatial-temporal representations from is capable of fully leveraging the complex spatial-temporal
interactive contents and dynamic relations in a unified manner. clues to generate the reconstructed time series as follows:

 X̂t = P(Xt |Θ) = φd {φe (Xt ; Θe ) ; Θd } , (1)
 III. P RELIMINARIES
 where X̂t denotes the reconstructed outputs, and Θ refers to
A. Problem Formulation and Notations
 the set of to-be-learned model parameters. Meanwhile, our
 The MTS data generated from Industrial Control Networks unsupervised basic model P combines an encoding network
can be defined as T = {x1 , x2 , · · · , xN }, which is a sequence φe and a decoding network φd parameterized by Θe and Θd .
of consecutive observations with length N collected at equal- Table I summarizes the descriptions of the main notations.
spaced time samples. Generally, the ICS platforms involve
multiple sensors, and each time series can contain a variety
of signal features from different devices. Given a set of time B. Time Series Data Preprocessing
 T
series metadata TT = {xt }t=1 ∈ RM ×T , where T is the In real-world industrial scenarios, the collected data is often
sequence length of TT and M is the total number of variables. interfered by some noise due to extreme events. Considering
1008 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

diverse noise data, we choose a common data preprocessing B. Multiview Feature Extraction
process with reference to previous works [7], [30] for fair. To characterize multi-scale temporal patterns of time-series
 1) Data Normalization: To enable our model against noise data from diverse perspectives, we exploit the dual structures
to be robust, we initially normalize the time-series data, both in of Temporal Convolutional Network (TCN) [32] to extract the
the training and testing phases. Formally, the specific process local and global temporal features. This module includes two
of data normalization can be formulated as follows: types of TCNs, i.e., causal convolutions as local extractor and
 xt − min(T ) dilated convolutions as global extractor. Notably, we construct
 x̃t ← , (2) a skip-layer connection to return the outputs of local branch.
 max(T ) − min(T ) + 
 The two main principles of TCN model are to maintain the
where min(T ) and max(T ) are the minimum and maximum length of the outputs generated by network equal to the inputs,
vectors in the original time series T , respectively. In addition, and to prevent information leakage from the past to the future.
 denotes the small constant vector introduced to prevent the To ensure the above two points, the TCN employs the 1D fully
zero-division operation. Notably, we normalize the entire input convolutional network with regularization operations and pads
data to get it within the range of [0, 1). the input tensor with zeros. Specifically, for each input of MST
 2) Handling Noisy Data: Inspired by randomly adding the sub-sequence Xt ∈ RM ×w , the basic function of single-layer
Gaussian noise for data augmentation [31], we also use the temporal convolution Fkr (t) can be defined as follows:
same noise, which is conformed to multi-type time-series data. (
To simulate the interference effect of actual noisy data on Xrt = Weight-Norm(Conv1Drk,step (Wcr , Xr−1 t ) + brc ),
model generality, we then add the Gaussian white noise with Fkr (t) = Dropout(LeakyReLU(Xrt )), r ∈ {1, · · · , R},
a Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of 50 dB, which can ensure (4)
the presence of noise and overall signal high quality within
the typical SNR range of [45, 55] dB. Accordingly, to improve where Xrt is the hidden temporal feature of the r-th layer, and
the robustness and generalization of our model, we process the Conv1Drk,step denotes 1-dimensional convolution operation
standardized data with the appropriate noise interference and with the kernel size of k and the convolution step of step = 1.
convert it into the sliding time-series windows as follows: Wcr and brc are the learnable weight matrix and bias term.
 PN Besides, LeakyReLU (·) denotes the LeakyReLU activation
 (x̃t )2
 (
 SNR (dB) = 10 log10 Pi=1 N 2 , function, and R is the number of hidden TCN layers.
 i=1 (t ) (3)
 t
 xt = x̃t + 100 , 1) Local Feature Encoder: Benefiting from the potential of
 short-term time-series forecast, we adopt causal convolutions
where x̃t and t denote the signal and noise vectors, respec- with each hidden layers of the same length and the zero
tively. N is the total number of samples in the MTS data. padding of length (k − 1) to learn the local temporal trends.
 Formally, the local temporal feature ZLoct extracted via the
 IV. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY causal convolutional network can be expressed as follows:
 C −1
 kX
A. Overall Framework
 FkrC (t) = (xt ∗ f )(t) = f (i) · x(t − i), (5)
 To jointly learn the spatial-temporal dependencies of con- i=0
tents and correlations, we aim to develop the spatial-temporal
 where * stands for the convolution operation, f (i) represents
interactive encoding and local-global contrastive decoding
 the i-th filter, and kC is the size of causal convolution kernel.
structure. The architecture of MSTIA-Net scheme is illustrated
 2) Global Feature Encoder: For high-level temporal feature
in Fig. 2, which involves the following reasoning modules:
 of long-range sequence as global detection, we apply dilated
 • Multiview Feature Extraction: It obtains the local and convolutions to expand the receptive field of each layer and
 global temporal features of time-series data using two maintain the encoding causality without increasing model
 types of independent temporal convolutional structures. complexity. To enhance global feature integration, we design a
 • Spatial-Temporal Interactions Aggregation: It initially feedback mechanism via skip-layer connections to re-transmit
 learns the content-oriented relevant interactions between the local reconstructed outputs predefined as x̂Loc
 t , which can
 spatial and temporal dependency embeddings based on a be regarded as implicit clues of inputs xt . Formally, we can
 parallel self-attention Transformer structure, and further obtain the global temporal feature ZGlob as follows:
 t
 aggregates the spatial-temporal content-aware representa-
 D −1
 kX
 tions through a low-rank interaction fusion manner.
 • Spatial-Temporal Correlations Learning: It leverages FkrD (t) = ((xt ⊕ x̂loc
 t ) ∗d f )(t) = f (i) · x(t−d · i),
 multiple spatial-temporal GAT blocks to adaptively cap- i=0
 (6)
 ture dynamic correlations among time and variable series
 for the spatial-temporal relation-aware representations. where d is the dilation factor, ⊕ denotes the element-wise addi-
 • Dual Attention-Enhanced Contrastive Reconstruction: tion operation, and kD is the filter size of dilated convolutions.
 It refines the local-branch and global-branch results via In particular, d determines the previous index, and is equivalent
 cross-attention mechanism, and then adds the contrastive to the fixed step length for skipping between two adjacent
 learning strategy as an auxiliary means to generate the filter taps. It corresponds to the j-th power of 2, denoted as
 cross-aware fusion embeddings for reconstructed outputs. d = 1, 2, 4, · · · , 2j . Generally, we set the size of receptive field
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1009

Fig. 2. Overview of MSTIA-Net contains four key modules: (a) Multiview feature extraction, (b) Spatial-temporal interactions aggregation, (c) Spatial-temporal
correlations learning, and (d) Dual Attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction.

 Notably, given the temporal feature of inputs Zft ∈ Rw×M , the
 corresponding spatial feature in the spatial encoder can be first
 converted into its transposed matrix, denoted as Zfs ∈ RM ×w .
 To maintain the temporal position order of entire time-series
 data and enrich long-term coherent dependencies, we introduce
 the positional encoding operation, which is incorporated into
 the original sequence as an additional input. Concretely, the
 initial temporal embedding is an early combination of input
 Zft and positional embedding PE(t) as follows:
   
 pos
 
 
  PE (pos,2i) = sin 100002i/dh ,
  
Fig. 3. Illustration of spatial-temporal parallel-attention mechanism, con- pos (8)
 PE (pos,2i+1) = cos 100002i/d h
 ,
taining (a) Temporal Self-attention transformer and (b) Spatial self-attention 
 Z̃ft = Zft + PEpos (L{T,S} , dh ),
 
transformer architectures.
 

p to the input length n and the kernel size to k, and solve the where Z̃ft is the encoded input matrix, PEpos (·, dh ) ∈ Rw×M
number of layers r required for its complete coverage. Under denotes the embedding matrix of position index in time-series,
the above conditions, solution process is defined as follows: and L{T,S} corresponds to the input length of the temporal or
 p = 1 + r · (k − 1), r = d(n − 1)/(k − 1)e . (7) spatial features. Besides, i and dh are the dimensions of input
 sub-sequences and the hidden layers in the PE encoding.
where d·e refers to the rounding up operation. The width of 1) Spatial-Temporal Self-Attention Transformer: The parreceptive field increases by d·(k−1) with each additional layer, allel attention mechanism contains two types of forms, and
and is based on the b-exponential expansion, where d = br−1 . we take the temporal attention as an example. The Temporal
 For the brevity of this paper, we uniformly use Zft ∈ Rw×M Self-Attention Transformer is constructed to model the timeto represent the multiview temporal features of Xt , where f ∈ domain interactions using the Multi-Head Attention (MHA)
{Loc, Glob} denotes the local and global temporal features. structure, and each self-attention head is obtained as follows:
 T
   
 Self-Attn (Z̃f ) = softmax Q√ T KT
 VT , h ∈ {1, · · · , H},
C. Spatial-Temporal Interactions Aggregation h t
 dk
 Considering the fact that the MTS data depends on various f Q f
 QT = Z̃t WT , KT = Z̃t WT , VT = Z̃ft WTV ,
 K
 
relevant characteristics in the time-domain and space-domain, (9)
we present a spatial-temporal interactions aggregation module
to simultaneously learn the time-oriented and space-oriented where Self-Attnh (Z̃ft ) ∈ Rw×dmodel is the time-oriented dependependencies with a parallel-attention mechanism, and further dency embedding of the h-th head, and H is the number of
combine these embeddings in a low-rank fusion manner. attention heads. softmax(·) is the Softmax activation function.
 Similar to Transformer [33] model, the structure of spatial- WTQ ∈ RM ×dq , WTK ∈ RM ×dk , and WTV ∈ RM ×dv are the
temporal parallel-attention mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 3. learnable projection matrices of the Queries, Keys, and Values,
1010 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

respectively. In our case, dq , dk and dv denote the dimensions 1) Spatial Graph Attention Layer: In terms of the space
of corresponding projection, where dq = dk = dv = dmodel . dimension, the given inputs with M variables at time point t
 By integrating multiple attention heads, the spatial-temporal can be formulated as a spatial graph Gxt (Vs , Es ), where the
parallel-attention mechanism can be formulated as follows: variable set Vs ∈ RM ×w = {vm |m ∈ [1, M ]} is the node set
 and the set of spatial relation edges Es ∈ RM ×M reflects the
 SpatTemp-Attn(Z̃ft ) = Multi-Head-Attn(Z̃ft )
 O
 interactive relation among different variables. In particular, we
 = Concat(SA1 , · · · , SAh , · · · , SAH )WSA , (10) regard the reformulated matrix of spatial feature Zfs ∈ RM ×w
where WSA O
 ∈ RH∗dmodel ×M is the projection matrix, SAh as the initial node feature matrix, and each node is denoted
denotes the h-th head, and Concat(, ) is concatenation oper- as vi ∈ Rw in our case. Generally, for spatial GAT layer, the
ation. The self-attention outputs are fed into the residual attention coefficient of each variable node can be produced via
connection and position-wise Feed-Forward Network (FFN) propagating interactive correlations from neighbors as follows:
as follows: 
 f
 
 T f f
 
 (  e
  ij = LeakyReLU W S · Concat(v i , vj ) ,
 Hft = Layer-Norm(Spat&Temp − Attn(Z̃ft ) + Z̃ft ),
 
 f
 exp(eij ) (13)
 Eft = Layer-Norm(Feed-Forward(Hft ) + Hft ), f
 αij = P
 
  f
 ,
 (11) k∈Ni exp(eik )
 f
where Eft ∈ Rw×M is the time-oriented dependency embed- where αij is the correlative degree of the node i to j, WS ∈
 2w×1
ding, and Hft is the hidden temporal embedding. Furthermore, R is the learnable transformation matrix, and Ni denotes
Feed-Forward(·) denotes the FFN with two Fully-Connected the set of neighbor nodes for node i in a spatial graph.
(FC) layers, expressed as FFN(x) = ReLU(xW1 + b1 )W2 + Subsequently, to better aggregate the context cues of neighb2 , where ReLU(·) denotes the ReLU activation function. bor nodes through multi-level dynamic relations, we can
Layer-Norm(·) is layer normalization operation for outputs. adaptively update the outputs of each graph node by continu-
 In the above progress of Temporal Transformer, it targets to ously stacking multiple spatial GAT layers as follows:
learn the temporal dependencies between multiple variables. K
   
As for the Spatial Transformer, the input feature Zfs ∈ RM ×w 1 X X
 gil,f = Sigmoid  k,l,f
 αij WSk,l,f vjl−1,f  ,
is transformed from a transposed form of Zft ∈ Rw×M , and K
 k=1 j∈Ni
we can also derive the space-oriented dependency embedding (14)
Efs ∈ RM ×w in this similar manner as shown in Fig. 3.
 2) Intermediary Feature-Level Fusion: Due to the hetero- where gil,f ∈ Rw is the hidden contextual embedding of the
geneous contents of spatial-temporal information, we devote l-th GAT layer, l ∈ {1, · · · , L}, and L is the total number of
to exploring an intermediary feature-level aggregation strategy stacked GAT blocks. WSk,l,f ∈ Rw×w is the learnable weight
via uniformly integrating multiple types of the spatial-temporal matrix, Sigmoid(·) denotes the Sigmoid activation function,
cues in a common space. Low-Rank Bilinear Pooling (LRBP) and K is the number of GAT attention heads. Consequently,
[34] can explicitly model the higher-order interactions fusion we can obtain the space-domain contextual embedding matrix
between features and reduce computational complexity by Gl,f
 s
 l,f T
 = [g1l,f , · · · , gil,f , · · · , gM ] ∈ RM ×w , which is
means of low-rank constraints. Specifically, time-dependent regarded as the inputs of the next sequential temporal graph
embedding Eft and space-dependent embedding Efs are unified layer in the same spatial-temporal GAT block.
to obtain the dual-fused results, the content-aware process is 2) Temporal Graph Attention Layer: To adaptively capture
implemented through the LRBP fusion manner as follows: temporal correlations across different time periods, we define a
 temporal graph as Gxs (Vt , Et ) with the set of time nodes Vt ∈
 h i
 Rft = PT tanh (UT Eft ) (VT Efs ) + B, (12)
 Rw×M and the set of temporal relation edges Et ∈ Rw×w ,
where Rft ∈ Rw×M is the spatial-temporal content-aware where each node {zt−w0 |w0 ∈ [0, w − 1]} corresponds to the
representation. U ∈ Rw×du and V ∈ RM ×dv are two low- input time sub-sequence Xt and Et represents the connections
rank matrices used to align the two types of the time-oriented between different time nodes at the current moment t and only
and space-oriented embeddings. P ∈ Rdu ×w and B ∈ Rw×M the other previous moments. Specifically, similar to the above
are the learnable parameters of FC network with a hyperbolic update method of spatial graph, the function of temporal GAT
activation function tanh(·). du and dv are the dimensions of network with multiple stacked GAT layers FTl emp GAT (t) can
factorized matrices, where du = dv is preset in our condition, be formally performed as follows:
and denotes the element-wise multiplication operation. Gl,f l f l,f l,f T
 t = FT emp GAT [αT WT (Gs ) ], (15)
D. Spatial-Temporal Correlations Learning where Gl,f
 t ∈ Rw×M is the time-domain contextual embed-
 Since there are dynamic associations between various time ding matrix of the l-th GAT layer. αTf and WTl,f ∈ RM ×M
series, we coherently explore spatial-temporal correlations as are the correlative degree and the learnable weight matrix
context cues. Inspired by a GAT [35] structure based on the of temporal GAT layer. To simplify the notation of spatial-
MHA mechanism, we construct a spatial-temporal correlations temporal relation-aware representation with multi-layer GAT
learning module with multiple stacked GAT blocks to capture adaptive updating, we can use Gft ∈ Rw×M to represent the
 (L),f
deeper relevant dependencies in both space and time domains. outputs Gt of the final GAT block.
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1011

 for cross-view contrastive learning Lccl can be defined as
 follows:
 vec(FLoc ) · vec(FGlob
 
 Loc Glob i j )
 sim(Fi , Fj ) = kvec(FLoc )kkvec(FGlob )k ,
 
 
 
 i j 
 Loc Glob (20)
 exp sim(F i , F j )/τ c
 Lccl = − log PNb ,
 
 
 
 Loc , FGlob )/τ
 j=1 exp sim(Fi j c

 where sim(·, ·) is the cosine similarity function, vec(·) denotes
 the flattening operation, and τc is the temperature parameter.

 F. Training and Inference
Fig. 4. Illustration of local-global cross-attention mechanism.
 The overall goal is to train our MSTIA-Net model with the
E. Dual Attention-Enhanced Contrastive Reconstruction reconstruction error and cross-view contrastive terms, and then
 infer anomaly score based on the predicted and actual values.
 The content-aware and relation-aware information can suffi- 1) Objective Function: Given the input time series Xt , the
ciently provide high-level spatial-temporal dependency clues, model produces dual reconstructed results X̂Loc and X̂Loc
 t t . We
a dual attention-enhanced contrastive reconstruction module introduce the Mean Square Error (MSE) between the predicted
is developed to further ensure the comprehensive fusion rep- and ground-truth values of two streams in a certain proportion,
resentation and dual-stream reconstruction outputs from local and reconstruction loss function Lrec is formulated as follows:
and global perspectives, which is refined via the cross-attention
mechanism and cross-view contrastive learning strategy. Lrec
 1) Local-Global Attention-Based Reconstruction: To fully 1 X
 = (λkXt − X̂Loc 2 Glob 2
 t kF + (1 − λ)kXt − X̂t kF ),
aggregate two types of perceptual representations, we devise a |X |
 Xt ∈X
local-global cross-attention mechanism, which is illustrated in
 (21)
Fig. 4. The cross-attention block is used to learn cross-aware
interactions, and each co-attention head is obtained as follows: where λ ∈ (0, 1) is the hyper-parameter to control the weights
   T
  of local and global flows, and k · kF indicates Frobenius norm.
 Cross-Attn (Rf ; Gf ) = softmax Q√ R KG
 VG , Accordingly, to jointly optimize the MSTIA-Net, we can
 h t t
 dk present the total objective function Ltotal by combining the
 QR = Rft WR Q
 , KG = Gft WG K
 , VG = Gft WG V
 ,
 
 Eq. (20), Eq. (21), and regularization terms as follows:
 (16)
 Ltotal = Lrec + µLccl + γkΘk22 , (22)
where Cross-Attnh (Rft ; Gft ) ∈ Rw×dmodel is the cross-aware
embedding of the h-th head. WR Q
 ∈ RM ×dq , WG K
 ∈ RM ×dk , where µ and γ are the trade-off parameters to balance the
 V
and WG ∈ R M ×dv
 are the learnable projection matrices. contributions of different losses, and k · k2 denotes L2 -norm.
 Consequently, we combine multiple co-attention heads, and 2) Meta Learning: To alleviate the model underfitting on
local-global attention mechanism is described as follows: the limited data of real-world scenarios, we utilize the Model-
 Agnostic Meta Learning (MAML) [36] method to perform
LocGlob-Attn(Rft ; Gft ) = Multi-Head-Attn(Rft ; Gft ) data enhancement. In each training phase, for the model P(Θ)
 = Concat(CA1 , · · · , CAh , · · · , CAH )WO
 CA , (17) with parameters Θ in each random batch task Ti , the total
 (
 f f f f gradient update of multiple tasks can be expressed as follows:
 Ct = Layer-Norm(Loc&Glob − Attn(Rt ; Gt ) + Rt ), 
 0
 Fft = Layer-Norm(Feed-Forward(Cft ) + Cft ), Θi = Θ − α∇Θ LTX
  i (P(Θ))),

 (18)  Θ = Θ − β∇ Θ LTi (P(Θ0i )), (23)
 
 Ti ∼P(T )
where Fft ∈ Rw×M is the cross-aware fusion representation.
 Ultimately, for multiview fusion representations, we employ where α is the learning rate, and β is the meta-step size. The
the FFN with two linear layers through a residual connection detailed model training process is summarized in Algorithm 1.
to generate the reconstructed outputs X̂ft ∈ RM ×w as follows: 3) Anomaly Scoring: In the anomaly inference phase, each
 sample xt ∈ Xtest is input into a well-trained model. Formally,
 X̂ft = Sigmoid(Feed-Forward(Fft ) + Fft ), (19) anomaly score of the t-th time stamp can be defined as follows:
where Sigmoid activation is utilized to generate outputs within M
 1 Xp m
the range of [0, 1] for matching the normalized input window. score(t) = kxt − x̂Glob
 t k2 = (xt − x̂m 2
 t ) , (24)
 M m=1
 2) Cross-View Contrastive Learning: As an auxiliary
supervised means, our contrastive learning aims to achieve where score(t) is the reconstruction error-based anomaly score
cross-view alignment between local-global fusion representa- at time point t. Since the local representation is regarded as an
tions, thereby maximizing the consistency of representations additional clue for the global representation, we only utilize
across multiple perspectives. Specifically, for the batch size of the global outputs for anomaly scoring. The complete infer-
  Nb
Nb local-global pairs (FLoc i , FGlob
 i ) i=1 , the loss function ence process of MSTIA-Net model is shown in Algorithm 2.
1012 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Algorithm 1 The Training Procedure of MSTIA-Net TABLE II
 S TATISTICS OF S IX R EAL -W ORLD B ENCHMARK DATASETS

 structure to encode the local and global temporal features. For
 an input MTS sequence of shape (T, M ), the time complexity
 of local-global TCNs is O(T · R · Kmax · M ), where T is the
 length of time series, M is the number of variables, R denotes
 the number of TCN layers, and Kmax = max{kC , kD } is
 the maximum value of convolution kernels. In the interactions
 aggregation phase, single-view temporal feature is refined by
 spatial-temporal parallel-attention mechanism, resulting in the
 complexity of O(H ·(T 2 ·M +T ·M 2 )) per Transformer model,
 and the low-rank bilinear pooling strategy adds the complexity
 of O(D · (T + M ) + T · D2 ), where H is the number of
 attention heads, and D is the dimension of embedding. In the
 correlations learning phase, the relation-aware representation
 is captured by spatial-temporal GAT with the complexity of
 O(L · K · (|Vs | · T 2 + |Es | · T + |Vt | · M 2 + |Et | · M )), where L
 denotes the number of stacked GAT blocks, K is the number of
 GAT attention heads, |Vs | and |Vt | are the numbers of variables
 and time nodes, |Es | and |Et | are the numbers of spatial and
 temporal relation edges. In the contrastive reconstruction stage,
 the cross-aware representation is fused by dual cross-attention
Algorithm 2 The Testing Procedure of MSTIA-Net mechanism with the complexity of O(H · (T 2 · M + T · M 2 )).
 Therefore, the overall computational complexity of MSTIA-
 Net model is O(T · R · Kmax · M + H · (T 2 · M + T · M 2 ) + D ·
 (T +M )+T ·D2 +(L·K·(|Vs |·T 2 +|Es |·T +|Vt |·M 2 +|Et |·M )),
 which simplifies to O((L·K ·|Vs |+H ·M )·T 2 +(L·K ·|Vt |+
 H ·T )·M 2 +T ·D2 ). This highlights quadratic dependencies on
 T , M , and D due to attention mechanism and GAT structure.

 V. E XPERIMENTS

 A. Datasets
 To evaluate our proposed MSTIA-Net, we adopt six widelyused datasets for anomaly detection. Table II summarizes the
 statistics of benchmark datasets. The training set contains only
 normal data, and abnormal data are labeled in the testing set.
 1) MIT-BIH Supraventricular Arrhythmia Database (MBA)
 The inference is to calculate the anomaly score for the inputs [38]: It is a popular large-scale dataset for ventricular arrhythprocessed by the current sliding window, and identify the time mia research, derived from electrical signal recordings in 25
point as abnormal label if its score exceeds a certain threshold. selectively chosen partitions of four patients.
We apply the Peak Over Threshold (POT) [37] approach to 2) Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Dataset [17]: It is a
automatically select anomaly threshold on the validation set. collection of sensor and actuator data with 55 features using
 the Mars rover itself extracted from the abnormal events of
 monitoring systems. Notably, we use only the three non-trivial
G. Computational Complexity Analysis sequences (A4, C2 and T1) identified in the work [8].
 To clearly assess our algorithm performance, we analyze the 3) Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) Dataset [17]:
time complexity of MSTIA-Net based on the data flow. In mul- It is an expert-labeled database of satellite mission, which
tiview feature extraction stage, we adopt a dual-branch TCN comprises the observation data with 25 dimensions.
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1013

 4) Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) Dataset [39]: It is datasets, we set the size of sliding window as w = 10, and the
obtained from 51 senors in the water treatment plant operating dropout operation with a fixed value of 0.2. All experiments
for 11 consecutive days, including 7 days of normal operations are implemented by PyTorch-1.11.0 framework and performed
and 4 days of abnormal conditions under attack scenarios. on the environment with a single NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.
 5) Water Distribution (WADI) dataset [40]: It is a 123- For the optimization of our proposed MSTIA-Net model,
dimensional sensor dataset collected from water distribution we employed the AdamW method as training optimizer with
networks. Notably, we assign zero values to the missing values. an initial learning rate of 1e−2 for SMAP and SWaT, 1e−3 for
 6) Server Machine Dataset (SMD) [9]: It is a 5-week MBA and MSL, 1e−4 for WADI and SMD, the meta learning
dataset provided by an Internet company, containing resource rate of α = 2e−2 , and the weight decay of γ = 1e−5 . The steputilizations from a compute cluster. We utilize only the four scheduler strategy is used to adjust the optimizer with step size
non-trivial sequences (machine-1-1, 2-1, 3-2 and 3-7). of 5 and learning decay rate of 0.9. As for the loss function,
 In our experiments, we divided the training time-series data the trade-off parameters of reconstruction loss in Eq. (21) and
into the training set (80%) and validation set (20%). For a fair total objective function in Eq. (22) are experimentally set as
comparison, we used the same data preprocessing operations λ = 0.7 and µ = 1e−3 , and the fixed parameter of cross-view
as described in preliminaries for all baseline methods. contrastive learning in Eq. (20) is empirically set as τc = 0.5.
 In training process, we use an early-stopping criteria to pre-
B. Evaluation Metrics vent overfitting and the batch size is 256. For POT parameters,
 the coefficient is set as 1e−4 for all datasets, and low quantile
 1) Anomaly Detection: To measure the detection per- is set as 7e−2 for SMAP, 1e−2 for MSL, and 1e−3 for others.
formance, we adopted the Precision (Prec), Recall (Rec),
F1-Score (F1) and AUC value (the Area Under the ROC
Curve) as our main evaluation metrics. For clarity, the values D. Comparison With State-of-the-Art Methods
of Prec, Rec, and F1 are calculated as follows: To validate the effectiveness of our proposed MSTIA-Net
 TP TP 2 × Prec × Rec scheme on the both anomaly detection and diagnosis tasks, we
 Prec = , Rec = , F1 = ,
 TP+FP TP+FN Prec+Rec mainly compared our model with the following state-of-the-
 (25) art baselines, including the prediction-based, reconstructionwhere TP, FP, and FN are the number of true positive, false based, graph-based, and attention-based methods.
positive, and false negative results, respectively. Besides, we
also employed a common point-adjust [41] method to calculate • LSTM-NDT [17]: An LSTM-based network that interevaluation metrics. To further verify model performance under prets predictions with a dynamic error threshold strategy.
limited scale dataset, we also measure the AUC and F1 scores • DAGMM [42]: An autoencoding method that combines
with the same data splitting ratio by training all models with the Deep AE and Gaussian Mixture Model to estimate the
only 20% of the training data, termed as ACU∗ and F1∗ . density of representations in the low-dimensional space.
 2) Anomaly Diagnosis: To estimate the diagnosis perfor- • OmniAnomaly [9]: A RNN-based model that uses the
mance, we adopted two main evaluation metrics: HitRate@P% VAE and GRU to generate reconstruction probabilities.
and NDCG@P% [9]. The former is to determine how many • MSCRED [19]: A ConvLSTM-based network that capground-truth dimensions are hit in the top-ranked candidates tures the temporal patterns and inter-sensor correlations
via ranking the anomaly scores predicted by model, and the from multi-scale signature matrices in different statuses.
latter is to measure the Normalized Discounted Cumulative • MAD-GAN [22]: An LSTM-based method that integrates
Gain (NDCG) considered with the same number of top the GAN model to learn the temporal distributions using
predicted candidates. Notably, P% denotes the percentage of the prediction errors and discriminator loss.
ground-truth dimensions for each timestamp. • USAD [43]: An autoencoding-based approach that
 employs two independent AEs and GAN model to
 enhance performance and stable with adversarial training
C. Implementation Details strategy.
 For the local feature encoder, we applied a causal convo- • MTAD-GAT [7]: A graph-based framework that utilizes
lutional network, where the number of hidden TCN layers is two parallel GATs to capture correlations between differset as R = 3 and the kernel size is kC = 3. As for the global ent timestamps and signals through multi-task learning.
feature encoder, we employed a dilated convolutional network • CAE-M [31]: An autoencoding method that builds
with three hidden layers, dilation factor d ∈ {1, 2, 4} and a convolutional AE and memory network with the
convolution kernel kD = 5. We used the grid-search strategy attention-based BiLSTM method and an autoregressive
to determine the optimal values for all hyper-parameters. In the model.
spatial-temporal self-attention and local-global cross-attention • GDN [10]: A graph-based model that uses a GNN model
mechanism, we both adopted the MHA mechanism, where to learn pairwise correlations between multiple sensors
the number of attention heads is set as H = 3, and the by graph attention mechanism and then detects anomalies
dimension of projection space is set as dmodel = 64. In according to the predicted deviations from node relations.
the correlations learning stage, we constructed the multi-level • TranAD [44]: An attention-based network that incorstacked spatial-temporal GAT blocks, where the numbers of porates Transformer with the adversarial training and
layers and attention heads are set as L = 4 and K = 4. For all self-conditioning process to improve the model stability.
1014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE III
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT M ETHODS ON THE S IX C OMPLETE DATASET. T HE B EST R ESULTS OF
 AUC AND F1 S CORE A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD , W HILE S UBOPTIMAL R ESULTS A RE U NDERLINED

 • MUTANT [24]: A graph-based model that learns the cor- positive effect of generative adversarial leaning for temporal
 relations and each importance between variables via the distributions. The graph-based methods, i.e., MTAD-GAT and
 temporal GCN and LSTM-based attention reconstruction. MUTANT both perform relatively worse than our MSTIA-Net.
 • DCdetector [45]: An attention-based model that designs One possible explanation is that they only focus on modeling
 dual attention contrastive representation learning scheme. spatial-temporal dependencies but ignore the potential multi-
 • DTAAD [30]: An attention-based method that adopts dual cue interactions. The attention-based methods, i.e., CAE-M,
 TCN and Transformer models to capture the multi-scale TranAD, DCdetector, and DTAAD gain competitive results,
 temporal dependences with a meta-learning strategy. which confirms the advantage of modeling complete spatialtemporal dependencies through the Transformer structure.
 1) Analysis of Anomaly Detection: Table III shows the
performance comparison of state-of-the-art methods on the 2) Analysis of Anomaly Diagnosis: Table IV provides the
six complete datasets. Notably, all baseline methods use the diagnosis performance comparison of other baseline methods
same data splits for a fair comparison. From these tables, on the SMD for the sake of brevity. As shown in the table,
we have the following observations: MSTIA-Net outperforms our MSTIA-Net model remains significantly superior to others,
other baselines on most MTS datasets, which demonstrates verifying that our model is highly capable of MTS anomaly
the superiority of our method in effectively leveraging the diagnosis and the parallel-attention mechanism enables it more
spatial-temporal dependencies from multiview feature patterns. suitable for the inter-correlated anomalies. Specifically, this
The prediction-based methods, i.e., LSTM-NDT and GDN task aims to distinguish the abnormality from each dimension,
obtain relatively poor results, which may be attributed to the and our proposed MSTIA-Net can effectively learn the spatialinherent nature of prediction models in dealing with long-term temporal dependencies from local-global interactive patterns to
sequences. Obviously, the reconstruction-based methods, i.e., accurately diagnose multi-dimensional anomalies.
DAGMM, OmniAnomaly, MSCRED, MAD-GAN and USAD 3) Analysis of Model Efficiency: We also further compared
adopt the deep AE models and show a certain degree of the model performance on the scale-restricted training sets and
performance gap. MSCRED gets satisfactory results compared model computational cost. Table V shows the performance
to OmniAnomaly, which indicates the sufficiency of capturing comparison under the data-constrained conditions, and implies
the spatial-temporal patterns from multi-scale features. MAD- that our model achieves the excellent results thanks to the
GAN and USAD achieve more promising results, reflecting the meta-learning strategy. Fig. 5 illustrates the comparison results
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1015

 TABLE IV TABLE V
D IAGNOSIS P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF O UR MSTIA-N ET W ITH BASELINE
 BASELINE M ETHODS ON THE SMD M ETHODS ON 20% OF THE T RAINING S ETS

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of computational complexity and model • w/o STIA: We eliminated the influence of Spatialconvergence on the SMAP and SMD.
 Temporal Interactions Aggregation (STIA) module without generating the content-aware representations.
of computational complexity and model convergence, and • w/o STCL: We eliminated the influence of Spatialdemonstrates the efficiency of our method against suboptimal Temporal Correlations Learning (STCL) module without
baseline methods. From the figures, we can find that our generating the relation-aware representations.
MSTIA-Net gets an acceptable range of training and inference • w/o DACR: We disabled the impact of Dual Attentiontime consumption and moderate number of model parameters. enhanced Contrastive Reconstruction (DACR) without
Due to the multi-node interactions of graph networks, the cross-attention mechanism and contrastive learning.
graph-based methods typically have higher time complexity • w/o Spatial / Temporal MSA: We disabled the influence
than the attention-based methods. Notably, our method also of spatial or temporal self-attention Transformer by only
exhibits a faster convergence rate, achieving better perfor- using the single domain dependency embedding.
mance and model stability in fewer training epochs. • w/o LRBP: We eliminated the impact of LRBP fusion
 Overall, compared to the graph-based and attention-based strategy via a direct concatenation manner.
methods, our significant strengths are that the MSTIA-Net can • w/o Spatial / Temporal GAT: We disabled the influence
jointly learn spatial-temporal content-aware and relation-aware of spatial or temporal GAT layer by using the single
interactions in a multiview parallel-attention manner, thereby domain contextual embedding.
improving detection performance to varying degrees. • w/o Callback: We removed the effect of local reconstruction outputs without a skip-layer feedback mechanism.
E. Ablation Analysis Table VI shows the performance comparison of different
 ablation schemes, we can see that all variants consistently
 To verify the contribution of each component in the MSTIA- show inferior performance compared to overall MSTIA-Net
Net model, we compared the performance of multiple ablation model, which illustrates significant effectiveness of each comschemes by removing the relevant components as follows: ponent. In detail, the w/o Local or Global TCN performs
 • w/o Local / Global TCN: We removed the effect of local worse than other schemes, demonstrating that modeling the
 or global temporal features by using single view feature. multi-scale patterns of MTS data from multiview features can
1016 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 6. Performance comparison with different values of parameters in our proposed MSTIA-Net on the MBA and SMD.

 TABLE VI performance. The LRBP enhances interaction in the feature
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT C OMPONENT space to achieve refined encoding. MSTIA-Net achieves the
 C ONFIGURATIONS ON THE S IX DATASETS best results, which can be attributed to the relevance of spatialtemporal patterns.

 F. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
 To investigate the influence of spatial-temporal and localglobal Transformer, we considered changing the number of
 attention heads (i.e., H) by ranging H from 1 to 5. Fig. 6
 (a) shows the performance with different numbers of heads in
 the Transformer, we can find that the results show significant
 fluctuations and the best performance is gained when H = 3.
 Possible explanation is that MHA mechanism not only assists
 spatial-temporal contents interaction and multi-view patterns
 integration, but also causes a certain degree of negative noise.
 Furthermore, we explored the impact of spatial-temporal GAT
 blocks by varying the number of GAT layers (i.e., L) and MHA
 heads (i.e., K), which both range from 1 to 5. Fig. 6 (b) and (c)
 show the results with different numbers of layers and heads
 in the STCL module. From the figures, our model achieves
 the optimal performance when L = 4 and K = 4, while also
 exhibits strong volatility. This can be attributed to the fact that
 the dynamic correlations of spatial-temporal domains can be
 effectively captured as the number of GAT layers increases, but
 excessively deep GAT layers lead to certain negative effects.
 We also studied the influence of λ and µ in the total objective function Ltotal , which are used to control reconstruction
effectively characterize temporal information. w/o STIA and and cross-view contrastive loss terms. Fig. 6 (d) and (e) show
w/o STCL both obtain unsatisfactory results, which implies the the results with different values of trade-off parameters λ and
necessity of learning the content-oriented interactions based µ, which are selected for the optimal parameters via a heuristic
on parallel-attention mechanism and capturing the dynamic grid-search strategy with the same interval ranging from
correlations via stacked GAT blocks. Notably, w/o DACR also {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9} and {1er |r ∈ −4, · · · , 0}, respectively.
gets poor performance due to the insufficient reconstruction From the figures, we can find that the best results are obtained
means and missing auxiliary strategies for generating dual- when λ = 0.7 and µ = 1e−3 . Nevertheless, µ exhibits stronger
stream outputs. Similar to the w/o Spatial or Temporal MSA, sensitive properties than λ, indicating the significance of crossthe w/o Spatial or Temporal GAT obviously drops compared to view contrastive learning strategy for the fusion embeddings.
MSTIA-Net. The main reason is that both temporal and spatial Fig. 6 (f) and (g) show the results with different values of
information have certain content and correlation dependencies, batch size (i.e., B) and feature dimension (i.e., dmodel ) by rangwhich are beneficial to jointly construct fusion embedding. ing from {32, 64, 128, 256, 512} and {16, 32, 64, 128}. The
Limited by the capability of early fusion and implicit clues optimal results are obtained when B = 256 and dmodel = 64,
mining, both w/o LRBP and w/o Callback show poor and our model exhibits a certain degree of stability. In addition,
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1017

Fig. 7. Parameter sensitivity studies of the sliding window size and training
dataset ratio on the six benchmark datasets.

we verify the impact of noise signals at different proportions
on model performance in the simulated industrial scenarios.
Fig. 6 (h) shows the performance with different SN R values
of Gaussian white noise by ranging from {35, 40, 45, 50, 55}
dB, and our model has a certain degree of robustness against
interference from noisy data of varying intensity.
 We further explored the impact of sliding window size and
training set ratio. Fig. 7 shows the averaged results with different values of w and Ratio (%), which are selected by varying
from {5, 10, 15, 20, 25} and {20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100%}.
The observations can be made: our model obtains the optimal
results when w = 10, and the size of window has a certain
impact on model performance. It may be that smaller windows
are difficult to learn the global temporal feature, while local Fig. 8. Diagnosis visualization of anomaly prediction among multiple
anomalies are hidden in the multiple points for larger windows. dimensions on the SMD testing set using MSTIA-Net and other ablation
 strategies. The time series with ground-truth values and reconstruction results
Obviously, under different conditions of limited-scale training are provided, and anomaly labels marked in purple are also presented for
set, our MSTIA-Net demonstrates strong model robustness. comparison. The predicted anomalous segments are highlighted in red.

G. Case Study
 To intuitively understand the effect of MSTIA-Net model
on anomaly detection, we conduct the following case analysis
of our model and other schemes on the testing set of SMD.
 1) Anomaly Diagnosis Study: Fig. 8 illustrates the visualization of anomaly diagnosis on multiple dimensions of testing
 Fig. 9. T-SNE visualization of different temporal features before reconstrucsamples with the MSTIA-Net and ablation methods, where the tion learned by (a) multiview fusion, (b) only global-patterns, and (c) only
latter two only use single-view temporal feature. As shown in local-patterns on the testing set of SMD. The dots with same color indicate
the Fig. 8, we can find that MSTIA-Net performs well overall the same label.
on the MTS-AD task, which is able to diagnose the anomalous
sequences based on the predicted anomaly scores. There are
the associated abnormal points between dimensions #0 and #2
with relevant inter-relations, where anomalous behavior in one
dimension may lead to a chain of events causing abnormalities
in others. Similarly, the ablation schemes based on single-view
features also exhibit specific detection effects in #3 and #4. It
can be seen that the prediction results of local-global features
are broadly consistent with anomaly labels, and discrepancy
can be avoided by the point adjustment strategy. This validates Fig. 10. Cross-Attention visualization of (a) Local-Branch and (b) Global-
 Branch attention matrices on the SMD. The coordinate axes represent the size
that our model fully integrates the interactions of local-global of sliding window.
temporal patterns, thus assisting in locating abnormal data.
 2) Multiview Interaction Study: We also explored the
impacts of multiview temporal features and dual cross- boundaries, we can find that multiview fusion features enhance
attention mechanism. Fig. 9 shows the T-SNE visualization discriminative representations in complex distributions. Fig. 10
of various temporal features. The MSTIA-Net with multiview shows the heatmap visualization of cross-attention matrix in
feature obviously reduces the overlap between normal and the local and global perspectives, and implies that it has the
abnormal sample embeddings. Both global and local temporal ability to capture correlative interactions from different view
patterns also exhibit specific discriminability with clearer features.
1018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [15] X. Zhou, C. Dai, W. Wang, and T. Qiu, “Global–local association
 discrepancy for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IIoT,”
 In this study, we focus on jointly model the spatial-temporal IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 11287–11297, Apr. 2024.
dependencies of time-series in the distributed ICS, and propose [16] P. Qi, D. Li, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-SGCN: Multivariate anomaly
a novel MTS-AD approach called MSTIA-Net, which consists detection with self-learning graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int.
 Conf. Data Eng., Jul. 2022, pp. 1232–1244.
of a spatial-temporal interactive encoder and a dual-stream [17] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Sodercontrastive decoder. Specifically, the STIA module is presented strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric
to learn spatial-temporal dependencies by a parallel-attention dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 387–395.
mechanism and aggregate content-aware representations with
 [18] X. Qiu et al., “TFB: Towards comprehensive and fair benchmarking of
a low-rank fusion manner. In addition, the STCL module is time series forecasting methods,” in Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 17, 2024,
designed to adaptively capture dynamic correlations by stacked pp. 2363–2377.
GAT blocks. Conclusively, the cross-aware fusion embedding [19] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly
 detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI
is further enhanced for generating dual-stream outputs through Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, vol. 33, pp. 1409–1416.
the DACR module. Extensive experimental results verify the [20] X. Qiu, X. Wu, Y. Lin, C. Guo, J. Hu, and B. Yang, “DUET: Dual
superiority of our model and the effectiveness of each module. clustering enhanced multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. 31st
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining V.1, Jul. 2025,
 In future work, we plan to exploit the powerful knowledge pp. 1185–1196.
reasoning capability of Large Language Models (LLMs) to [21] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for
further explore more efficient solutions based on MSTIA-Net. robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
Towards the demands of real industrial scenarios, our MSTIA-
 [22] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN:
Net still has limitations in terms of high model complexity, so Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
we will improve and deploy our model in a lightweight manner adversarial networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw. (ICANN),
on the nuclear power industrial network for data management. 2019, pp. 703–716.
 [23] H. Zhou, K. Yu, X. Zhang, G. Wu, and A. Yazidi, “Contrastive
 autoencoder for anomaly detection in multivariate time series,” Inf. Sci.,
 R EFERENCES vol. 610, pp. 266–280, Sep. 2022.
[1] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain: [24] Y. Shi, B. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Tang, C. Huang, and J. Dong, “Robust
 A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4, anomaly detection for multivariate time series through temporal GCNs
 pp. 2356–2426, 2023. and attention-based VAE,” Knowledge-Based Syst., vol. 275, Sep. 2023,
[2] J. Li, Y.-A. Tan, X. Liu, W. Meng, and Y. Li, “Interpretable adversarial Art. no. 110725.
 example detection via high-level concept activation vector,” Comput. [25] Y. He et al., “Variate associated domain adaptation for unsupervised mul-
 Secur., vol. 150, Mar. 2025, Art. no. 104218. tivariate time series anomaly detection,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery
[3] S. Li, B. Li, B. Sun, and Y. Weng, “Towards visual-prompt temporal from Data, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1–24, Sep. 2024.
 answer grounding in instructional video,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. [26] N. Bai, X. Wang, R. Han, Q. Wang, and Z. Liu, “PAFormer: Anomaly
 Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 8836–8853, Dec. 2024. detection of time series with parallel-attention transformer,” IEEE Trans.
[4] H. Yu, R. Xu, H. Zhang, Z. Yang, and H. Liu, “EV-FL: Efficient Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 3315–3328, Feb. 2025.
 verifiable federated learning with weighted aggregation for industrial [27] S. Ma, J. Nie, S. Guan, Z. He, and M. Gao, “MPFormer: Mul-
 IoT networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 1723–1737, tipatch transformer for multivariate time-series anomaly detection
 Apr. 2024. with contrastive learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 23,
[5] J. Shi, M. Sha, and Z. Yang, “Distributed graph routing and scheduling pp. 38221–38237, Dec. 2024.
 for industrial wireless sensor-actuator networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. [28] C. Lin, B. Du, L. Sun, and L. Li, “Hierarchical context representation
 Netw., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1669–1682, Aug. 2019. and self-adaptive thresholding for multivariate anomaly detection,” IEEE
[6] T.-A. Nguyen et al., “Federated PCA on Grassmann manifold for Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 3139–3150, Jul. 2024.
 IoT anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, [29] X. Qiu et al., “TAB: Unified benchmarking of time series anomaly detecpp. 4456–4471, Oct. 2024. tion methods,” in Proc. VLDB Endow., vol. 18, 2025, pp. 2775–2789.
[7] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph [30] L.-R. Yu, Q.-H. Lu, and Y. Xue, “DTAAD: Dual TCN-attention networks
 attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowl.-Based
 2020, pp. 841–850. Syst., vol. 295, Jul. 2024, Art. no. 111849.
[8] T. Nakamura, M. Imamura, R. Mercer, and E. Keogh, “MERLIN: [31] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly
 Parameter-free discovery of arbitrary length anomalies in massive time detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data
 series archives,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), Nov. Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023.
 2020, pp. 1190–1195. [32] C. Lea, M. D. Flynn, R. Vidal, A. Reiter, and G. D. Hager, “Temporal
[9] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly convolutional networks for action segmentation and detection,” in
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery pp. 156–165.
 Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [33] K. Han, A. Xiao, E. Wu, J. Guo, C. Xu, and Y. Wang, “Transformer
[10] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in transformer,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021,
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 15908–15919.
 vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4027–4035.
 [34] Z. Yu, J. Yu, J. Fan, and D. Tao, “Multi-modal factorized bilinear pooling
[11] S. Qin, L. Chen, Y. Luo, and G. Tao, “Multi-view graph contrastive
 with co-attention learning for visual question answering,” in Proc. IEEE
 learning for multivariate time series anomaly detection in IoT,” IEEE
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 1839–1848.
 Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, pp. 22401–22414, Dec. 2023.
 [35] X. Wang, X. He, Y. Cao, M. Liu, and T. Chua, “KGAT: Knowledge graph
[12] C. Ding, S. Sun, and J. Zhao, “MST-GAT: A multimodal
 attention network for recommendation,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD
 spatial–temporal graph attention network for time series anomaly
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD). Anchorage, AK, USA:
 detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 89, pp. 527–536, Jan. 2023.
 ACM, Aug. 2019, pp. 950–958.
[13] H. Kang and P. Kang, “Transformer-based multivariate time series
 anomaly detection using inter-variable attention mechanism,” Knowl.- [36] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for
 Based Syst., vol. 290, Apr. 2024, Art. no. 111507. fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
[14] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpreta- vol. 70, Aug. 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
 tion using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. [37] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detec-
 27th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2021, tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD
 pp. 3220–3230. Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075.
CUI et al.: MULTIVIEW SPATIAL–TEMPORAL INTERACTION ATTENTION-BASED MTS-AD 1019

[38] G. B. Moody and R. G. Mark, “The impact of the MIT-BIH arrhythmia Shenghao Liu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 database,” IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 45–50, Mar. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Electronic
 2001. Information and Communications, Huazhong Uni-
[39] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed versity of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan,
 for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber- China, in 2016 and 2021, respectively. He is cur-
 Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw. (CySWater), Apr. 2016, pp. 31–36. rently an Associate Professor with the School of
[40] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water Cyber Science and Engineering, HUST. His research
 distribution testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical interests include data and information content secusystems,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Physical Syst. Smart Water rity, recommender systems, social network security,
 Netw., Apr. 2017, pp. 25–28. and deep learning and neural networks. He received
[41] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- the IEEE SCSTC Early Career Award.
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in Web applications,” in Proc. World Wide
 Web Conf., 2018, pp. 187–196.
[42] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2018,
 pp. 1–19.
[43] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga,
 “USAD: UnSupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,”
 in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 Aug. 2020, pp. 3395–3404.
[44] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
 VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022. Lingzhi Yi received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
[45] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual civil engineering and the Ph.D. degree in safety sciattention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly ence and engineering from the University of South
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery China, Hengyang, China, in 2005, 2008, and 2018,
 Data Mining (KDD), 2023, pp. 3033–3045. respectively. She is currently a Professor with the
 School of Information Engineering, Zhongnan University of Economics and Law, Wuhan, China. Her
 Kai Cui received the B.S. degree from the School
 research interests include the artificial intelligence of
 of Electrical Engineering, University of South China,
 things (AIoT), data and information content security,
 Hengyang, China, in 2020, and the M.S. degree from
 and coverage reliability in the IoT.
 the School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in 2023. He is
 currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School
 of Cyber Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan,
 China. His research interests include the industrial
 Internet of Things security, data and information
 content security, multimodal disinformation analysis,
and social network security.

 Shibo He (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
 from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, in 2012. From
 Liangbin Gao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
 November 2010 to November 2011, he was a
 from the Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering,
 Visiting Scholar with the University of Waterloo,
 Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, in 2021
 Waterloo. He was an Associate Research Scientist
 and 2022, respectively. He is currently pursuing the
 and a Post-Doctoral Scholar with Arizona State
 Ph.D. degree with the School of Cyber Science and
 University, Tempe, AZ, USA, from March 2014
 Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and
 to May 2014 and from May 2012 to February
 Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. His research
 2014, respectively. He is currently a Professor with
 interests include the industrial Internet of Things
 Zhejiang University. His research interests include
 security, video harmful content detection, multithe IoT, crowdsensing, and big data analysis.
 modal disinformation analysis, and social network
 security.

 Xianjun Deng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree from the School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University
 of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2014.
 He is currently a Professor with the School of Cyber Hongwei Lu received the B.Sc., M.Sc., and Ph.D.
 Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of degrees from Huazhong University of Science and
 Science and Technology. He has published more Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China. He is currently
 than 100 technical papers in international top jour- a Professor with the School of Cyber Science and
 nals and conferences. His current research interests Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and
 include the industrial Internet of Things security Technology. His research interests include security
 and reliability, data and information content security, and privacy in ubiquitous computing and electronic
artificial intelligence (AI) security, and social network security. He received commerce, with a focus on security protocol analythe IEEE TCSC Early Career Award and the IEEE SCSTC Middle Career sis, access control, and trust negotiation.
Award.