Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

 Journal of Information Security and Applications
 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jisa

MVNIDS: A multiview-based network intrusion detection system
Sunit Kumar Nandi ∗, Ritesh Ratti , Sanasam Ranbir Singh , Sukumar Nandi
Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati Guwahati, Assam, India

a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c t

Keywords: Traditional Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) predominantly rely on signature-based and supervised
Intrusion detection systems learning approaches that require large volumes of labeled attack data. However, generating such labeled data
Network attacks is costly, time-consuming, and often impractical, especially in the presence of class imbalance and zero-day at-
Network security
 tacks. To address these limitations, this paper proposes MVNIDS, a Multiview-based Network Intrusion Detection
Unsupervised machine learning
Self supervised learning
 System employing a self-supervised learning paradigm. The proposed method constructs three complementary
Autoencoder network views from raw packet capture data, namely, Network View, Flow View, and Image View, each capturing distinct
 protocol, temporal, and structural characteristics of network traﬃc. Independent autoencoder models are trained
 on benign samples for each view, and their reconstruction errors are fused through a majority-voting mechanism
 to automatically generate “Attack” and “Benign” pseudo-labels. These labels are subsequently used to train a
 binary classiﬁer for ﬁnal intrusion detection. Experimental evaluation on the CICIDS2018 dataset, focusing on
 FTP BruteForce and UDP DoS attacks, demonstrates that MVNIDS outperforms most view-speciﬁc and supervised
 baselines, achieving up to 98.3 % F1-score and 98.5 % accuracy. The multiview representation enhances detection robustness and enables eﬀective identiﬁcation of zero-day and variant attacks, highlighting MVNIDS as a
 scalable, computationally eﬃcient, and generalizable framework for modern network security applications.

1. Introduction zero-day attacks are frequent and cannot be detected reliably by systems
 trained on static labeled data.
 Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) play a critical role in Moreover, most Internet traﬃc today is encrypted and thus the masafeguarding modern communication infrastructures against a growing jority of the IDS solutions have issues with Deep Packet Inspection. In
range of cyber threats. These threats are easily generated by attackers us- order to eﬀectively develop an IDS solution for modern encrypted neting open-source utilities like LOIC [1], Slowloris [2], Nmap [3], etc. and work traﬃc, only payload information is not suﬃcient for detecting atcan hamper overall communication between entities and aﬀect system tacks. It is also required to utilize information from other sources like
performance. However, most existing NIDS frameworks remain heavily header and ﬂow statistics [4] for accurate detection. Several IDS soludependent on signature-based and supervised learning techniques for tions like Guo et. al. [5], Bhale et. al. [6], Koc et. al. [7], etc. utilizing
attack detection. Signature-based systems rely on manually engineered the ﬂow level information have been developed earlier to resolve this
rules or known attack patterns, while supervised learning models de- problem.
pend on large volumes of labeled data for training. In both cases, the Earlier approaches like rule-based IDS solutions (i.e. Snort [8], and
availability and quality of labeled data directly determine system per- Bro [9]) consider header ﬁelds and payload distribution details only for
formance. attack detection, due to which payload-related attacks are not captured.
 The reliance on labeled datasets presents several challenges. First, On the other hand, solutions like Perdisci et. al. [10], Ariu et. al. [11],
curating labeled attack data is costly and time-consuming, as it requires and Thorat et. al. [12] consider only the payload information and do not
extensive domain expertise and continuous updates to accommodate utilize header or ﬂow level information due to which the ﬂow sequence
new or evolving attack variants. Second, even in widely used benchmark information is missing and such solutions are unable to detect certain
datasets, the number of attack samples is signiﬁcantly smaller than that attacks. In other solutions, the packet header and payload are utilized
of benign samples, resulting in high class imbalance. This imbalance together but they are unable to detect low rate attacks.
leads to biased models that tend to favor normal traﬃc, often missing To address these limitations, this paper proposes MVNIDS, a
subtle or rare malicious patterns. Moreover, in real-world network en- Multiview-based Network Intrusion Detection System that employs a
vironments, new or previously unseen attacks, commonly referred to as self-supervised learning paradigm. The proposed method eliminates the

 ∗ Corresponding author.

 E-mail addresses: sunitknandi@iitg.ac.in (S.K. Nandi), ritesh.ratti@gmail.com (R. Ratti), ranbir@iitg.ac.in (S.R. Singh), sukumar@iitg.ac.in (S. Nandi).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jisa.2025.104321

Available online 2 December 2025
2214-2126/© 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

dependency on manually labeled attack data by leveraging multiple and SPADE [17] consider building proﬁles for network header ﬁelds and
perspectives, or views, of the same network traﬃc. Speciﬁcally, three detecting attack activity by comparing them with the pre-determined
complementary views are constructed from raw packet capture data, thresholds. Another proposed method [18] considers the statistical analnamely, Network View, Flow View, and Image View. Independent au- ysis of packet header data to detect attacks. It is based on analyzing
toencoder models are trained for each view using only normal traﬃc, en- the correlation of destination IP in outgoing traﬃc and uses wavelet
abling them to learn compact representations of benign behavior. Dur- transforms to study the address and port number correlation for diﬀering inference, reconstruction errors from these view-speciﬁc models are ent timescales. Most of these proposed solutions are based on outdated
combined through a majority-voting mechanism to automatically gen- datasets and are not relevant to recent attacks.
erate pseudo-labels (“Attack” or “Benign”). These self-generated labels
are subsequently used to train a binary classiﬁer capable of accurately 2.2. Flow view based solutions
predicting the class of unseen traﬃc instances.
 The multiview design serves two key purposes. First, it enhances The Flow-based solutions proposed earlier consider a supervised
detection accuracy by integrating diverse information sources: packet learning-based approach like Tomio [19] proposed a multiple ﬂow
headers that capture protocol-level statistics, ﬂow records that capture features-based classiﬁcation model that considers diﬀerent views of
temporal dependencies, and image representations that encode abstract MAWIFlow dataset [20] like Nigel, Orunada & Viegas features. It convisual patterns. Second, it empowers the system to detect zero-day and sists of two main steps of classiﬁcation with an autonomous model upvariant attacks. When new attack types exhibit behavioural, temporal, date, where the classiﬁcation decision is based on the consensus of ranor statistical similarities to known malicious activity, the system can still dom forest models trained for each set of features using majority voting.
identify them as anomalies without relying on predeﬁned signatures or Other recent ﬂow based solution by Alzubi et. al. [21] and Najaﬁ et. al.
exact feature matches. Among these views, the Image View provides [22] utilized sophisticated feature selection to utilize important features
a unique advantage by transforming packet data into visual represen- to construct various supervised machine learning models.
tations that are protocol-agnostic. This allows the system to detect vi- Other recent Deep CNN based models by Kaur et. al. [23], Wanjau et.
sually similar malicious patterns even when attacks diﬀer in transport al. [24], Kim et. al. [25], Dai et. al. [26] and Kim et. al. [27] utilized the
mechanism or application context. The Flow View, on the other hand, wide set of features to build intrusion detection model that improve the
captures sequence-based temporal dependencies, identifying repetitive overall detection accuracy but unable to capture the contextual inforor sustained activity across multiple sessions or applications. Together, mation. To resolve this issue, sequence based model is developed by Hai
these views create a comprehensive understanding of network behavior et. al. [28] that introduces high time complexity due to sequence based
that enables robust, generalized intrusion detection. approach. Although, the proposed supervised learning based methods
 In other words, the proposed MVNIDS framework addresses the key provide better results however these methods require frequent data uplimitations of traditional intrusion detection approaches by combining date for new attack detection.
self-supervised learning with a multiview representation strategy miti- Various unsupervised deep learning-based solutions are also progating the challenges of labeled data scarcity and class imbalance and posed to mitigate the problems of supervised learning-based models.
extending the system’s capability to detect unknown or evolving attacks For instance, autoencoder-based solutions proposed by Said et. al. [29],
in real-world environments. The proposed framework has been evalu- Binbusayyis et. al. [30], Mirsky et. al. [31], Han et. al. [32], Lopes et.
ated on a recent benchmark dataset, namely, CICIDS2018 [13] on the al. [33] and similarity learning-based methods proposed by Andresini
FTP Bruteforce and UDP DDoS attacks, and its eﬃcacy demonstrated in et. al. [34], Hindy et. al. [35] are discussed earlier that utilize ﬂow level
details. The superiority of the proposed framework is reported by com- information.The major limitation of most of these deep learning based
parison with existing works. models is that they suﬀer from high computation time and complexity.
 The paper is organized into diﬀerent sections as follows. In
Section 2, we discuss the various solutions proposed on diﬀerent views 2.3. Image view based solutions
derived from network packets for attack detection. Section 3 describes
the proposed methodology and algorithm in detail and the components Most of the other proposed methods also consider representing netinvolved. Section 4 presents the implementation of the proposed ap- work packets in binary format (primarily image) and developing the
proach, dataset, & experimentation results. Section 5 brings forward the classiﬁcation model on the represented information. Irina [36] proposed
discussion on generalizability of the proposed method for varying attack a malware detection method based on binary visualization and selftypes. In Section 6 we provide a conclusion and future work. organizing incremental neural network (SOINN [37]). The algorithm
 chosen for binary representation uses Hilbert space-ﬁlling curves [14]
2. Background for a better imprint of the image. The proposed method ﬁrst converts
 the binary ﬁles into an image and then considers 4 parts of an im-
 Network packets consist of two important parts i.e. Network header age as the region of interest to construct the histogram with a feature-
(describing the protocol header-speciﬁc information) and Network pay- length of 1024 and utilized the SOINN model for malware detection.
load (consisting of the data bytes transferred). These network packets The dataset used for experimentation consists of 2K benign ﬁles from
can be further aggregated based on various parameters, and statistical a trusted source and 2K malicious ﬁles collected from the VirusShare
features like byte per sec, inter-arrival time, sub-ﬂow information, etc website. The detection accuracy of 91.7 % and 94.1 % is achieved for
can be computed to build the ﬂow level information. Other represen- ransomware attacks in .pdf and .doc ﬁles.
tations can also be generated similarly with the further transformation Another method for IoT malware traﬃc detection is proposed by
of packets to binary formats like Images [14], Text [15], etc. We study Robert et. al. [38], which considers transforming network traﬃc into
various IDS solutions proposed earlier that consider multiple views like 2D images using the binvis.io [39] utility and classifying the images usnetwork header (Section 2.1), ﬂow (Section 2.2), image (Section 2.3), ing the MobileNet model. In the ﬁrst step network traﬃc is captured
generated from network packets. A brief description of diﬀerent meth- using a sniﬀer and then to convert the binary ﬁle to 2D image data
ods is presented as follows: is assumed as a byte string and converted to speciﬁc color using an
 ASCII table. The proposed approach achieved an accuracy of 91.32 %.
2.1. Network view based solutions Another similar method proposed by Joseph [40] for IoT network attack
 detection uses a combination of network traﬃc proﬁling and machine
 Network view-based solutions consider the information extracted learning components. The Network proﬁling component uses rate metfrom network headers. Most of the earlier proposed solutions PHAD [16] rics for calculating the deviation from normal proﬁle due to attack and

 2
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

the machine learning component built on MobileNetV3 [41] classiﬁcation model uses extracted images from packet capture (pcap) ﬁles for
attack detection. The combination of both systems results in an average
accuracy rate per iteration of 99.17 %. Most of these proposed solutions
are based on supervised learning mechanisms that require labeled data
for training.

2.4. Multi-aspect based solutions

 We also study various approaches that consider multiple aspects
generated from the same feature set and build supervised learningbased models for detection. For example, the classiﬁcation method
proposed by Ming [42] considers spatial and temporal views together.
It consists of 3 layers parallel network structure where the ﬁrst and
third sub-networks consider spatial features using a convolution neural
network model (CNN) based model and the second network simultaneously learns spatial and temporal features using the CNN-LSTM
network. The proposed network learns the network using early fusion
technology to improve the accuracy of network traﬃc classiﬁcation.
This proposed method is tested on ISCX2012 and CICIDS2017 datasets
and provides a classiﬁcation accuracy of 99.9 %. Another solution
HCRNNIDS [43] is proposed earlier to initially process the features
through CNN and later passed through recurrent neural network (RNN)
layers to generate the sequence at each time step. CNN is used to
capture the local features while temporal features are captured using
RNN. This method is applied to the CIC-IDS2018 dataset and detects
attacks with an accuracy of 97.75 %.

 The major limitation of the earlier proposed methods is that it considers a single view or set of features at a time and multiple aspects from
one type of features are utilized only in the supervised learning-based Fig. 1. Flow diagram for multi-view based IDS model training.
solution. Our proposed model considers multiple views together to build
an IDS solution that is based on a self-supervised learning mechanism
 Algorithms 1 and 2 respectively. Section 3.1 presents how various views
and avoids the requirement of labeled data for model training. In the
 are generated from network packets, Section 3.2 discusses the details
next section, we discuss the proposed methodology in detail.
 on training view speciﬁc auto-encoders and Section 3.3 presents the self
 supervised model training process. Section 3.4 discusses the algorithms
3. Proposed methodology
 for training and inference process in detail.
 The proposed method considers the raw packets from network communication. Various packet sniﬃng tools like Wireshark, tcpdump, [44] 3.1. View generation
etc. can be used to capture these raw packets from the port in dedicated
machine or network switch that is running in promiscuous mode. These Once the packets are captured from the packet sniﬃng module, variraw packets contain communication information among diﬀerent hosts. ous views are extracted in View generation module. These views exhibit
For the experiment purpose, we used the raw packets already extracted diﬀerentiated representations of network packets in multiple forms and
for speciﬁc attacks, but in the real network, a sniﬃng module is required constructed views represent supplementary as well as complementary
to capture the packets consecutively with a pre-deﬁned time window properties intrinsically. For a the pre-deﬁned time window of △𝑇 , we
length. As shown in the ﬂow diagram (Fig. 1), the extracted network ﬁrst extract the batch of network packets based on generated timestamp
packets are ﬁrst converted to multiple diﬀerent views using the subset and use these batches to construct multiple diﬀerent views as follows:
of packets captured at ﬁxed time window length and later the viewspeciﬁc autoencoder models are trained and view-speciﬁc reconstruc- 3.1.1. Network view
tion error thresholds are estimated by training the autoencoder models The Network View generation extracts protocol header ﬁelds from
with reconstruction error as a loss function. These trained encoders (part all TCP/IP stack layers (data link through application layer), providing
of autoencoder) are further utilized for generating representation from comprehensive visibility across network communications. Features as
the extracted views and used for producing labeled data with the ma- speciﬁed in Table 1 are then aggregated within deﬁned time windows
jority voting on view-speciﬁc encoder classiﬁcation results. This label (△𝑇 ) of 1 min, 2 min, 3 min and 4 min to reveal statistical patterns ingeneration process also handle the scenario for the slight change on the visible in individual packets. The resulting Network view features inthreshold values to build the more robust model that can handle the clude protocol distribution metrics (percentage of TCP, UDP, ICMP trafminimal change in learned threshold as the value of threshold may vary ﬁc), connection establishment patterns (SYN packet rates, connection
over time due to change in network characteristics. In the ﬁnal stage attempt distributions), fragmentation statistics (fragment counts, fragof processing, the prepared labeled data is utilized to build the binary mentation oﬀsets), and addressing patterns (unique source/destination
classiﬁcation model that is used to predict the outcome as Benign or counts, address entropy measures).
Attack. To construct the Network view, we apply speciﬁc ﬁltering rules that
 The proposed solution for the intrusion detection system consists of extract meaningful patterns from the raw header data. For instance, to
various modules of processing as shown in the high-level architecture identify broadcast traﬃc patterns that might indicate network scanning
diagram (Fig. 2) for the proposed model training method. The pseudo- or ARP poisoning attacks, we ﬁlter packets with the destination MAC
code for the proposed model training and inference is represented in address ﬀ:ﬀ:ﬀ:ﬀ:ﬀ:ﬀ. Similarly, to calculate incoming traﬃc volume to

 3
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Fig. 2. High level architecture for model training.

 Table 1
 Network view: Feature information.
 S.No. Feature Category Feature Description Count

 1 Interface Based Features related to transferred octets incoming and outgoing, incoming and outgoing unicast and non-unicast packets. 6
 2 IP header based Features related to incoming and outgoing IP datagrams. 2
 3 ICMP header based Fearures related to number of incoming and outgoing icmp total, echo, destination unreachable messages. 6
 4 TCP header based Features speciﬁc to TCP header information like incoming and outgoing segments, connection information. 7
 5 UDP header based Features constructed from UDP header information like input and outgoing datagrams. 3

a potential victim, we ﬁlter packets where the destination IP address
matches the monitored host’s address. These rule-based aggregations
are applied systematically across all relevant protocol ﬁelds to build a
comprehensive network traﬃc proﬁle.
 By focusing on header information rather than payload content, the
Network View provides an eﬃcient ﬁrst-line analysis that is both computationally lightweight and privacy-preserving. This approach allows
us to detect attacks that manifest as anomalies in connection patterns,
protocol usage, or traﬃc distribution without the need for deep packet
inspection, making it particularly valuable for encrypted traﬃc analysis
where payload examination is not possible. Fig. 3. Image view for benign and attack scenario.

3.1.2. Flow view tured image representation is created where header and payload infor-
 The Flow View transforms raw traﬃc into bidirectional ﬂow repre- mation from captured raw packets is combined to create a 2D represensentations using the standard 5-tuple identiﬁer (source IP, destination tation for each time window △𝑇 (1 min, 2 min, 3 min and 4 min) using
IP, source port, destination port, protocol). For each ﬂow, we compute binvis.io [39] utility.
various statistical features like volume metrics (byte and packet counts, binvis.io [39] internally uses Hilbert Space ﬁlling curve [14] for clusaverage sizes), timing characteristics (inter-arrival times, ﬂow dura- tering the data which generates a better imprint of an image that protion), ﬂag analysis (distribution of TCP ﬂags throughout the connection vides an added advantage of representation over black and white image.
lifecycle), throughput patterns (bytes per time unit at diﬀerent temporal In this algorithm, the image data is divided into multiple bytes and each
granularities) and other features as speciﬁed in Table 2. The features are byte is assigned to a speciﬁc color code depending on its ASCII values
captured using utilities like Netﬂow [45] and CICFlowMeter-V3 [46]. within the range of ASCII characters as follows:
 These features are calculated for both directions of each ﬂow, then
 • blue for printable character
combined to create bidirectional ﬂow proﬁles. Flow aggregation is fur-
 • green for control characters
ther employed to construct time-series representations at various dis-
 • red for extended characters
tinct time windows (△𝑇 ) of 1 min, 2 min, 3 min and 4 min.
 • black for the null character
 • white for the non-breaking space
3.1.3. Image view
 The Image View generation methodology transforms abstract net- It is also observed that images related to attack consist of dense pixel
work data into visual patterns. This abstract data contains both network values with red and blue regions, which is easily distinguishable from
header and payload information. The payload information can exist in normal scenarios where most of the images consist of sparse black reeither non-encrypted or encrypted (with TLS, DTLS, etc.) form. A struc- gions as represented in Fig. 3. It also conveys that amount of packets

 4
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Table 2
 Flow view : Feature information [13].
 S.No. Feature Category Feature Description Count

 1 Packet Transfer rate Features related to forward and backward packet transfer rate 5
 2 Packet Length Features related to forward and backward packet length information 15
 3 Inter-arrival Time Elapsed time information between ﬂows 14
 4 Header information Features speciﬁc to header information like ﬂag count, header length etc. 14
 5 Segment information Features speciﬁc to segment size information 4
 6 Transfer rate Features speciﬁc to bulk transfer rate 7
 7 Subﬂow related Features speciﬁc to subﬂow information 7
 8 Flow activeness Statistical Features speciﬁc to ﬂow activeness information 8

generated for high rate attacks like DDoS attack is more due to which individual thresholds are used to label the individual records as Benign
dense regions are created. or Attack in the next stage.
 Once the views are generated, the information is represented into numerical features. These numerical features can follow a diﬀerent range 3.3. Self-supervised model training
of values. So to avoid model bias, it is required to convert them into a
common scale. For this, we used the Normalization technique to trans- Automatic data labelling is the next step that delivers selfform features in the range of [0,1]. Let us assume the feature values for supervision for the proposed scheme. It is used to generate the attack
a speciﬁc view is represented in vector 𝑋̂ 𝑖 then the transformed value is or benign labels from the pre-trained view-speciﬁc autoencoder models.
𝑋 𝑖 is the normalized representation computed through Eq. (1) where, 𝜇 This stage utilizes the view-speciﬁc thresholds learned in the previous
is mean and 𝜎 is the standard deviation of 𝑋̂ 𝑖 . For the Image view, we stage to compute the label for an outcome of each record when passed
divide each pixel value by 255 so that values are aligned in the range through a learned autoencoder. For a given record, multiple views are
from [0,1]. processed through each view-speciﬁc encoder separately to identify the
 attack activity. Now the ﬁnal label speciﬁc to the network event is as-
 𝑋̂ 𝑖 − 𝜇
𝑋𝑖 = (1) signed as the majority vote of the individual encoders. As shown in Fig. 4
 𝜎
 majority of outcome from individual view-based autoencoder is assigned
 as a ﬁnal label (anomaly as True or False) for further training. In this
3.2. Auto-encoder model training example, loss values and thresholds for network, ﬂow and image view
 are deﬁned as (loss_nw, loss_ﬂow, loss_img) and (threshold_nw, thresh-
 Autoencoder Model Training module ﬁrst performs the job of train- old_ﬂow, threshold_img) respectively. In the proposed mechanism maing individual view-speciﬁc auto-encoder models for normalized view jority voting from 3 (odd number of views) autoencoders is considered
speciﬁc features (𝑋 𝑖 ), and learn the reconstruction error thresholds spe- as a majority. This stage also handles the slight change (𝜃 𝑖 ± 𝛿) in the valciﬁc to each view. To build the view-speciﬁc auto-encoders on provided ues of learned view speciﬁc thresholds by estimating the slightly moddata, we assume input data for view is 𝑋 𝑖 which is represented as a iﬁed threshold and regenerating the labels. By considering the slight
set of N records 𝑥1 , 𝑥2 , 𝑥3 , . . . 𝑥𝑁 . Each of these input records (rep- change in threshold, the trained model becomes more robust towards
resented with normalized features) is supplied to the Encoder network. the minimal changes in network characteristics and provide better re-
The encoder module consists of multiple layers and each layer is asso- sults. During inference, this model can directly be used to classify an
ciated with multiple processing units. These units are selected based on attack instance, instead of considering the majority voting from the authe type of each view. For instance, Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) units toencoders.
are used for network and ﬂow view (1 dimensional) and CNN units are For the majority voting, Let 𝐶1 (𝑋), 𝐶2 (𝑋)…𝐶𝑛 (𝑋) be the predicted
used for Image view (2 dimensional). The ﬂow of records is processed classes from 𝑛 diﬀerent view-based encoder models for an input vector
through each encoder unit. At the last stage of the encoder, an inter- 𝑋 then, ﬁnal label 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑗𝑜𝑟 (𝑋) can be computed with Eq. (4).
mediate representation is generated which is provided to the Decoder
module. The decoder module consists of the same number of stages as 𝐶𝑚𝑎𝑗𝑜𝑟 (𝑋) = 𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒(𝐶1 (𝑋), 𝐶2 (𝑋), … 𝐶𝑛 (𝑋)) (4)
speciﬁed in the corresponding encoder layer and tries to reconstruct the The data prepared using self-supervision is used now to build the bisupplied information at the subsequent stage of processing. At the ﬁnal nary classiﬁer. In this step, we utilize the intermediate representations
stage, Decoder generates the view-speciﬁc output as 𝑌 𝑖 which is of the from view speciﬁc autoencoders and used as an input to binary classisame dimension as the input 𝑋 𝑖 . The ﬁnal layer of the decoder generates ﬁer. View-speciﬁc encoders are ﬁrst used to encode the incoming view
an output vector and Mean Square Error (MSE) is used to calculate the and generate representation. These representations are further concateerror between the input and output vector using Eq. (2). This error helps nated together and supplied to classiﬁer consisting of fully connected
us to quantify the view speciﬁc reconstruction error threshold 𝜃 𝑖 for nor- layers with softmax layer as an output. This binary classiﬁer consists
mal traﬃc which is based on the mean of the error values as shown in of 3 dense layers with 128,64,32 neurons and utilize binary cross en-
Eq. (3). Once the threshold is determined, incoming ﬂow is identiﬁed to tropy loss function for training the model. More details on the learning
be an attack speciﬁcally if the reconstruction error is larger than thresh- structure of the network can be found in Table 3.
old 𝜃 𝑖 . Let D is the feature dimension for view 𝑋 𝑖 and N is the total
number of training records then the error value 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖 and threshold 𝜃 𝑖 3.4. Algorithm
is estimated as

 1 ∑ 𝑖
 𝐷 The proposed algorithm involves multiple stages of processing as
 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖 = |𝑋 (𝑑) − 𝑌 𝑖 (𝑑)|2 (2) described earlier in Fig. 2. These stages play a vital role in the overall
 𝐷 𝑑=1
 process. The Pseudo-code for the proposed model training and inference
 1 ∑
 𝑁
 is represented in Algorithms 1 and 2 respectively.
 𝜃𝑖 = 𝐸𝑟𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖 (𝑛) (3)
 𝑁 𝑛=1
 3.4.1. Model training
 After this stage, the set of various thresholds (𝜃 1 , 𝜃 2 , …𝜃 𝑛 ) are learned The Algorithm 1 presents the model training process in detail. For
for each speciﬁc view, which is used to classify the input records. These the pre-selected time window △T and raw packets 𝑃 , diﬀerent views

 5
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Fig. 4. Sample of automatic data labeling using majority voting.

 Table 3 tion in Table 3. The whole training process is explained below in the
 Model conﬁguration for binary classiﬁer. Algorithm 1.
 Parameter Values Complexity Analysis: The overall complexity of the training process
 depends upon the associated functions. The 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁()
 Additional dense Layers 3
 Concatenated Encoder Representation Length 96 function considers calculating the aggregated features for the set of
 Layer Structure 128, 64, 32 packets in the speciﬁed time window. The speciﬁed views can be com-
 Optimizer Adam puted in parallel with linear complexity therefore for V such views and F
 Learning rate 1e-4 features, the total complexity is O(𝑉 ∗ 𝐹 ). The complexity of training an
 Loss function Binary cross entropy
 Batch size 16
 autoencoder model with a constant number of layers and with 𝑁 com-
 Number of Epochs 50 putation units is around O(𝑁 2 ) and multiple view-speciﬁc autoencoders
 can be trained in parallel too. Function 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸𝑅_𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 () also
 takes O(𝑁 2 ) time for encoding the view-speciﬁc information. The ﬁ-
 nal classiﬁer trained is a multi-layer perceptron and its complexity is
 Algorithm 1: Model training.
 also O(𝑛2 ) for 𝑛 computation units. Hence the overall complexity for
 Input: Time window △T, 𝛿, and collection of raw packets 𝑃 the model training process for a particular batch is around O(𝑉 ∗ 𝐹 ) +
 Output: Classiﬁcation Model 𝑀, and Autoencoder models O(𝑁 2 ) + O(𝑛2 ).
 𝐴𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝐴𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝐴𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
 1: 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑋 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 ← 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁(𝑃 , △𝑇 )
 3.4.2. Model inference
 2: 𝑋 ← 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑋 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
 The Algorithm 2 represents the execution of the proposed scheme
 3: for 𝑋 𝑖 ∈ 𝑋 do
 during inference where the trained models are ﬁrst loaded from per-
 4: 𝐴𝑖 , 𝜃 𝑖 ← 𝐴𝑈 𝑇 𝑂𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸𝑅_𝑀𝑂𝐷𝐸𝐿(𝑋𝑖 )
 sistent storage. It utilizes the view-speciﬁc autoencoder models for en-
 5: end for
 coding purpose and uses the classiﬁcation model directly to classify
 6: Initialize label array as 𝐿
 the generated view-speciﬁc representations as Benign or Attack. In the
 7: for 𝑃 𝑗 ∈ 𝑃 do
 ﬁrst step, the packets captured at a pre-deﬁned time window △𝑇 are
 8: Initialize class array as 𝐶
 used to generate the multiple views iteratively by using the function
 9: for 𝑋 𝑖 ∈ 𝑋 do
 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁(). Later these views are processed from the
 10: 𝐶𝑗𝑖 ← 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸𝑅_𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 (𝜃 𝑖 ± 𝛿, 𝑃 𝑗 )
 respective encoders to generate the representations (i.e. 𝑅𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑅𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ,
 11: Add 𝐶𝑗𝑖 to 𝐶
 𝑅𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 ). This encoding is represented as a function 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸() that
 12: end for
 takes a trained autoencoder and view as an input and generates the
 13: 𝐿𝑗 ← 𝑀𝐴𝐽 𝑂𝑅𝐼𝑇 𝑌 _𝑉 𝑂𝑇 𝐼𝑁𝐺(𝐶)
 view-speciﬁc representation. These representations are further classi-
 14: end for
 ﬁed from the trained self-supervised model to predict a Benign or an
 15: Model 𝑀 ← 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁_𝑀𝑂𝐷𝐸𝐿(𝑃 , 𝐿)
 Attack scenario and are represented as a function 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 ().
 Complexity Analysis: The overall complexity of the proposed model inference algorithm depends on the functions
 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁() , 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸(), and 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 (). For
𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 ,𝑋 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 are generated at an initial stage. The view generan incoming set of packets captured at time window △T, V views
ation functionality is represented as 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁() which
 are generated for F features so the complexity is around O(𝑉 ∗ 𝐹 ).
is used to create multiple views as per sub-Section 3.1. Later, for each of
 The function 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸() is used to encode the view information
the views, separate autoencoder models are trained, and view-speciﬁc
 through autoencoder which is O(𝑁 2 ) for 𝑁 computation units. and
thresholds 𝜃 𝑖 are determined. The autoencoder training process is de-
 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 () function generally takes O(𝑛2 ) for 𝑛 computation units.
ﬁned as function 𝐴𝑈 𝑇 𝑂𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸𝑅_𝑀𝑂𝐷𝐸𝐿() that trains the model
 Therefore the overall complexity of algorithm is O(𝑉 ∗ 𝐹 ) + O(𝑁 2 ) +
on supplied view 𝑋 𝑖 . Now with each autoencoder, an input record is
 O(𝑛2 ).
predicted as Normal or Benign depending on comparing calculated loss
with learned view-speciﬁc threshold. The process of prediction is called
𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸𝑅_𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 () that takes the learned thresholds and the Algorithm 2: Model inference.
variation factor 𝛿 as input. Additional records are generated by includ- Input: Model M, Time window △T, 𝐴𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 ,𝐴𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝐴𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 and
ing the slight change (𝛿) in threshold values. Further, the majority voting collection of raw packets 𝑃
is applied on predicted class metrics, and the ﬁnal label is identiﬁed for Output: Benign or Attack
an input record. The associated function 𝑀𝐴𝐽 𝑂𝑅𝐼𝑇 𝑌 _𝑉 𝑂𝑇 𝐼𝑁𝐺() con- 1: Load models 𝑀, 𝐴𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝐴𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝐴𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒
siders the outcome from each view-speciﬁc autoencoder and selects the 2: 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑋 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 ← 𝑉 𝐼𝐸𝑊 _𝐺𝐸𝑁𝐸𝑅𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁(𝑃 , △𝑇 )
majority as a ﬁnal outcome. This information is generated for all input 3: 𝑅𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 ← 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸(𝐴𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 )
records. In the ﬁnal stage, the binary classiﬁer M is trained with labeled 4: 𝑅𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 ← 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸(𝐴𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑋 𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 )
data and stored for the inference process. The classiﬁcation model is 5: 𝑅𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 ← 𝐸𝑁𝐶𝑂𝐷𝐸(𝐴𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 , 𝑋 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 )
trained in function 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝐼𝐶𝐴𝑇 𝐼𝑂𝑁_𝑀𝑂𝐷𝐸𝐿() by using the ﬁnal 6: Benign or Attack ← 𝐶𝐿𝐴𝑆𝑆𝐼𝐹 𝑌 (𝑀, 𝑅𝑛𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑘 , 𝑅𝑓 𝑙𝑜𝑤 , 𝑅𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 )
labels generated at the previous step and using the speciﬁed conﬁgura-

 6
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Table 4 age. The conﬁguration for autoencoder networks for diﬀerent views are
 Model conﬁguration for network and ﬂow view. used as shown in Tables 4 and 5. We validated the model performance
 The 𝐟 indicates input feature vector. in terms of classiﬁcation metrics considering the timestamps speciﬁc to
 Parameter Values Attack or Benign class from the dataset description. We also evaluated
 Total Layers 9
 the run time performance of the proposed model in terms of the num-
 Encoder structure 𝐟 ,128, 64, 32 ber of ﬂows processed per second in run time. We used 𝛿 = 0.10 as a
 Compressed output length 16 value to consider the change in threshold parameters while training the
 Decoder structure 32, 64, 128, 𝐟 self-supervised model. This value is selected by observing the standard
 Optimizer Adam
 deviation in the estimated thresholds after multiple runs. If the thresh-
 Learning rate 0.0001
 Loss function Mean squared error old change factor (𝛿) is very high the false positives are reduced, that
 Batch size 16 leads to higher precision.
 Number of Epochs 20
 4.3. Results and analysis
 Table 5
 Model conﬁguration for image view. We evaluated the detection performance of the proposed model in
 Parameter Values terms of precision, recall, F1-score, and accuracy for various time windows (1 min, 2 min, 3 min, and 4 min). In general window size refers to
 Total Layers 6
 the time frame or number of data points considered for analysis at any
 Input Dimension 512x512x3
 Encoder structure 512x512x32, 256x256x64 given moment. The intuition behind selecting speciﬁc window sizes in-
 Compressed dimension 128x128x64 volves balancing between detecting short-term anomalies and capturing
 Decoder structure 256x256x64, 512x512x32 long-term patterns. Too small windows might capture too much noise,
 Optimizer Adam
 leading to false positives, while too large windows may smooth out sig-
 Learning rate 0.0001
 Loss function Mean squared error
 niﬁcant anomalies, leading to false negatives. The selection of window
 Batch size 16 size is based on these intuitions. We have considered the maximum win-
 Number of Epochs 20 dow size of 4 min. to capture the attacks activity within this duration.
 To estimate the prediction performance, we hold out 10 % of normal data as testing along with the attack dataset, and estimated the
4. Experimentation results evaluation metrics between Benign or Attack classes. We experimented
 the models with diﬀerent time window lengths and report the results
4.1. Dataset for each time window since diﬀerent values exhibits diﬀerent performance ﬁgures as mentioned in Tables 6 and 7 for FTP Brute force and
 To evaluate the performance of the proposed method, we consider UDP DDoS attacks respectively. We present results for the two proposed
CICIDS2018 dataset [13] which is recent and publicly available dataset methods with majority voting and with self supervised learning sepadeveloped at Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity (CIC) where FTP- rately, deﬁned as Proposed M.V. and Proposed S.S. respectively. From
Patator and SSH-Patator tools [47] are used for performing brute force the results, it is evident that the proposed model performance varied
attacks and the LOIC, HOIC tools are used for performing DDoS attacks. with time window length. It is analyzed from the performance results
To prepare the dataset, network ﬂow records are generated on traﬃc that the proposed model outperforms every other individual view in
data by using CICFlowMeter-V3 tool [46] and in total 7 diﬀerent types terms of precision and accuracy for most of the time window values.
of attacks are captured at diﬀerent dates. It also contains data in raw net- The best F1-score and accuracy for FTP Brute force attack is attained
work packet ﬁles also which is only used for experimentation purpose. as 98.3 % and 98.5 % respectively for a time window of 1 min. The best
For the purpose of our evaluation, we consider raw packets for two rep- F1-score and accuracy results for UDP DDoS attack is attained as 98.1 %
resentative attacks, namely, FTP BruteForce and UDP DDoS along with and 97.2 % respectively for time window of 3 min.
Benign traﬃc. We utilized raw packet data speciﬁcally for the victim It is also observed that the proposed majority voting based method
host (IP address: 172.31.69.25) and constructed various views from it always performs better than the ﬂow view and network view separately
to build the model. The selected pcap ﬁles consist of 4718327 num- for both the attacks. The proposed self-supervised learning-based model
ber of packets in total for FTP brute force-speciﬁc attacks performed on also outperforms the majority voting in terms of precision, F1-score and
Wed-14-02-2018 date and a total of 91,666,016 packets for UDP DDoS- accuracy for speciﬁc time window length. It is estimated that recall valspeciﬁc attacks that was preformed on Tue-20-02-2018 date. ues are lower for the proposed self supervised learning based model due
 to introduction of the slight change in threshold and generating data in-
4.2. Implementation herently which consists of more records for normal scenario. However
 with the proposed self supervised learning based scheme, model is able
 For our implementation, we extracted data for the Benign scenario to capture the slight change in threshold values and handle the attack
speciﬁc raw packets by utilizing the timestamp information when any scenarios better.
attack has not been performed and generated various .pcap ﬁle chunks It is also observed from view-speciﬁc results, that ﬂow view and imusing editcap utility [48] with the deﬁned time window length from the age view are able to well capture the FTP Brute Attacks because it is
entire packet capture from the dataset. In various experiments, we in- based on a connection-oriented protocol (i.e. TCP) and the performance
crease the time window size (from 1 min. upto 4 min.) and analyze how results for network view are lower. On the other hand for UDP DDoS
the model performs with the increment as the time window aﬀects the attack Network view performs better than ﬂow view and image view
amount of data generated after aggregation. These binary ﬁles (.pcap) because it is based on connection-less protocol (i.e. UDP) and network
are used further to generate multiple views, where binvis.io [39] is used view is the best representative to explain the attack. We also analyzed
for image view generation, CICFlowMeter-v3 [46] is used for prepar- that image view performance (F1-score and accuracy) diminishes for
ing ﬂow view, and network view is generated using our handcrafted larger window sizes.
code. Further, view-speciﬁc autoencoder models are trained and viewspeciﬁc thresholds are identiﬁed for each view individually. The com- 4.3.1. Model convergence
plete implementation is performed on Mac OS with 6-core Intel Core-i7 To assess the learning stability and optimization behavior of the proprocessor with 16 GB RAM and utilized the TensorFlow Python pack- posed model, an epoch-wise convergence analysis is conducted on the

 7
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

Table 6 • Final stabilization (Epochs 15-20): The model approaches conver-
Performance comparison of diﬀerent auto-encoder models for FTP Bruteforce gence with minor oscillations, reﬂecting ﬁne-tuning of parameters
attack. without any indication of overﬁtting.
 Window Size △𝑇 Model Precision% Recall% F1Score% Accuracy%
 The maintained gap of approximately 0.25 between training and val-
 Network View 93.0 100 96.3 94.1 idation losses throughout training demonstrates eﬀective regularization
 Flow View 94.9 100 97.3 95.8
 1 min and robustness. The absence of validation loss spikes conﬁrms model
 Image View 97.3 100 98.2 97.9
 Proposed M.V. 96.8 99.4 98.1 97.0 stability, while the ﬁnal low validation loss of 0.13 underscores the au-
 Proposed S.S. 98.7 98.1 98.3 98.5 toencoder’s ability to generalize eﬀectively to unseen intrusion patterns.
 These results collectively highlight the model’s suitability for real-world
 Network View 89.5 100 94.4 90.9
 Flow View 93.0 100 96.4 94.2 deployment in network intrusion detection systems requiring both ac-
 2 min
 Image View 95.6 100 97.7 95.9 curacy and reliability.
 Proposed M.V. 93.9 98.9 96.4 94.2
 Proposed S.S. 98.2 96.0 95.9 96.0 4.3.2. Time window length vs processing rate
 Network View 92.4 98.3 95.3 92.5 Further, this section also investigates the processing rate in terms of
 3 min
 Flow View 91.0 98.3 94.5 91.2 records per second processed by the trained model against the provided
 Image View 95.1 100 97.5 95.9 time window length (in minutes), as shown in Fig. 5b. The ﬁgure de-
 Proposed M.V. 93.9 100 96.8 95.0
 notes that the processing rate is independent of selected time window
 Proposed S.S. 98.3 90.1 94.0 94.3
 as minimal change is identiﬁed on increasing time window length. This
 Network View 90.3 100 94.9 91.8 is due to non-contextual nature of the proposed scheme that process
 Flow View 97.8 97.8 97.8 96.7
 4 min
 Image View 97.6 100 97.6 96.0
 available data for every time window independently. However, the out-
 Proposed M.V. 96.0 100 97.9 95.7 come of IDS is delayed due to higher time window length as IDS system
 Proposed S.S. 98.1 93.1 95.5 96.0 requires to wait for processing till the data is available.

 4.3.3. Comparison with existing methods
Table 7 In this subsection, we ﬁrst provide the overall comparison of the
Performance comparison of diﬀerent auto-encoder models for UDP DDoS attack. proposed framework with several recent methods build on CICIDS2018
 Window Size △𝑇 Model Precision% Recall% F1Score% Accuracy% dataset for attack detection. The comparison is based on various properties like utilized feature set, underlying approach, support for zero day
 Network View 90.0 100 94.1 90.2
 attack and overall complexity described in Table 8.
 Flow View 90.0 80 84.9 79.8
 1 min We later presented the performance comparison with existing meth-
 Image View 93.0 97.5 95.2 93.6
 Proposed M.V. 93.0 100 96.3 94.6 ods used for FTP brute force attack and UDP DDoS attack detection re-
 Proposed S.S. 98.5 77.12 86.5 90.8 spectively that are implemented using CICIDS2018 dataset. The perfor-
 Network View 87.2 100 93.1 89.6 mance comparison results are presented in Table 9 for both the attacks.
 2 min
 Flow View 91.6 80.4 85.7 81.0 From the results it is evident that the proposed model outperforms most
 Image View 89.3 100 94.3 92.1 of supervised learning based methods except Alzubi et. al. [21] and Na-
 Proposed M.V. 93.0 100 94.4 94.7
 jaﬁ et.al. [22] for FTP Brute Force attack and Lopes et. al. [33] for UDP
 Proposed S.S. 97.9 91.1 95.4 95.5
 DDoS attacks. We can analyze that Alzubi et. al. [21] and Najaﬁ et.al.
 Network View 96.2 100 98.1 97.2 [22] provides better classiﬁcation metrics for FTP Brute Force attack
 Flow View 91.6 84.6 87.9 83.7
 3 min
 Image View 87.0 100 93.1 90.4
 detection, but being supervised learning based model extra eﬀorts on
 Proposed M.V. 96.2 100 98.1 97.2 data labeling is required due to which it is unable to detect zero-day at-
 Proposed S.S. 100 81.0 90.0 93.2 tacks. Also Najaﬁ et.al. [22] suﬀers from high complexity for ensemble
 Network View 84.3 100 91.3 86.2 based model training on selected features and extra processing overhead
 Flow View 90.0 95.2 93.0 89.6 on feature selection and discretization. On the other hand, Lopes et. al.
 4 min
 Image View 71.4 100 83.3 74.2 [33] oﬀers better performance compared to our proposed method for
 Proposed M.V. 90.9 100 95.2 92.8 UDP DDoS attack, but suﬀers from the requirement of labelled data for
 Proposed S.S. 100 68.0 81.0 87.2
 training and involves complex multi-stage model training and inference
 process. In comparison to speciﬁed recent studies, the proposed method
 delivers comparable performance and is well suitable for detecting new
autoencoder component during training, as illustrated in Fig. 5a. The attacks with less complexity and can be used in online detection of at-
ﬁgure presents the epoch-wise progression of training and validation tacks as it processes the data in unsupervised manner for speciﬁed time
loss over 20 epochs. The training loss begins at approximately 0.72 and window.
steadily decreases to 0.38, while the validation loss exhibits a parallel
 5. Discussion on generalizability
downward trend from 0.25 to 0.13, indicating strong generalization and
consistent learning throughout the process.
 The proposed multiview self-supervised model IDS approach evalu-
 The convergence pattern reveals four distinct phases:
 ated on the FTP Brute Force and UDP DDoS attacks for the CICIDS2018
 dataset demonstrates strong potential for generalizability across diverse
 • Rapid initial improvement (Epochs 1-3): The model quickly learns intrusion types. These two attacks have diﬀerent fundamentals: FTP
 fundamental data representations, resulting in a sharp decline in Brute Force aims to compromise authentication through repeated cretraining loss. dential attempts, while UDP DDoS targets service availability through
 • Intermediate ﬂuctuations (Epochs 3-8): Minor oscillations appear traﬃc ﬂooding and resource exhaustion. The consistent detection peras the model explores a complex error landscape while reﬁning fea- formance across such contrasting behaviors implies that the proposed
 ture reconstruction. model detects core malicious patterns rather than attack-speciﬁc signa-
 • Consistent convergence (Epochs 8-14): Both loss curves show a tures.
 smooth, steady decline, signifying stable learning and progressive SSH Brute Force, RDP Brute Force, and Web Application login abuse
 optimization of latent feature mappings. attacks share similar behaviours with FTP Brute Force, particularly in

 8
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

Fig. 5. Performance analysis of the MVNIDS model: (a) Model convergence (b) Processing Rate (a) Training and validation loss curves of the autoencoder-based
MVNIDS model. (b) Time window vs Processed records per sec.

 Table 8
 Overall comparison with recent proposed methods on CICIDS2018 dataset.
 Method Approach Feature Set Zero-day attack support Complexity

 Alzubi et. al. [21] Supervised learning with From 67 Flow level features, Unable to identify zero-day Slower model training due to added
 Advanced feature selection. group of 10,6,7 features after attack as re-training is required. complexity of feature selection,
 feature reduction are used. results are also highly sensitive to
 selected features. It uses binary
 classiﬁcation model only and ignore
 attack speciﬁc results that can vary
 due to class imbalance.

 Najaﬁ et. al. [22] Supervised learning with feature From a pool of 67 ﬂow level Unable to identify zero day High complexity for ensemble based
 selection and discretization. features, group of 5,9 and 10 attacks as complex feature model training on selected features.
 features are selected after feature engineering is required with Extra processing overhead on feature
 selection. change in attack behaviour. selection and discretization introduce
 added complexity which is unsuitable
 for online IDS execution.

 Kaur et. al. [23] Supervised method - CNN based Total 64 ﬂow level features after Unable to identify zero day More complex due to training of
 classiﬁcation model. selection. attacks. Deep-CNN based models and slow
 inference at run time.

 Wanjau et. al. [24] Supervised learning - Deep CNN 78 Flow level features with PCA Require retraining and data High training complexity due to Deep
 based model. based dimensionality reduction. preparation for detection of new CNN Model training and slower
 attacks. inference.

 Hai et. al. [28] Supervised Learning - Sequence 70 ﬂow level features are utilized. Unable to detect zero day attacks, High complexity due to sequence
 based models like RNN, LSTM, require retraining and data model training and slow inference
 GRU. preparation. speed due to sequence prediction.

 Kim et. al. [25] Supervised method - Deep CNN 78 numerical Flow level features Required retraining and data Full training of Deep CNN model is
 based classiﬁcation model. are used. preparation for new attack highly complex.
 detection.

 Dai et. al. [26] Supervised - Deep CNN and All ﬂow level features are Framework can not identify zero Model training and inference is
 sparse autoencoder based model. utilized. day attacks. complex as it involves combination of
 Deep-CNN and intermediate sparse
 autoencoders.

 Lopes et. al. [33] Semi-Supervised learning - All ﬂow level features are System can minimally identify Complex model training and
 Denoising Autoencoder with utilized. zero day attacks. inference due to multistage execution.
 Deep neural network classiﬁer.

 Proposed M.V. Unsupervised - Majority Voting Extensive set of Network (24 Framework can identify zero day Medium complexity due to inference
 based features), Flow level (74 features) attacks. from multiple auto-encoders and
 and Image view are utilized. execution of majority voting process.
 It can be executed in an online
 manner.

 Proposed S.S. Self-supervised Learning Extensive set of Network level Framework can identify zero day Less run time complexity due to
 (24 features), Flow level (74 attacks classiﬁcation model based prediction
 features) and Image view are on constructed views. It requires
 utilized. training classiﬁcation model with
 auto-generated labels and can run in
 online manner.

 9
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

 Table 9 CRediT authorship contribution statement
 Performance comparison with recent proposed methods on CICIDS2018 datasets. Sunit Kumar Nandi: Writing – original draft, Software, Methodol-
 (a) FTP Bruteforce Attack ogy, Investigation; Ritesh Ratti: Writing – original draft, Formal anal-
 Method Prec.% Rec.% F1 % Acc.%
 ysis, Data curation, Conceptualization; Sanasam Ranbir Singh: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision; Sukumar
 Alzubi [21] 99.8 99.0 99.4 99.0
 Nandi: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Project administration,
 Najaﬁ [22] 99.7 98.8 99.3 98.8
 Kaur [23] 82.8 42.6 56.3 42.6 Conceptualization.
 Wanjau [24] 92.5 97.8 91.8 94.3
 Hai [28] 95.7 95.4 97.5 – Data availability
 Kim [25] – – – 98.0
 Proposed M.V. 96.8 99.4 98.1 97.0
 Research uses publicly available CICIDS2018 dataset. URL: https://
 Proposed S.S. 98.7 98.1 98.3 98.5
 www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
 (b) UDP DDoS Attack

 Method Prec.% Rec.% F1 % Acc.% Declaration of competing interest
 Kim [27] – – – 95
 Dai [26] 88.0 100 94.11 93 The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
 Lopes [33] 95.6 98.8 97.7 – interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
 Proposed M.V. 93.0 100 94.4 94.7 the work reported in this paper.
 Proposed S.S. 97.9 91.1 95.4 95.5

 References

terms of repetitive authentication attempts and persistence within dis- [1] Sauter M. LOIC will tear us apart: the impact of tool design and media portrayals in
tinct protocol contexts. Therefore, the multiview representation capable the success of activist DDOS attacks. Am Behav Sci 2013;57(7):983–1007.
 [2] Yaltirakli G. Slowloris. 2015. https://githubcom/gkbrk/slowloris
of identifying FTP-based brute force attacks can be naturally extended [3] Lyon GF. Nmap network scanning: the oﬃcial Nmap project guide to network disto credential stuﬃng or distributed password guessing attacks, where covery and security scanning. Insecure. Com LLC (US); 2008.
packet timing and protocol variations diﬀer but the underlying access [4] Papadogiannaki E, Tsirantonakis G, Ioannidis S. Network intrusion detection in
 encrypted traﬃc. In: 2022 IEEE Conference on dependable and secure computing
attempt behaviours remain consistent. (DSC). IEEE; 2022, p. 1–8.
 Similarly, the ability to detect UDP-based DDoS attacks provides [5] Guo C, Ping Y, Liu N, Luo S-S. A two-level hybrid approach for intrusion detection.
extensibility to other volumetric and application-layer ﬂooding tech- Neurocomputing 2016;214:391–400.
 [6] Bhale P, Chowdhury DR, Biswas S, Nandi S. OPTIMIST: lightweight and transparent
niques, including TCP SYN Floods, ICMP Floods, reﬂection attacks and IDS with optimum placement strategy to mitigate mixed-rate DDoS attacks in IoT
HTTP-based DoS/DDoS. These attacks produce distinctive ﬂow dynam- networks. IEEE Internet Things J 2023;10(10):8357–70.
ics and image view representations that deviate markedly from normal [7] Koc L, Mazzuchi TA, Sarkani S. A network intrusion detection system based on a
 hidden naïve bayes multiclass classiﬁer. Expert Syst Appl 2012;39(18):13492–500.
traﬃc patterns, which the proposed multiview encoding captures eﬀec- [8] Roesch M. Snort: lightweight intrusion detection for networks. In: LISA XIII. 1999,
tively. p. 229–38.
 A principal advantage of the multiview design lies in the image view, [9] Paxson V. Bro: a system for detecting network intruders in real-time. Comput Netw
 1999;31(23-24):2435–63.
which abstracts network activity into visual patterns that are mostly
 [10] Perdisci R, Ariu D, Fogla P, Giacinto G, Lee W. McPAD: a multiple classiﬁer system
protocol-agnostic. This enables the detection of visually similar mali- for accurate payload-based anomaly detection. Comput Netw 2009;53(6):864–81.
cious behaviors even when underlying transport mechanisms diﬀer. Ad- [11] Ariu D, Tronci R, Giacinto G. HMMPayl: an intrusion detection system based on
ditionally, the ﬂow view encapsulates temporal dependencies, allowing hidden Markov models. comput Secur 2011;30(4):221–41.
 [12] Thorat SA, Khandelwal AK, Bruhadeshwar B, Kishore K. Payload content based netthe model to recognize repetitive or sustained activity across various work anomaly detection. In: 2008 First international conference on the applications
network services. Overall, the proposed multiview methodology demon- of digital information and web technologies (ICADIWT). IEEE; 2008, p. 127–32.
strates an inherent generalization capability by focusing on fundamental [13] Sharafaldin I, Lashkari AH, Ghorbani AA. Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traﬃc characterization. In: 4th international conference
behavioural characteristics such as repetition, persistence, and devia- on information systems security and privac. 2018, p. 108–16.
tion from typical ﬂow distributions rather than speciﬁc implementation [14] Jagadish HV. Analysis of the hilbert curve for representing two-dimensional space.
details or protocols. This adaptability positions MVNIDS as a promis- Inf Process Lett 1997;62(1):17–22.
 [15] Min E, Long J, Liu Q, Cui J, Chen W. TR-IDS: anomaly-based intrusion detection
ing framework for detecting both known and emerging network attacks through text-convolutional neural network and random forest. Secur Commun Netw
beyond the FTP Brute Force and UDP DDoS categories. 2018;2018(1):4943509.
 [16] Chan PK, Mahoney MV. PHAD: packet header anomaly detection for identifying
 hostile network traﬃc. Florida Inst Technol Tech Report CS-2001-04 2001. https:
6. Conclusion //repository.ﬁt.edu/ces_faculty/130/
 [17] Staniford S, Hoagland JA, McAlerney JM. Practical automated detection of stealthy
 portscans. J Comput Secur 2002;10(1-2):105–36.
 We proposed MVNIDS, a Multiview-based Network Intrusion Detec- [18] Kim SS, Reddy ALN. Statistical techniques for detecting traﬃc anomalies through
tion System that leverages a self-supervised learning approach to over- packet header data. IEEE/ACM Trans Netw 2008;16(3):562–75.
come the limitations of traditional signature-based and supervised IDS [19] Tomio RL, Viegas EK, Santin AO, dos Santos RR. A multi-view intrusion detection
 model for reliable and autonomous model updates. In: IEEE International conference
methods. By independently training autoencoders on Network, Flow, on communications. 2021, p. 1–6.
and Image views derived from raw packet data and combining their out- [20] Fontugne R, Borgnat P, Abry P, Fukuda K. Mawilab: combining diverse anomaly
puts through a majority-voting mechanism, MVNIDS eﬀectively gener- detectors for automated anomaly labeling and performance benchmarking. In: Co-
 NEXT ’10:proceedings of the 6th international COnference. 2010, p. 1–12.
ates its own labels and learns robust behavioral representations without [21] Alzubi QM, Makhadmeh SN, Sanjalawe Y. Optimizing intrusion detection: advanced
manual annotation. Experimental evaluation on the CICIDS2018 dataset feature selection and machine learning techniques using the CSE-CIC-IDS2018
for FTP BruteForce and UDP DoS attacks demonstrates that the proposed dataset. J Adv Inform Technol 2025;16(3):20.
 [22] Najaﬁ Mohsenabad H, Tut MA. Optimizing cybersecurity attack detection in comframework achieves higher accuracy, precision, and F1-scores than most
 puter networks: a comparative analysis of bio-inspired optimization algorithms usview-speciﬁc or supervised baselines, while maintaining reduced com- ing the CSE-CIC-IDS 2018 dataset. Appl Sci 2024;14(3):1044.
putational complexity to be used as an online IDS. The system’s mul- [23] Kaur G, Lashkari AH, Rahali A. Intrusion traﬃc detection and characterization using
tiview design enhances both accuracy and adaptability, enabling de- deep image learning. In: 2020 IEEE Intl conf on dependable, autonomic and secure
 computing, intl conf on pervasive intelligence and computing, intl conf on cloud and
tection of zero-day and evolving attacks through protocol-agnostic and big data computing, intl conf on cyber science and technology congress (DASC/pitemporally aware representations com/CBDCom/cyberscitech). IEEE; 2020, p. 55–62.

 10
S.K. Nandi et al. Journal of Information Security and Applications 96 (2026) 104321

[24] Wanjau SK, Wambugu GM, Kamau GN. SSH-brute force attack detection model [37] Shen F, Hasegawa O. Self-organizing incremental neural network and its application.
 based on deep learning. Int J Comput Appl Technol Res 2021;10(1):42–50. In: Artiﬁcial neural networks–ICANN 2010: 20th international conference, thessa-
[25] Kim J, Shin Y, Choi E. An intrusion detection model based on a convolutional neural loniki, greece, september 15–18, 2010, proceedings, part III 20. Springer; 2010, p.
 network. J Multimed Inform Syst 2019;6(4):165–72. 535–40.
[26] Dai Q-y, Zhang B, Dong S-q. A DDoS-attack detection method oriented to the [38] Shire R, Shiaeles S, Bendiab K, Ghita B, Kolokotronis N. Malware squid: a novel iot
 blockchain network layer. Secur Commun Netw 2022;2022(1):5692820. malware traﬃc analysis framework using convolutional neural network and binary
[27] Kim J, Kim J, Kim H, Shim M, Choi E. CNN-based network intrusion detection against visualisation. (2021) arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03375.
 denial-of-service attacks. Electronics 2020;9(6):916. [39] Cortesi A. binvis. io: Visual analysis of binary ﬁles. 2016. https://binvis.io/.
[28] Hai TH, Nam LH. A practical comparison of deep learning methods for network [40] Rose JR, Swann M, Bendiab G, Shiaeles S, Kolokotronis N. Intrusion detection using
 intrusion detection. In: 2021 International conference on electrical, communication, network traﬃc proﬁling and machine learning for iot. In: 2021 IEEE 7th internaand computer engineering (ICECCE). IEEE; 2021, p. 1–6. tional conference on network softwarization (NetSoft). IEEE; 2021, p. 409–15.
[29] Said Elsayed M, Le-Khac N-A, Dev S, Jurcut AD. Network anomaly detection using [41] Howard A, Sandler M, Chu G, Chen L-C, Chen B, Tan M, et al. Searching for mo-
 LSTM based autoencoder. In: Proceedings of the 16th ACM symposium on QoS and bilenetv3. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
 security for wireless and mobile networks. 2020, p. 37–45. vision. 2019, p. 1314–24.
[30] Binbusayyis A, Vaiyapuri T. Unsupervised deep learning approach for network in- [42] Li M, Han D, Yin X, Liu H, Li D. Design and implementation of an anomaly network
 trusion detection combining convolutional autoencoder and one-class SVM. Appl traﬃc detection model integrating temporal and spatial features. Secur Commun
 Intell 2021;51(10):7094–108. Netw 2021;2021:1–15.
[31] Mirsky Y, Doitshman T, Elovici Y, Shabtai A. Kitsune: an ensemble of autoencoders [43] Khan MA. HCRNNIDS: hybrid convolutional recurrent neural network-based netfor online network intrusion detection.(2018) arXiv preprint arXiv:1802:09089. work intrusion detection system. Processes 2021;9(5):834.
[32] Han X, Liu Y, Zhang Z, Lü X, Li Y. Sparse auto-encoder combined with kernel for [44] Goyal P, Goyal A. Comparative study of two most popular packet sniﬃng toolsnetwork attack detection. Comput Commun 2021;173:14–20. tcpdump and wireshark. In: 2017 9th international conference on computational
[33] Lopes IO, Zou D, Abdulqadder IH, Ruambo FA, Yuan B, Jin H. Eﬀective network intelligence and communication networks (CICN). IEEE; 2017, p. 77–81.
 intrusion detection via representation learning: a denoising autoencoder approach. [45] Sommer R, Feldmann A. NetFlow: information loss or win? In: Proceedings of the
 Comput Commun 2022;194:55–65. 2nd ACM SIGCOMM workshop on internet measurment. IMW ’02; New York, NY,
[34] Andresini G, Appice A, Malerba D. Autoencoder-based deep metric learning for net- USA: Association for Computing Machinery. 2002, 173–4.
 work intrusion detection. Inf Sci 2021;569(1):706–27. [46] Lashkari AH, Draper-Gil G, Mamun M SI, Ghorbani AA. Characterization of tor traf-
[35] Hindy H, Tachtatzis C, Atkinson R, Brosset D, Bures M, Andonovic I, et al. Leverag- ﬁc using time based features. In: International conference on information systems
 ing siamese networks for one-shot intrusion detection model. (2020) arXiv preprint security and privacy. 2017, p. 253–62.
 arXiv:2006:15343. [47] Patator. Ftp patator and ssh patator https://github.com/lanjelot/patator.
[36] Baptista I, Shiaeles S, Kolokotronis N. A novel malware detection system based on [48] Editcap.. https://wwwwiresharkorg/docs/man-pages/editcaphtml.
 machine learning and binary visualization. In: 2019 IEEE International conference
 on communications workshops (ICC workshops). IEEE; 2019, p. 1–6.

 11