This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 Network Intrusion Detection System Based on
 Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
 Autoencoders for Internet of Vehicles
 Shizhao Tian , Yaowen Zheng , Laile Xi , Shenghao Lin , Yubo Li , and Hongsong Zhu , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The Internet of Vehicles (IoV) is highly vulnerable However, the open communication environment inherent to
to attacks due to its open communication environment, with IoV also renders it a prime target for attackers, which can
new types of attacks continuously emerging. However, existing lead to severe repercussions, as malicious attacks on vehicles
Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) often fall short in
accuracy, recall rates, false positive rates, and they frequently traveling on the road would pose a serious threat to human
prove ineffective in detecting new attacks. In this paper, we life. Threats to IoV are divided into two main categories: (1)
propose a NIDS for IoV based on Enhanced Dual Gaussian Attacks on vehicle-to-external networks; (2) Attacks on in-
Mixture Variational Autoencoders (EDGMVAE) to detect var- vehicle networks.
ious attack behaviors, including new attacks. We employ two When a vehicle connects to external networks, it becomes
separate Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoders (GMVAE)
to conduct unsupervised reconstruction training on normal traffic vulnerable to various attacks, including Denial of Service
and known attack traffic. During detection, we obtain the (DoS), Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), Spoofing and
tested traffic’s reconstruction probabilities using these GMVAEs Replay. In DoS and DDoS attacks, malicious actors overwhelm
and determine whether an attack has occurred through logical vehicle nodes by sending a massive volume of irrelevant
fusion operation. We use two datasets for evaluation, i.e., the messages. This deluge of traffic congests the vehicle’s pro-
Car Hacking Dataset (CHD) for in-vehicle communication and
the UNSW-NB15 Dataset (UBD) for external network commu- cessing capacity, rendering it incapable of handling legitimate
nication. The results demonstrate that our method achieves requests. Attackers can also impersonate legitimate users to
remarkable performance in detecting known attacks, with an transmit fake GPS data to the vehicle, with the intention
accuracy rate of 98.54% on the CHD and 98.59% on the of deceiving it. Replay attacks intercept communication to
UBD. Moreover, it outperforms other state-of-the-art methods identify unencrypted data, enabling hackers to conduct Manin detecting new attacks. Specifically, on the CHD, the accuracy
of the method is 6.66% to 12.83% higher than other methods, in-the-Middle (MITM) attacks.
while on the UBD, the accuracy is 5.13% to 21.91% higher than In addition to external attacks, vehicles are also at risk
other methods. from internal attacks. The Controller Area Network (CAN) is
 Index Terms—Internet of vehicles, intrusion detection, new the standard communication method for in-vehicle networks,
attack, Gaussian mixture variational autoencoder. connecting various Electronic Control Units (ECUs) to support
 critical applications such as autonomous driving. However,
 the lack of authentication mechanisms makes it easy for
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 attackers to launch attacks. Common types of attacks include

I NTERNET of Vehicles (IoV) is an integral component
 of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS). Leveraging advanced information and communication technologies,
 Fuzzy, DoS and spoofing. Fuzzy attacks cause malfunctions
 or abnormalities in the vehicle system by sending a large
 amount of random information. DoS attacks overload the
IoV facilitates comprehensive network connectivity within target system, blocking normal services and rendering some
vehicles, as well as Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to- of its functions unusable. Spoofing attacks can deceive vehicle
Infrastructure (V2I), Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P), and Vehicle- systems by transmitting false gear or speed data, forcing
to-Service (V2S) communication [1]. This connectivity not incorrect decisions and potentially triggering safety incidents.
only enhances the overall intelligent driving capabilities of With the rapid development of technology, the attack methods
vehicles but also delivers a safe, comfortable, intelligent, and IoV faces are also constantly evolving [3]. In order to protect
efficient driving experience and traffic services to users [2]. the IoV from attacks from both inside and outside, it is
 Received 27 March 2025; revised 14 August 2025 and 1 December 2025;
 necessary to develop a powerful intrusion detection system
accepted 29 January 2026. The Associate Editor for this article was M. Bilal. that can not only accurately detect known attack patterns but
(Corresponding author: Yubo Li.) also effectively handle emerging attacks.
 The authors are with the Institute of Information Engineering, Currently, Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with
the School of Cyberspace Security, University of Chinese Academy methods have become pivotal technologies in the development
of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: tianshizhao@iie.ac.cn; of intrusion detection systems due to their advanced learnzhengyaowen@iie.ac.cn; xilaile@iie.ac.cn; linshenghao@iie.ac.cn; liyubo@
iie.ac.cn; zhuhongsong@iie.ac.cn).
 ing capabilities [4], [5], [6], [7]. These methods generally
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3660300 necessitate supervised training of binary or multi-classification
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 (UBD) [11] for external network communication. The results
 demonstrate that our method achieves high accuracy in detecting known attacks: 98.54% on the CHD and 98.59% on the
 UBD. It also outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in
 detecting new attacks, with accuracy improvements of 6.66%-
 13.61% on the CHD and 5.13%-21.91% on the UBD. These
 results further confirm the excellent performance and advantages of EDGMVAE in detecting new attacks. The primary
Fig. 1. Challenges faced by ANIDS. contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
 • We propose a network intrusion detection system for IoV
models, utilizing extensive datasets that encompass both nor- based on EDGMVAE. This method aims to accurately
mal and attack traffic, in order to attain high detection detect both known and emerging new attack patterns by
performance. However, most existing ML and DL methods utilizing the strengths of GMVAE.
prove ineffective in detecting emerging new attacks due to • We implement the EDGMVAE approach with a threethe absence of representative features of these attacks in phase framework, including data preprocessing, data
the training datasets. Thus, Anomaly-based NIDS (ANIDS) reconstruction, and detection.
is the most suitable option, which can detect existing and • We conduct several experiments on the CHD and
new attacks as it builds a profile from normal data and any UBD to demonstrate that our EDGMVAE approach not
deviation from that profile is detected as an anomaly [8], [9]. only achieves excellent performance in detecting known
However, ANIDS also confronts several significant challenges, attacks but also outperforms other compelling methods in
as illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, it is difficult for normal profile detecting new attacks.
to fully cover all normal traffic patterns, which will inevitably The article is organized as follows: in Section I, we prolead to a high false positive rate. In addition, as the technical vide an introduction, and in Section II, we examine relevant
sophistication of attackers increases, their attack behavior will literature. Section III provides research motivations and model
become more similar to normal traffic patterns, making it preliminaries. Our proposed approach is presented in Secharder to detect and leading to inevitable false negatives. tion IV. We present experimental verification and assessment
 To address the above challenges, we propose an ANIDS in Section V. Finally, in Section VI, we conclude the paper.
based on Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
Autoencoders (EDGMVAE) for IoV. The high-level design II. R ELATED W ORK
goals of our method are twofold: (1) Our primary goal is With the rapid development of the IoV, ensuring network
to model normal behavior patterns with the utmost preci- security has become increasingly critical, prompting extension and comprehensiveness, which is essential for effectively sive research into IDS. To systematically summarize existing
reducing false positives. (2) We add the profiling of known efforts, Table I provides a comparative overview of repreattacks as a reference in the detection process to reduce false sentative studies, evaluating them based on detection scope
negatives, especially for attacks whose behavioral patterns (in-vehicle vs. external networks), attack types (known vs.
closely resemble normal traffic. When building traffic profiles, unknown), datasets and technical mechanisms.
we propose using Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder
(GMVAE), which is an improvement upon the traditional
Variational Autoencoder (VAE). Specifically, the GMVAE A. In-Vehicle Network Intrusion Detection Systems
replaces the single Gaussian distribution of latent variables A significant amount of research has been dedicated to
with a mixture of Gaussians, thereby achieving more accurate securing in-vehicle networks, with a particular focus on the
and comprehensive modeling capabilities. This improvement CAN bus. Early efforts in this domain primarily targeted
allows for arbitrary precision in approximating any distribution known attacks, leveraging classical deep learning models to
by simply adding or removing components (i.e., the number achieve high detection accuracy. Hossain et al. [12] pioneered
of Gaussian distributions). this direction by proposing an LSTM-based NIDS for CAN
 Our EDGMVAE approach comprises three phases. In the bus attacks. They constructed a custom dataset by extractfirst phase, raw traffic data is processed to extract and standard- ing normal data from a Toyota hybrid vehicle and injecting
ize key features, thereby ensuring data quality. In the second DoS, Fuzzing, and Spoofing attacks, achieving an impressive
phase, the processed data is fed into two GMVAE models: the 99.995% accuracy in detecting these known threats.
GMVAE N (trained on normal traffic to build normal profile), Wei et al. [13] introduced AMAEID, an intrusion detection
and GMVAE A (trained on known attack traffic to build model that combines an attention mechanism with a multiattack profile), both of which are used for data reconstruction. layer denoising autoencoder. Xie et al. [14] proposed an
In the third phase, the reconstruction probabilities of the input intrusion detection technique based on an enhanced GAN. It
data are computed using the two GMVAEs seperately, and the aims to solve the problems of existing GAN models, such
final detection results are obtained through logical fusion oper- as the rough construction of CAN message blocks and the
ations. We comprehensively evaluate the proposed EDGMVAE inability to detect data tampering threats, thereby improving
on two datasets: the Car Hacking Dataset (CHD) [10] for the detection performance against various attacks. Song et al.
in-vehicle comminication and the UNSWNB-15 Dataset [17] proposed an IDS based on a deep convolutional neural
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 3

 TABLE I
 C OMPARATIVE E VALUATION OF THE E XISTING R ESEARCH R ELATED TO IDS FOR I OV

network (DCNN). Through a frame builder, the 29-bit IDs of learning-based anomaly detection method for in-vehicle
29 consecutive CAN messages are converted into a 29 × 29 networks, which enables message-level anomaly detection
two-dimensional grid structure, which serves as input to a without labeled data through a message prediction model
reduced Inception-ResNet model to learn the temporal patterns based on hierarchical Transformers (MPMHit). The method
of CAN traffic and detect anomalies. Jin et al. [18] proposed an consists of three modules: masking, predicting, and anomaly
intrusion detection approach that integrates oversampling, out- detecting. It uses noisy message sequences to train the model
lier detection, and metric learning techniques. Ullah et al. [19] to learn the distribution of normal messages and combines an
proposed a stacking-based hybrid ensemble model employ- online update mechanism with vehicle-cloud collaboration to
ing XGBoost, Random Forest, Decision Tree, and Gradient address the problem of concept drift.
Boosting as base learners, integrated with K-means sampling,
Information Gain feature selection, and SMOTE to address
class imbalance, achieving high performance in Internet of B. Vehicle-to-External Network Intrusion Detection Systems
Vehicles intrusion detection. As the IoV becomes increasingly interconnected, vehicle-to-
 Recent advancements have expanded capabilities to include external network communications have become a key security
unknown attack detection, driven by innovations in model focus. The complexity and variety of potential attacks on these
architecture and data processing. Song et al. [20] adopted networks promotes the continuous development of intrusion
a self-supervised approach, combining an LSTM generator detection technologies.
(trained on normal traffic to produce noisy pseudo-normal Early research on vehicle-to-external network intrusion
data) with a Reduced Inception-ResNet detector, allowing the detection mainly focused on known attacks. Almutlaq et al.
model to generalize to unseen threats. Luo et al. [15] proposed [23] proposed a two-stage intrusion detection system that
a spectral residual-lightweight CNN (SR-LiCNN) model, balances detection accuracy, resource efficiency, and interwhich transforms signal sequences into matrix-like images pretability by extracting rules from deep neural networks.
to frame intrusion detection as an image classification task. The first stage of the system distinguishes between normal
The spectral residual operation eliminates redundancy, while and attack traffic, while the second stage identifies the type
lightweight convolutions optimize decision-making efficiency, of attack. It includes three variants based on the DeepRed
enabling detection of both known and unknown attacks. and HypInv rule extraction methods. Anbalagan et al. [26]
 Shi et al. [16] proposed an unsupervised intrusion detec- proposed a CNN-based NIDS. First, the original data caption system IDS-DEC for the CAN bus, which is based tured was processed, and quantile transformation was applied
on deep embedded clustering and integrates a spatiotempo- to obtain uniformly distributed labels. Then, the processed
ral autoencoder with an entropy-regularized deep embedding data was converted into image data for fine-grained pattern
clustering module. Cao et al. [21] proposed a self-supervised extraction. Subsequently, an improved deep CNN architecture
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

was used to train the converted image data to identify various Autoencoder (GMVAE), an enhanced variant of the Variational
attack patterns. Autoencoder (VAE). By replacing VAE’s single Gaussian
 To overcome the limitations of only detecting known latent variable distribution with a mixture of Gaussians, we
attacks, researchers have conducted extensive exploration and can achieve more flexible and accurate performance of prodeveloped systems that can detect both known and new file construction. Based on this improvement, we propose a
attacks by adopting more advanced technologies. Khan et al. NIDS leveraging Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational
[25] proposed a multi-stage deep learning framework. This Autoencoder (EDGMVAE), aiming to significantly enhance
framework’s first stage verified the status of incoming data intrusion detection ability.
using state-based Bloom filter technology, and its second stage
detected threats using a Bi-LSTM classifier. Nissar et al. B. Model Preliminaries
[27] proposed a multi-objective intrusion detection framework
that incorporated Variational Autoencoder (VAE) along with 1) Variational Autoencoder (VAE): VAE is a deep gentwo optimization algorithms: the Adaptive Geometric Estima- erative model widely used for data compression, denoising,
tion Multi-Objective Evolutionary Algorithm (AGE-MOEA) anomaly detection and generation. The core concept of a VAE
and the Reference Point-based NSGA-III (R-NSGA-III). This involves mapping input data x to a low-dimensional latent
framework was designed to optimize multiple objectives, space z via an encoder and then reconstructing the input data
including divergence, Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, and from this space using a decoder. This process enables effective
reconstruction error, effectively detecting anomalies based on data representation and facilitates the generation of new data
reconstruction error. samples similar to the input data.
 Yang et al. [22] proposed a multi-tiered hybrid intrusion VAE is understood through two perspectives: variational
detection system (MTH-IDS) for the Internet of Vehicles inference and neural network. The core objective is to obtain
(IoV), aiming to detect both known and unknown attacks. The the posterior distribution P(z|x), with x as the input data and
system includes data preprocessing, feature engineering, and z as the latent variable, and P(z|x) can be calculated using
a four-tier learning model. It detects known attacks through Bayes’s theorem:
tree-based algorithms, identifies unknown attacks using cluster P(x|z)P(z)
labeling k-means, and combines methods such as Bayesian P(z|x) = . (1)
 P(x)
optimization to improve performance. Huang et al. [24] pro-
 R direct computation of the marginal probability
 However,
posed an Automatic Incremental Lifetime Learning Intrusion
 P(x) = P(x|z)P(z) dz is generally intractable. Thus, vari-
Detection System (AILL-IDS), which reduces the reliance
 ational inference addresses this problem by introducing a
on labeled data through incremental semi-supervised learntractable distribution Qφ (z|x) (often Gaussian) to approximate
ing and triggers model updates by detecting concept drift
 P(z|x). The Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between these
with the KSWIN algorithm. The system combines incremendistributions must be minimized, as shown below:
tal k-means, DBSTREAM clustering algorithms, and a dual
ensemble learning mechanism to achieve anomaly detection, DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] = EQφ (z|x) [log Qφ (z|x)
attack type identification, and continuous detection during − log P(z|x) − log P(z) + log P(x)]. (2)
updates, avoiding performance fluctuations. Fu et al. [28]
proposed a BERT-based hybrid network intrusion detection log P(x) can be shifted to the left since the expectation is
system for the Internet of Vehicles (IoV-BERT-IDS), which with regard to z:
converts traffic data into contextual byte sentences through
a semantic extractor and combines pre-training (including DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] − log P(x)
MBWM and NBSP tasks) with a fine-tuning mechanism to = − EQφ (z|x) [log P(x, z) − log Qφ (z|x)] . (3)
achieve attack detection.
 „ ƒ‚ …
 ELBO(φ)

 The objective of minimizing the KL divergence is equivalent
 III. M OTIVATIONS AND P RELIMINARIES to maximizing the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO). The
A. Motivations expression in (3) can be reformulated as:
 Through analysis of existing Anomaly-based NIDS DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z|x)] − log P(x)
(ANIDS), we find that they have advantages in detecting = DKL [Qφ (z|x)||P(z)] − EQφ (z|x)[log P(x|z)] . (4)
new attacks. However, ANIDS suffer from high false positive
and false negative rates. This is mainly because constructing Then the role of neural network becomes evident, as
a precise and comprehensive normal profile is challenging, depicted in Fig. 2a. Qφ (z|x) serves as an encoder, converting
which can lead to false positives, and some attack patterns are the original data x into the latent variable z. Meanwhile,
extremely similar to normal patterns, which can lead to false Pθ (x|z) functions as a decoder, which decodes z to generate
negatives. If we can construct the normal profile as accurately reconstructed data x0 . The objective of the model is to minand comprehensively as possible, and incorporate the profile imize the right part of (4). KL divergence between Qφ (z|x)
of known attack patterns into the detection process, it will and P(z) is represented by the first component on the right.
significantly improve the detection performance. When build- The following component measures the degree of similarity
ing profiles, we introduce the Gaussian Mixture Variational between the original and the reconstructed data.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 5

 Fig. 3. Process of GMVAE.

 TABLE II
 D ISTRIBUTIONS IN GMVAE M ODEL

Fig. 2. Structure of VAE and GMVAE.
 Equation (5) and (7) can be substituted into (6) to reformulate ELBO as:
 2) Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder (GMVAE):
 ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) log P(y) − log Qφ (y | x)
 
VAEs encounter challenges when processing complex data. 
This is due to the fact that the approximate posterior dis- Pθ (z | y)
 + log + log Pθ (x | z) (8)
tribution and the prior distribution of the latent variable Qφ (z | x, y)
z are typically simple Gaussian distributions. These simple The third and fourth components in equation (8) repdistributions often fail to adequately capture the complex resent the regularization and reconstruction, respectively.
characteristics of the original data, causing the reconstructed EQφ (y,z|x) [log Qφ (y|x)] is a conditional entropy, capturing
data to be both unrealistic and incomplete. It is theoretically the degree to which x influences y. During training, a coefpossible to represent any complex data distribution using ficient α can be added to the entropy term between x and y
Gaussian Mixture distribution. Consequently, incorporating to regulate the influence of clustering loss items on other loss
Gaussian Mixtures into VAE to construct Gaussian Mixture items:
Variational Autoencoder (GMVAE) can significantly enhance
 ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) log P(y) − α log Qφ (y | x)
 
the model’s ability to represent and reconstruct complex data.
 Specifically, we set the estimated posterior distribution Pθ (z | y)
 
Qφ (y, z|x) and the posterior distribution P(z) of the latent vari- + log + log Pθ (x | z) . (9)
 Qφ (z | x, y)
able z as Gaussian Mixture distribution, where the Gaussian
distribution category is represented by the variable y. The A smaller α reduces the impact of the entropy term on the
expression for Qφ (y, z|x) is as follows: loss, resulting in less distinct boundaries between Gaussian
 components. Conversely, a larger α strengthens this influence,
 Qφ (y, z|x) = Qφ (y|x)Qφ (z|x, y). (5) leading to sharper boundaries, but also increasing the risk of
 A Gaussian Mixture with k distinct Gaussian distributions overfitting.
makes up the latent variable. It is assumed that Qφ (z|x, yi ) is a Table II lists the probability distributions used in the model,
single Gaussian distribution with i ∈ {0, 1,..., k − 1}. It is worth while the detailed process of GMVAE is depicted in Fig. 3.
noting that an appropriate value of k needs to be selected. Initially, x is assigned into k clusters based on the probabilities
A too small k will result in the Gaussian components being provided by NN(Qy ), while Q(y|x) denotes the probabiliunable to cover the complex patterns of the data, while a too ties of these cluster assignments and follows a multinomial
large k will increase model redundancy, which not only raises distribution. NN(Qz ) is used to learn the variance σ and
computational costs but also may lead to overfitting. ELBO is mean µ of these Gaussians, since each cluster’s latent space is
reformulated as: thought to follow a Gaussian distribution. Then, by collecting
 samplesPand calculating their anticipated values, z is derived
 ELBO = EQφ (y,z|x) [log Pθ (x, y, z) − log Qφ (y, z|x)]. (6) as z = k−1 i=0 p(yi |x)zi .
 During the decoding process, NN(Pz ) extracts the variance
 According to conditional independence hypothesis shown in
 and mean from the relevant category. After that, reparameter-
Fig. 2b, Pθ (x, y, z) is:
 ization sampling is used to obtain the latent variable z, where
 Pθ (x, y, z) = Pθ (x|z)Pθ (z|y)Pθ (y). (7) P(y) has a uniform distribution. The reconstructed data x0 is
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Workflow of proposed EDGMVAE.

then calculated using zi byP sampling and taking the expected • Data conversion. The traffic contains various string-type
value of xi0 , which is x0 = k−1 0
 i=0 P(yi |x)xi . features (e.g., “state”,“’proto’, “service”, etc.) that need
 to be encoded into numerical format. We use OneHotEn-
 IV. P ROPOSED M ETHOD coder from scikit-learn for this conversion.
A. Overview • Standardization. To address the diverse value ranges of
 continuous features and facilitate faster convergence of
 GMVAE enhances the modeling capabilities of traditional the gradient descent algorithm, we standardize the data
VAE for complex data by introducing a Gaussian mixture using StandardScaler from scikit-learn.
latent distribution. However, employing a single GMVAE in
NIDS scenarios presents notable shortcomings. Specifically,
 C. Stage2-Data Reconstruction
when using a single GMVAE, the profile is constructed
exclusively for normal traffic. When attack traffic closely We employ two GMVAEs to reconstruct traffic data.
resembles normal patterns, the single model finds it difficult GMVAE N is trained solely on normal traffic to construct a
to detect subtle differences due to the absence of a reference normal profile, while GMVAE A is trained on known attack
attack profile, resulting in a high risk of false negatives. traffic to build an attack profile. The preprocessed traffic data x
To address this issue, we propose a novel framework called is simultaneously fed into the two GMVAEs for reconstruction.
Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder By analyzing the reconstruction results from these models,
(EDGMVAE). This framework builds independent profiles for we can assess whether an attack has occurred. Specifically, if
normal traffic and known attack traffic using two GMVAEs. By GMVAE N has good reconstruction result while GMVAE A
combining their reconstruction probabilities, it enables more has poor result, it indicates that the traffic is more likely to be
accurate detection performance. normal; on the contrary, it may suggest that the traffic is more
 The proposed EDGMVAE is depicted in Fig. 4 and com- likely to be an attack. The detailed detection method will be
prises three primary stages, i.e., data preprocessing, data explained in the following content.
reconstruction, and detection. First, we preprocess the network traffic data. Subsequently, the preprocessed data x is D. Stage3-Detection
simultaneously fed into two GMVAEs for data reconstruction. We use the reconstruction probability as the criterion,
Specifically, GMVAE N is a model that has been trained which indicates the likelihood of data being reconstructed by
on normal traffic data, and GMVAE A has been trained on the model. Unlike reconstruction error, its normalized range
known attack traffic data. During the detection stage, the recon- between 0 and 1 allows for direct comparison of reconstruction
struction probabilities of x by GMVAE N and GMVAE A quality across different data points or models, eliminating the
are calculated, which reflect the models’ reconstruction effects impact of data magnitude. The reconstruction probability can
on the input data. Then, through logical fusion operation, the be calculated as follows:
reconstruction probabilities of the input data from the two L k−1
models are combined to determine whether an intrusion has 1 XX 0
 Preconstruction = p(yi |x)P(xi l |zli ) (10)
occurred. L
 l=1 i=0

 where L is the number of Monte Carlo simulations, used to
B. Stage1-Data Preprocessing reduce the impact of sampling randomness; k is the number of
 Raw network traffic data has many issues and must be pre- Gaussian mixture components; p(yi |x) represents the probabilprocessed before being used as model input. The preprocessing ity that the input data belongs to the i-th Gaussian component;
 0 0
steps in this paper are as follows: and P(xi l |zli ) is the probability of generating xi l from the latent
 • Data cleaning. The infinite values are replaced with -1, variable zli in the l-th Monte Carlo sampling. We calculate the
 and the missing values are filled with the mean value. reconstruction probability pn for the input data x using the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 7

GMVAE N model, and pa for the same input data x using TABLE III
GMVAE A model. DATA T YPES AND S IZES OF CHD

Algorithm 1 Logical Fusion
 Require: reconstruction probabilities pn and pa , thresholds τn and τa
 Ensure: ‘normal’ or ‘attack’
 1: if pn ≥ τn andpa ≥ τa then
 2: result ← ‘attack0 .Covert known attack
 3: end if
 4: if pn ≥ τn andpa < τa then
 5: result ← ‘normal0 .Normal traffic
 6: end if
 • Recall. The proportion of actual positive samples that are
 7: if pn < τn andpa ≤ τa then
 correctly predicted as positive.
 8: result ← ‘attack0 .New attack TP
 Recall = . (12)
 9: end if T P + FN
10: if pn < τn andpa > τa then • Precision. The proportion of samples predicted as positive
11: result ← ‘attack0 .Explicit known attack that are actually positive.
12: end if
 TP
13: return result Precision =. (13)
 T P + FP
 Subsequently, we employ a logical fusion operation to • F1-Score. The harmonic mean of precision and recall.
obtain the detection results, as shown in Algorithm 1. pn Precision × Recall
reflects the match degree of the tested traffic with normal F1 − S core = 2 × . (14)
 Precision + Recall
traffic, while pa reflects the match degree of the tested traffic
 • False Positive Rate (FPR). The proportion of real negative
with known attack traffic. By comparing the two reconstruction
 samples that are mistakenly predicted to be positive.
probabilities with their respective thresholds through logical
fusion operations, four scenarios can be formed. i) When pn FP
 FPR = . (15)
exceeds the threshold τn and pa exceeds the threshold τa , it T N + FP
means that the input data x matches both the characteristics • False Negative Rate (FNR). The proportion of real posiof normal traffic and the characteristics of known attack traffic tive samples that are mistakenly predicted to be negative.
very well. In this case, we classify it as a covert known FN
attack, i.e. a known attack type whose behaviour is highly FNR = . (16)
 FN + T P
similar to normal traffic and difficult to identify. ii) When pn
 2) Description of Datasets: The two datasets used to evalexceeds τn while pa falls below τa , it indicates that the input
 uate the performance of the proposed NIDS are: Car Hacking
data x is more consistent with the characteristics of normal
 Dataset (CHD) [10] for evaluating detection of intrusions in intraffic and has a lower match degree with known attack types.
 vehicle communication and UNSW-NB15 Dataset (UBD) [11]
Therefore, we classify it as normal traffic. iii) When pn is
 for evaluating detection of intrusions generated from external
below τn and pa is below τa , it means that the input data
 networks. The description of the two datasets is as follows:
x does not match either the characteristics of normal traffic
 • Car Hacking Dataset. CHD provides authentic, realor the characteristics of known attack traffic. In this case, we
 world CAN traffic captured from a physical vehicle
classify it as a new attack. iv) When pn is below τn while pa
 during actual message injection attacks, making it
is above τa , it means that the input data x does not match the
 highly relevant for evaluating in-vehicle network intrucharacteristics of normal traffic but matches the characteristics
 sion detection. Table III shows the detailed information
of known attack traffic very well. In this case, we classify it as
 of CHD. The attack types include DoS, fuzzy, spoofan explicit known attack, i.e. a known attack whose features
 ing the drive gear, and spoofing the RPM gauge. The
are obvious and whose behaviour is significantly different from
 important features are extracted for use: CAN ID,
normal traffic.
 V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION DLC, DATA[0], DATA[1], DATA[2], DATA[3], DATA[4]
 DATA[5], DATA[6], DATA[7].
A. Experiment Setup
 • UNSW-NB15 Dataset. UBD was developed to evaluate
 1) Indicators: We utilize several metrics to evaluate the NIDS by constructing a synthetic laboratory environment
performance of our proposed method, which are calculated using the IXIA PerfectStorm tool to generate a blend
using the True Positive (TP), True Negative (TN), False of normal and attack traffic. Given that real-world IoV
Positive (FP), and False Negative (FN). attack data is extremely scarce due to privacy constraints
 • Accuracy. The proportion of total samples that are pre- and acquisition challenges, UBD’s synthetic environment
 dicted correctly. serves as a practical alternative. Although not originat-
 TP + TN ing from actual vehicles, its simulated traffic patterns
 Accuracy = . (11)
 T P + T N + FP + FN closely resemble network interactions between vehicles
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE IV and the entire training process will go through 500 epochs.
 DATA T YPES AND S IZES OF UBD The reconstruction probability is calculated using Monte Carlo
 sampling, with the number of samples set to 10. Lastly, we
 set two detection thresholds: τn at 0.6 and τa at 0.9.
 4) Competitive Baseline Configuration: We select four
 competitive baselines for fair and consistent performance
 comparison, all aligned with our research context and validated
 in state-of-the-art studies: OLGAM [18], BF+Bi-LSTM [25],
 PSSAE [29] and EBHM [19]. These methods represent the latest advances in intrusion detection research, and have garnered
 widespread attention owing to their superior performance in
 addressing complex network traffic patterns. The following is
 TABLE V an overview of these approaches:
 E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT C ONFIGURATION • OLGAM. Combines log-ratio oversampling, outlier
 detection, and metric learning for IoV intrusion detection, using LightGBM to achieve strong performance on
 datasets like UNSW-NB15.
 • BF+Bi-LSTM. A multi-stage intrusion detection framework that uses state-based Bloom filters for initial
 anomaly screening and Bi-LSTM for temporal feature
 learning.
 • PSSAE. A pseudo-siamese stacked autoencoder network
 and external communications. UBD includes network that extracts deep semantic features via unsupervised
 flow data of nine major families of attacks, which are pre-training and supervised fine-tuning for traffic classialso common in external network attacks on IoV. Table IV fication.
 shows the details about the dataset used to evaluate the • EBHM. A hybrid ensemble intrusion detection model
 proposed NIDS. The dataset contains 49 features, such addresses class imbalance by processing data through kas source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, means clustering sampling, Z-score normalization, and
 duration, source bytes, and destination bytes. SMOTE. It selects high-performance algorithms and fuses
 3) Implementation Details: Table V displays the simulation results via a stacking strategy.
environment. The experimental setup is shown in Table VI. All competitive baselines are re-implemented under a uni-
We design nine scenarios across the two datasets to thoroughly fied framework with identical scenario setup (Table VII), metassess our method’s performance. Scenarios Sce@1 to Sce@5 rics (Section V-A1), and experimental environment (Table V),
are designed for the CHD, while Sce@5 to Sce@9 for UBD. without specialized augmentation to ensure fairness.
Each scenario involves training two models: GMVAE N,
using only normal data, and GMVAE A, using a subset of B. Detection Performance
known attack data. During the testing phase, we evaluate the 1) Illustration of Detection Process: Fig. 5 illustrates the
model’s ability to detect known data types (normal data and detection process of EDGMVAE for various types of traffic
attacks encountered during training) and new attacks (attacks in the Sce@1 scenario, displaying ten records per traffic type
that were not seen during training). New attacks are defined due to space limitations. Fig. 5a shows the detection of normal
as attack types not included in the training dataset. These new traffic, where pn mostly exceeds the threshold τn , and pa falls
attacks are designed to simulate real-world scenarios in which below τa , enabling accurate classification of normal traffic.
attackers may use tactics that have not been seen before. For According to the logical fusion algorithm, the sixth record,
example, in Table VI, for Sce@1, the attack types used during highlighted in green, indicates a false positive. Fig. 5b to
training are DoS, Fuzzy and Spoofing. Therefore, the spoofing Fig. 5d illustrate the detection process for known attacks,
RPM gauge is considered a new attack. where it is observed that pn is generally below τn while pa
 Model details are provided in Table VII. The models exceeds τa . Notably, when pn exceeds τn and pa exceeds τa ,
use fully connected layes, with structures specified in the we classify the traffic as an ‘attack’ that is similar to normal
‘structure’ column. The selection of k is determined through traffic. This ensures not only the detection of known attacks
a grid search method, with k ∈ {3, 4, 5, 6, 7} and ELBO as with obvious patterns but also those with covert patterns that
the evaluation metric. For Sce@1 to Sce@4, k is set to 5 resemble normal traffic. The records marked by green lines
for GMVAE N based on empirical findings, and to 3 for indicate false negatives. Finally, Fig. 5e illustrates the detection
GMVAE A, corresponding to the three known attack types of new attacks, with both pn and pa notbaly below the
during training. For Sce@5 to Sce@9, k remains at 5 for thresholds. This aligns with our expectations and demonstrates
GMVAE N, and is adjusted to 4 for GMVAE A, correspond- that EDGMVAE effectively identifies most new attacks.
ing to four known attack types in training. Additionally, we set 2) Performance on CHD: Table VIII summarizes the perthe weighting factor α to 0.5, and use the Adam optimizer with formance of the EDGMVAE on CHD. For normal traffic
a learning rate of 0.001. Each batch consists of 40 samples, detection, EDGMVAE achieves an average accuracy rate of
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 9

 TABLE VI
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

 TABLE VII
 D ETAILS OF P ROPOSED M ODEL

Fig. 5. Illustrating the detection process using Sce@1.

99.04% and an average false positive rate of merely 0.96%, accuracy of 98.54%, recall of 98.52%, precision of 98.44%,
indicating our method’s high reliability in identifying nor- and f1-score of 98.47%, with false negative rate of just 1.48%.
mal traffic patterns. For known attacks, it attains an average These metrics highlight its strong performance in identifying
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE VIII
 P ERFORMANCE ON CHD

known attack patterns. For new attacks, EDGMVAE achieves probability is above the threshold τn , and as attack if it
an average accuracy of 92.47%, recall of 90.97%, precision is below.
of 92.06%, f1-score of 91.51%, and false negative rate of • GMVAE A: GMVAE trained exclusively on known
9.03%. Despite the greater challenges posed by new attacks, attack data, which identifies traffic as attack if the reconthese results highlight EDGMVAE’s strong adaptability and struction probability is greater than τa , and as normal
potential for detecting new attack patterns. otherwise.
 3) Performance on UBD: Table IX presents the perfor- We conduct a comprehensive comparison of our method
mance of EDGMVAE on UBD. For normal traffic detection, with baseline methods across two datasets. Fig. 6 and Fig. 7
EDGMVAE achieves an impressive average accuracy of illustrate the detection performance of various models for
98.91% and false positive rate of 1.09%. For known attacks, normal traffic, known attack traffic, and new attack traffic on
it attains an average accuracy of 98.59%, recall of 98.43%, the CHD and UBD datasets, respectively.
precision of 98.40%, f1-score of 98.41%, and false negative 1) Comparison on the Detection of Normal Traffic:
rate of 1.57%. For new attacks, it achieves an average accuracy VAE N and VAE A exhibit relatively lower average accuof 89.07%, recall of 89.85%, precision of 89.28%, f1-score of racy and higher FPR in detecting normal traffic. This is
89.56%, and false negative rate of 10.15%. because VAE models, using a single Gaussian distribution in
 the latent space, cannot accurately capture the complex underlying data features. In contrast, GMVAE N and GMVAE A
C. Ablation Study exhibit a marked improvement in average accuracy. This
 We perform an ablation study in which we compare our enhancement can be credited to the use of Gaussian Mixture
method’s performance with four ablative baselines: distributions as the latent space, which more effectively learns
 • VAE N: VAE trained exclusively on normal data, which and represents the patterns in complex data. Overall, the
 classifies traffic as normal if the reconstruction probability results indicate that our EDGMVAE model, which integrates
 exceeds the threshold τn , and as attack otherwise. the strengths of GMVAE N and GMVAE A, achieves the
 • VAE A: VAE trained exclusively on known attack data, highest accuracy and the lowest FPR.
 which identifies traffic as attack if the reconstruction 2) Comparison on the Detection of Known Attack Traffic: It
 probability surpasses the threshold τa , and as normal is evident that VAE A outperforms VAE N, and GMAVE A
 otherwise. outperforms GMVAE N. This can be attributed to the fact that
 • GMVAE N: GMVAE trained exclusively on normal VAE A and GMVAE A are specifically trained to learn the
 data, which labels traffic as normal if the reconstruction characteristics of known attacks, making them more sensitive
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 11

 TABLE IX
 P ERFORMANCE ON UBD

Fig. 6. Comparison of EDGMVAE with other baselines on the CHD.

to such patterns. GMVAE N and GMVAE A further demon- achieves the best performance, confirming its reliability in
strate improvements over VAE N and VAE A, respectively, detecting known attacks.
thereby highlighting the advantages of using Gaussian Mix- 3) Comparison on the Detection of New Attack Traffic:
ture distribution as the latent space. Ultimately, EDGMVAE VAE A and GMVAE A perform poorly in detecting new
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Fig. 7. Comparison of EDGMVAE with other baselines on the UBD.

 TABLE X
 C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ON CHD

 TABLE XI
 C OMPARISON W ITH OTHER M ETHODS ON UBD

attacks, nearly failing in this regard. This is because they are using two parallel GMVAEs. Each GMVAE processes input
trained only on known attack patterns and tend to misclassify traffic (with dimension d) through fully connected layers (with
unseen new attacks as normal traffic. In contrast, VAE N hidden layer size h) to extract latent features, involving matrix
and GMVAE N show better performance in identifying new multiplications that contribute a complexity of O(d · h). For
attacks, demonstrating a certain level of ability to recognize k Gaussian mixture components, the probability of the input
such patterns, although their FPR remains relatively high. belonging to each component is computed, adding O(k · h). To
EDGMVAE exhibits the most significant effectiveness in calculate the reconstruction probability Preconstruction , L Monte
detecting new attacks. This confirms that our method main- Carlo samples are drawn, with each sample involving data
tains a high detection accuracy when faced with previously reconstruction from latent variables and generation probability
unseen attack patterns, showcasing its broad applicability and computation, contributing O(L · k · d). Since the two GMVAE
robustness in practical applications. models run in parallel, the total time complexity for EDGM-
 VAE inference remains O(d·h+k·h+L·k·d). Space complexity
 is determined by the storage requirements for the parameters
D. Computational Efficiency Analysis of the two GMVAEs, which is O(2 · (d · h + h2 + k · h)).
 To address the practical deployment feasibility of EDGM- 2) Practical Overhead Measurements: We measure the
VAE in resource-constrained IoV environments, we analyze computational overhead using the experimental environment
its computational complexity and time/space overhead, with in Table V, with results in Table XII. We must expliccomparisons to baseline models. itly acknowledge the gap between simulation and actual
 1) Theoretical Complexity Analysis: In the detection phase in-vehicle hardware; however, preliminary simulation-based
of EDGMVAE, the time complexity is determined by the results remain valuable for feasibility assessment because:
key steps involved in computing reconstruction probabilities (1) The relative overhead differences between methods
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

TIAN et al.: NETWORK INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM BASED ON EDGMVAE FOR INTERNET OF VEHICLES 13

 TABLE XII car hacking dataset for in-vehicle communication and the
 P RACTICAL OVERHEAD M EASUREMENTS UNSWNB-15 dataset for external network communication.
 We carefully design various scenarios to thoroughly assess
 the model’s ability. The evaluation results demonstrate that
 our method not only excels in detecting known attacks but
 also outperforms other state-of-the-art methods in detecting
 new attacks, highlighting its robustness and adaptability.
 Despite the promising results achieved, we must acknowledge two main limitations of this study. First, experimental
remain valid; (2) Modern AI-capable vehicular platforms evaluation uses public datasets CHD and UBD with pre-
(e.g., NVIDIA Drive AGX) provide enhanced AI inference defined, static attack patterns, which fail to fully capture
optimization, which theoretically yields lower overhead than real IoV adaptive attacks, potentially limiting generalization
our simulation environment. assessment to complex landscapes. Second, the logical fusion
 EDGMVAE takes 17 hours to train for 500 epochs, which rules adopt fixed thresholds (τn , τa ), which may compromise
is approximately twice as long as GMVAE. This training time long-term detection stability under dynamic IoV traffic drifts
is acceptable for IoV scenarios, given that intrusion detection (e.g., evolving normal behaviors or iterative attack strategies).
models are usually trained offline prior to deployment and Future research will focus on the following directions:
updated periodically rather than in real time. In terms of (1) Overcome predefined dataset limitations by extending evaldetection latency, EDGMVAE processes each traffic in 2.7ms, uation to dynamic adaptive attacks, e.g., collecting real-road
which is marginally longer than GMVAE (2.2ms) and VAE attack flow data with automakers or using adversarial gener-
(1.8ms). EDGMVAE’s peak memory usage is 11.1 GB, which ation to build strategy-iterating dynamic samples. (2) Design
is roughly twice that of GMVAE (5.6 GB), due to the an online update mechanism to enable the model to adapt
storage of parameters for two GMVAEs. Thus, our method to the dynamic changes of the IoV environment. (3) Deploy
demonstrates feasibility in the IoV environment based on EDGMVAE in large-scale IoV environments to further verify
preliminary experimental evidence. Direct validation on in- its efficiency and practical value. (4) Given that adversarial
vehicle hardware remains essential future work that we will samples may bypass NIDS, it is necessary to conduct an inactively pursue. depth evaluation of the robustness of the proposed NIDS when
 facing adversarial attacks.
E. Comparison With Other Methods
 Tables X and XI present the comparative results on the R EFERENCES
CHD and UBD, respectively. In the identification of normal [1] W. Zhuang, Q. Ye, F. Lyu, N. Cheng, and J. Ren, “SDN/NFV-empowered
traffic, compared with other methods, the false positive rate of future IoV with enhanced communication, computing, and caching,”
EDGMVAE is 0.67% to 4.22% lower on the CHD and 0.54% Proc. IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 274–291, Feb. 2020.
 [2] B. Ji et al., “Research on optimal intelligent routing algorithm for
to 3.6% lower on the UBD. In the detection of known attacks, IoV with machine learning and smart contract,” Digit. Commun. Netw.,
EDGMVAE performs comparably with other methods and is vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 47–55, Feb. 2023.
generally superior to them. In the detection of new attacks, [3] H. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Chen, and W. Wang, “Evolutionary V2X technologies
 toward the Internet of Vehicles: Challenges and opportunities,” Proc.
EDGMVAE shows significant advantages. Specifically, EDG- IEEE, vol. 108, no. 2, pp. 308–323, Feb. 2020.
MVAE achieves 6.66% to 12.83% higher accuracy and 5.3% [4] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
to 13.61% lower false negative rate than other methods on G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
the CHD, and achieves 5.13% to 21.91% higher accuracy and in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11,
 pp. 1–40, Nov. 2023.
5.28% to 24.37% lower false negative rate than other methods [5] K. Huang, R. Xian, M. Xian, H. Wang, and L. Ni, “A comprehensive
on the UBD. intrusion detection method for the Internet of Vehicles based on federated learning architecture,” Comput. Secur., vol. 147, Dec. 2024, Art.
 no. 104067.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [6] X. Li, Z. Hu, M. Xu, Y. Wang, and J. Ma, “Transfer learning based
 intrusion detection scheme for Internet of Vehicles,” Inf. Sci., vol. 547,
 We propose the Enhanced Dual Gaussian Mixture Varia- pp. 119–135, Feb. 2021.
tional Autoencoder (EDGMVAE) to detect various network [7] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain:
intrusions in the IoV, including new attacks. Our method A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4,
consists of three main stages. In the initial stage, we pre- pp. 2356–2426, 4th Quart., 2023.
 [8] M. A. Alsoufi et al., “Anomaly-based intrusion detection systems in IoT
process the traffic data to prepare it for subsequent analysis. using deep learning: A systematic literature review,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11,
In the second stage, we reconstruct the traffic data using no. 18, p. 8383, Sep. 2021.
two distinct GMVAEs: GMVAE N, trained on normal traffic, [9] T. Saba, A. Rehman, T. Sadad, H. Kolivand, and S. A. Bahaj, “Anomalybased intrusion detection system for IoT networks through deep learning
and GMVAE A, trained on known attack traffic. We then model,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 99, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 107810.
obtain the reconstruction probabilities of the traffic data from [10] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
both GMVAEs. By integrating these probabilities via a logi- detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
 Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
cal fusion procedure, we improve the model’s capability to [11] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
identify new attacks. We conduct tests on two benchmark network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
datasets to evaluate the efficacy of our methodology: the in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

[12] M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, H. Ochiai, D. Fall, and Y. Kadobayashi, Yaowen Zheng is currently a Professor with
 “LSTM-based intrusion detection system for in-vehicle can bus the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
 communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 185489–185502, 2020. Academy of Sciences. He has published more than
[13] P. Wei, B. Wang, X. Dai, L. Li, and F. He, “A novel intrusion detection 30 papers in conferences and journals, including
 model for the CAN bus packet of in-vehicle network based on attention USENIX Security, ASPLOS, ISSTA, and TOSEM.
 mechanism and autoencoder,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 1, His research interests include system security, parpp. 14–21, Feb. 2023. ticularly in vulnerability discovery and security
[14] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat protection for embedded devices.
 analysis for automotive CAN networks: A GAN model-based intrusion
 detection technique,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7,
 pp. 4467–4477, Jul. 2021.
[15] F. Luo, J. Wang, Z. Li, and C. Luo, “An anomaly detection model
 for in-vehicle networks based on lightweight convolution with spectral
 residuals,” Comput. Secur., vol. 151, Apr. 2025, Art. no. 104304.
[16] J. Shi, Z. Xie, L. Dong, X. Jiang, and X. Jin, “IDS-DEC: A novel
 intrusion detection for CAN bus traffic based on deep embedded
 clustering,” Veh. Commun., vol. 49, Oct. 2024, Art. no. 100830.
[17] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion Laile Xi received the bachelor’s degree in engineerdetection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., ing and the bachelor’s degree in law from Nankai
 vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198. University and the master’s degree in engineering
[18] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion detection from the University of Chinese Academy of Scion Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling, outlier ences. His current research interests include the
 detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831, Nov. intersected areas of the IoT security, fuzzing, and
 2021. AIGC.
[19] I. Ullah, I. Khalil, X. Bai, S. Garg, G. Kaddoum, and M. S. Hossain,
 “An ensemble-based hybrid model for the detection of attacks in the
 Internet of Vehicular Things,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26,
 no. 10, pp. 17914–17927, Oct. 2025.
[20] H. M. Song and H. K. Kim, “Self-supervised anomaly detection for invehicle network using noised pseudo normal data,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
 Technol., vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 1098–1108, Feb. 2021.
[21] J. Cao et al., “Anomaly detection for in-vehicle network using selfsupervised learning with vehicle-cloud collaboration update,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 7454–7466, Jul. 2024.
[22] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid Shenghao Lin received the degree from the School
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Software, Tsinghua University, in 2021. He is
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute
[23] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using Sciences. His research interests include ADS testing,
 rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. fuzzing, and LLM.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[24] Y. Huang and M. Ma, “AILL-IDS: An automatic incremental lifetime
 learning intrusion detection system for vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 2669–2678, Feb. 2025.
[25] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An
 enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious
 activities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022.
[26] S. Anbalagan, G. Raja, S. Gurumoorthy, R. D. Suresh, and K. Dev,
 “IIDS: Intelligent intrusion detection system for sustainable development
 in autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, Yubo Li is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with
 no. 12, pp. 15866–15875, Dec. 2023. the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
[27] N. Nissar, N. Naja, and A. Jamali, “Securing VANETs: Multi-objective Academy of Sciences. He is an Engineer. His current
 intrusion detection with variational autoencoders,” IEEE Trans. Consum. research interests include large language models,
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3867–3874, Feb. 2024. network attack and defense, and network simulation
[28] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS: and emulation.
 Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
 models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
 2025.
[29] S. Tu, M. Waqas, A. Badshah, M. Yin, and G. Abbas, “Network
 intrusion detection system (NIDS) based on pseudo-siamese stacked
 autoencoders in fog computing,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput., vol. 16,
 no. 6, pp. 4317–4327, Nov. 2023.

 Shizhao Tian is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree Hongsong Zhu (Member, IEEE) is currently the
 with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chi- Ph.D. Supervisor and a Professor with the Institute
 nese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests of Information Engineering, CAS, and the University
 include the IoT security, the IoV security, and intru- of Chinese Academy of Sciences. He has published
 sion detection. more than 120 papers in journals and conferences,
 such as USENIX, AAAI, TDSC, and ACL. His
 research interests include the IoT security, network
 attack and defense, and big data security analysis.