IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 1511

 Noise Resistant Encrypted Malicious Traffic
 Detection Through Kernel-Enhanced
 Contrastive View Alignment
 Meihui Zhong , Ting Zhong , Member, IEEE, Yong Wang , Kai Chen , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Fan Zhou , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection (EMTD) is advancements protect user data, they also present significant
challenging due to the limitations of inspecting encrypted content challenges for Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection (EMTD)
and the scarcity of labeled data. Graph Contrastive Learning due to the limited visibility into encrypted traffic [1], [2].
(GCL) offers a promising direction by representing traffic as
graphs, yet existing approaches struggle to capture global rela- Traditional detection methods, such as Deep Packet Inspection
tionships and remain vulnerable to noise. To address these, we (DPI) [3], rely on inspecting packet payloads, which are not
propose KerCL, a Kernel-Enhanced Contrastive Learning frame- accessible in encrypted traffic. This has made the detection of
work for robust EMTD. KerCL introduces kernel-based graph malicious activities concealed within encrypted traffic a critical
convolution to capture both local and global traffic dependencies, issue in cybersecurity [4]. Consequently, there is an urgent
enhancing the ability to understand the long-range context of
encrypted traffic. Furthermore, we propose a dependency-guided need for detection methods that can detect malicious traffic
graph reconstruction strategy, which restructures adjacency without decryption, while maintaining both effective detection
matrices based on learned kernel similarities, ensuring structural and privacy preservation [5].
integrity while improving diversity in augmented views. To reduce Recent advancements in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs)
noise-induced semantic drift, we introduce a novel contrastive offer promising solutions for EMTD by representing netdependency alignment mechanism. It leverages the Hilbert-
Schmidt independence criterion to enforce semantic consistency work flows as traffic graphs [6], [7], [8], [9]. In these
across augmented views while preserving stability of traffic graphs, nodes represent network entities (e.g., IPs, sessions,
representations. Experiments on several benchmarks show that or flows), and edges capture their interactions. GNNs excel
KerCL surpasses previous methods in consistency, robustness, at modeling structural patterns within traffic graphs, which
and noise tolerance. On the DoHBrw dataset with 50% noise are challenging to capture using sequence-based approaches.
and only 2,000 labels, KerCL improves the F1-score by over
28% compared with the best baseline, showcasing its effectiveness This capability makes GNN-based methods promising for
under noisy, label-sparse network conditions. detecting malicious encrypted behaviors. However, real-world
 detection tasks face a key obstacle: high-quality labeled data
 Index Terms—Encrypted malicious detection, Kernel-based
graph convolution, Hilbert–Schmidt independence criterion, are scarce [10]. This scarcity has driven the development
graph contrastive learning, self-supervised learning. of Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL)-based methods [11],
 [12]. GCL is a powerful self-supervised approach, learns
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 discriminative representations by contrasting augmented views

T HE rapid proliferation of encryption protocols like TLS,
 QUIC, and HTTP/3 has significantly enhanced the privacy and security of online communications. While these
 of the same graph, reducing reliance on extensive labeled data
 [13].
 Despite significant progress, applying GCL directly to
 Received 4 March 2025; revised 28 August 2025; accepted 19 October EMTD faces two key challenges – (1) Limited context. in
2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor Y. Liu. traffic data. When modeled as graphs, traffic data within
Date of publication 28 October 2025; date of current version 5 January one-hop typically reflect only local interactions between enti-
2026. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62176043, Grant 62072077, and Grant U22A2097. ties. Existing GCL-based methods prioritize optimizing local
(Corresponding author: Fan Zhou.) embeddings, while overlooking global structural dependencies
 Meihui Zhong and Fan Zhou are with the School of Information and within traffic graphs [14], [15]. As a result, these approaches
Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu, Sichuan 610054, China (e-mail: zhong99 cs@outlook.com; struggle to capture long-range relationships between network
fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn). flows. (2) Susceptibility to noisy artifacts. Most GCL-based
 Ting Zhong is with the School of Information and Software Engineering, detection approaches rely on heuristic augmentations, such
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan
610054, China, and also with the Department of Information Security, Kashi as random node/edge deletion and graph perturbations, to
Institute of Electronics and Information Industry, Kashgar, Xinjiang 844000, generate contrastive views. These unguided transformations
China (e-mail: zhongting@uestc.edu.cn). are vulnerable to noise, disrupt semantic consistency, and
 Yong Wang is with The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Hong Kong, China (e-mail: wangyongjoy@ust.hk). inject distortions that mislead representation learning [16].
 Kai Chen is with the Computer Science and Engineering, The Hong Kong We introduce noise equal in volume to the clean dataset
University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China (e-mail:
kaichen@cse.ust.hk).
 (Figure 1(a)), markedly altering the flow-duration distribution
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3625606 and underscoring its impact on data integrity. Visualization of
 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1512 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 predefined graph structure [18]. This design captures both local
 and global dependencies, which improves contextual understanding and helps expose subtle malicious patterns spread
 across sessions. Next, dependency-guided graph reconstruction
 then uses the kernel similarity matrix to rebuild the adjacency
 matrix and create augmented views that retain meaningful
 structural context. By preserving learned flow dependencies,
 the reconstructed graphs avoid distortions that could otherwise mislead representation learning. Finally, the semantic
Fig. 1. (a) Adding noise data equivalent to the volume of clean data signif- alignment employs the Hilbert-Schmidt Independence Criteicantly alters the flow duration distribution, as evidenced by the noticeable rion (HSIC) to implement the dependency-based alignment
shift. (b) FeCoGraph exhibits performance degradation with increasing noise
levels, while KerCL demonstrates strong noise robustness, maintaining high
 mechanism. By emphasizing the core features of the source
F1-scores across the tested range. data, this component suppresses irrelevant noise, bolstering the
 model’s robustness.
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
the embeddings in the DoHBrw dataset, shown in Figure 1(b), • We propose KerCL, a novel Kernel-Enhanced Contrastive
reveals that in an environment where half the data is noise, the Learning framework for robust EMTD, which captures
FeCoGraph [17] – a label-aware federated GCL method that both local and global dependencies in traffic graphs and
optimizes intra- and inter-class distances – remains highly sen- preserves key semantics. It enhances the detection of
sitive, producing almost indistinguishable features. In contrast, subtle malicious patterns under sparse labels and noise
our KerCL effectively mitigates the influence of noise, learn- conditions.
ing distinct and robust embeddings. It suggests that without • We design three integral components to facilitate effective
proper regularization, contrastive learning can amplify these graph learning for EMTD: global dependency modeling,
distortions, causing learned embeddings to deviate from their dependency-guided graph reconstruction, and contrastive
true distributions. This, in turn, increases errors in similarity dependency alignment. These integrate kernel-induced
evaluations and compromises the model’s ability to maintain similarity, adjacency restructuring, and HSIC-based alignstable traffic representations. ment, to enhance graph representations in an efficient
 To prevent errors or irrelevant information from obscur- manner.
ing semantic, we reconstruct the source graph’s adjacency. • Extensive experiments across three real-world benchmark
We draw inspiration from kernel method, which is a natu- datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of KerCL. Comral approach to capture and quantify semantic relationships pared with eight competitive baselines, KerCL achieves
between nodes more accurately [18]. This motivates us to average improvements of 5%, 15%, and 18% in accuracy,
focus on reconstructing the graph from a similarity-based precision, and F1-score, respectively, on the TONIoT
kernel matrix. Pairwise similarities aggregate global informa- dataset, even under challenging conditions with 50%
tion and filter minor perturbations, making the reconstructed noise and limited labeled samples.
graph less noise-sensitive [19]. Furthermore, in noisy network Roadmap. The remainder of this paper is structured as
environments, augmented samples may include corrupted or follows: Section II reviews the related work on EMTD.
adversarial artifacts. Guided by alignment regularization, we Section III details the proposed KerCL framework. In
introduce a “consensus mechanism” based on dependency- Section IV, we reports extensive experiments, including overguided alignment, to further reduce noise impact. By aligning all effectiveness, robustness, ablation studies, and complexity
the representations of augmented views, the model can empha- analysis. Section V concludes the study and outlines future
size shared, semantically relevant features over noise, as work.
demonstrated in Figure 1(b). The regularization term thus mit-
 II. R ELATED W ORK
igates noise interference, and maintain semantic consistency.
 To this end, we propose the Kernel-Enhanced Contrastive A. Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection
Learning framework (KerCL), a novel graph learning EMTD has become central to network defense as encryption
approach designed to enhance EMTD. Technically, this models protocols proliferate. Existing approaches fall into three broad
global flow dependencies of through kernels, reconstructs the classes.
source graph to generate contrastive views, and introduces (1) Rule-based Methods. These methods rely on constructa guided alignment mechanism to mitigate noise interfer- ing blacklists of IP addresses, certificates, or ports associated
ence, ultimately improving detection accuracy and robustness. with known attackers [20], [21]. Although fast and easy
Structurally, it comprises three key components: global depen- to deploy, they are inherently static; adversaries can evade
dency modeling, dependency-guided graph reconstruction, and them by frequently changing observable features, and their
semantic alignment. effectiveness therefore decays in dynamic environments.
 Specifically, global dependency modeling first learns a (2) Statistics-based Methods. These approaches learn from
kernel matrix that reflects relations within the original flow flow-level statistics such as packet size, inter-arrival time, and
graph. Relying on high-order feature propagation, it infers session duration. For instance, XGBoost [22] uses sparse sensnode relations from feature similarity rather than from a ing and weighted quantile sketches to model high-dimensional
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1513

traffic features. Similarly, AppScanner [23] develops a frame- information in communication graphs, thereby identifying P2P
work for application fingerprinting, incorporating strategies to botnet nodes. Although they capture global aspects, their
identify and mitigate ambiguous traffic effects. However, such modality-specific or task-specific focus limits comprehensive
methods are vulnerable to traffic variation and noise, which modeling of flow dependencies in noisy, encrypted traffic,
lead to elevated false-positive and false-negative rates when falling short of addressing EMTD’s structural complexity.
data are sparse or noisy. In contrast, our KerCL learn the nonlinear dependen-
 (3) Deep Learning-based Methods. These methods offer cies of augmented representations in high-dimensional space,
powerful alternatives by learning complex representations employs dependency-guided reconstruction for consistent
from raw network data [24], [25]. They can be further classi- augmented views, and applies HSIC-based alignment for
fied by feature extraction strategies: Packet-level models, such noise-resistant, uniform representations.
as Deep Fingerprinting [26] treats website trace as a sequence
of packets, leveraging sequential learning method to classify III. M ETHODOLOGY
traffic flows using raw packet data. FS-Net [27] similarly This section elaborates on the framework of KerCL in detail.
processes raw packet data, mining potential sequence features Fig. 2 provides an overview of KerCL, which integrates global
from streams, and incorporating the reconstruction mechanism dependency modeling, graph reconstruction, and semantic
to improve the features effectiveness. Graph-based methods, alignment. The model is designed to capture both local and
including GraphDApp [24], TrafficGCN [28], ST-Graph [29] global dependencies in traffic graphs while generating semanand EC-GCN [30], transform sequences into graphs. They tically consistent augmentations for robust graph learning. This
represent dependencies among entities (e.g., IPs, sessions, or combination ensures effective and generalizable detection of
flows) for effective representation learning. And image-based malicious traffic, even in noisy and label-scarce environments.
methods, such as TAM-CNN [31] and ATVITSC [25], treat
traffic data as images, leveraging CNNs for EMTD.
 A. Task Definition
B. Semi-Supervised Learning Encrypted network traffic comprises data packets exchanged
 between hosts within a network. This traffic can be analyzed
 Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL) has gained traction as a
 at multiple granularities, from individual packets to aggregated
means of extracting supervisory signals from unlabeled data,
 entities such as flows, sessions, or channels. We adopt a
offering a promising direction for tasks like EMTD. SSL
 flow-based setting: a flow is a sequence of packets sharing
is particularly valuable in graph-based tasks, where large
 a common 4-tuple: source IP, destination IP, source port,
amounts of unlabeled data can be utilized to learn effective
 destination port.
representations. Recent studies in EMTD have explored sev-
 We model encrypted network traffic as a graph G =
eral SSL frameworks, categorized as follows:
 (V, E, A, H). Nodes vi ∈ V represent hosts identified by
 (1) Data-Level Augmentation. Models such as TrafCL
 IP addresses. Edges E are established using heuristics such
[32] randomly drops packets to generate augmented views.
 as flows sharing the same destination IP address and port.
MTC-MAE [33] constructs a unsupervised pretext task with
 The binary adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}n×n encodes these
a random masking strategy to get augmentation views. FeCoconnections, where Aij = 1 indicates an edge and Aij = 0
Graph [17], a label-aware federated GCL framework, enhances
 otherwise. Each node is associated with a feature vector
flow embedding discriminability by optimizing intra-class and
 in the initial node-feature matrix constructed from raw perinter-class distances; These methods effectively exploit data
 flow/session features H ∈ Rn×d , where each row contains
variability but risk semantic loss under noisy conditions due to
 a d-dimensional feature vector, and this matrix serves as the
unguided augmentations, limiting their robustness in EMTD’s
 input to the propagation stage. Feature fields include common
label-scarce, noisy environments.
 flow statistics such as packet counts, flow duration, and inter-
 (2) Representation-Level Augmentation. Some methods
 packet intervals. We consider a C-class classification problem
inject perturbations into inputs to regularize representation diswith label set Y = {1, . . . , C}. For each labeled node vi ,
tributions, generating semantically diverse views. For instance,
 yi ∈ Y denotes its class, and we use c ∈ Y to index classes.
TCG-IDS [34] proposes three graph contrastive strategies:
 Building on prior graph-based approaches to EMTD [12],
temporal contrasting to capture node evolution over time,
 [37], we implement a semi-supervised transductive learning
asymmetric contrasting to model relationships between nodes,
 framework. Given G with nl labeled nodes, our goal is to
and random masking of node or edge features during training
 learn f (·) to predict the label distribution ŷt for an unlabeled
to force the model to learn from residual data; While boostnode vt by leveraging both labeled and unlabeled nodes.
ing representation flexibility, these heuristic perturbations can
amplify noise distortions, exacerbating semantic inconsistency
in noisy encrypted traffic, as highlighted in our earlier analysis. B. Kernel Enhanced Global Dependency Modeling
 (3) Local-Global Augmentations. CoMDet [35] introduces In network traffic analysis, capturing both local and global
an inter-modal contrastive learning approach, enhancing fea- dependencies is essential for detecting malicious behaviors
ture representations by maximizing mutual information across hidden in encrypted flows. Local dependencies refer to direct
modalities. PeerG [36] employs graph contrastive learning to communication between two IP addresses, such as traffic
optimize feature extraction for P2P botnet detection, using exchanged within a single session or flow. Global dependenmaximum mutual information to measure local and global cies capture broader relationships across multiple, potentially
1514 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 2. The architecture of KerCL. (i) Global Dependency Modeling, which captures both local and global dependencies in the traffic graph through various
Kernel-based Graph Convolutions (KGCs); (ii) Dependency-Guided Graph Reconstruction, which generates semantically consistent augmented graphs using
a learned kernel matrix; (iii) HSIC-based Semantic Alignment, which aligns original and augmented embeddings (Z and Ẑ) using the Hilbert-Schmidt
Independence Criterion (HSIC) and contrastive learning. The final detection module objective combines cross-entropy and alignment losses.

distant nodes, such as flows originating from a malicious IP Formally, the mapping is defined as:
over different sessions. Traditional GNNs model capture these >
relationships by aggregating information from neighboring MAPPING(H) := ψ(H) = [ψ (h1 ) , ψ (h2 ) , . . . , ψ (hn )] ,
nodes based on graph adjacency, a structure-only approach (1)
that relies solely on the graph’s topological connections where ψ : Rd → RD is a feature mapping and d ≤ D.
without incorporating semantic similarities. This structure- Direct computation of explicitly designing the mapping
only approach has two key limitations: (1) stacking multiple function ψ(·), is computationally prohibitive, particularly for
layers to capture long-range dependencies often lead models large or infinite D. Instead, we utilize a kernel function k(·, ·),
suffer from over-smoothing, causing node embeddings to lose which implicitly computes the inner product in the mapped
distinctiveness, and (2) reliance on adjacency matrices alone space: k(h, h0 ) = hψ(h), ψ(h0 )i. Hence, the kernel matrix K
overlooks semantic similarities between flows based on shared for the node set H is constructed as:
  
behavioral patterns, hindering detection of non-adjacent flows k(h1 , h1 ) · · · k(h1 , hn )
with similar features. K= .. .. ..
 , (2)
  
 . . .
 (1) Kernel-based Graph Convolution.
 k(hn , h1 ) · · · k(hn , hn )
 To overcome these limitations, we propose a kernelenhanced global dependency modeling method that integrates where each kernel corresponds to an implicit feature map.
structural graph information with semantic dependencies For instance, a polynomial kernel k(h, h0 ) = (h> h0 + c)d
through the Kernel-based Graph Convolution (KGC). This corresponds to a d-order polynomial feature map, while a
method implicitly encodes pairwise relationships by mapping Gaussian kernel k(h, h0 ) = exp(−kh − h0 k2 /(2σ 2 )) repnode features into a high-dimensional space using kernel func- resents an infinite-dimensional mapping, with σ controlling
tions. And effectively balances the representation of local and sensitivity to feature differences.
global dependencies without requiring deeper architectures, b) Kernel Propagation: Our KGC’s propagation mechaensuring scalability and resilience to noise. nism updates node embeddings H(l) iteratively on the graph
 G = (V, E, A, H), where H = [h1 ; . . . ; hn ] ∈ Rn×d
 a) Kernel Mapping: A core component of our method is denotes the initial raw node-feature matrix constructed from
the kernel matrix K, which encodes pairwise relationships the original per-flow/session statistics.
between nodes by implicitly mapping their features into a This leverages high-dimensional feature mappings to encode
high-dimensional space. In network security, these relation- nonlinear relationships, expressed as:
ships capture the behavioral similarity between hosts, a critical
signal for detecting coordinated malicious activities which H̄(l+1) = AGGREGATE(G, H(l) ) = Â q H(l) , (3)
generate statistically similar traffic patterns. This projection H (l+1)
 = ψ(l) (H̄ (l+1)
 ), (4)
is designed to improve class separability, that is, to what
extent to which learned representations for different classes where Â = D−1/2 AD−1/2 is the normalized adjacency
are distinct and easily distinguishable. By leveraging kernel- matrix, q controls the propagation range and enables multiinduced similarities, this mapping aims to increase the margins hop aggregation, and l denotes the layer index. In particular,
between classes while reducing the variance within each we define the initial kernel matrix K(0) = HH> , where H is
class, making the subsequent classification task more effective. the initial input feature matrix.
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1515

 Obviously, it is easy to observe that the kernel matrix the original but preserves the behavioral relationships between
for the updated embeddings can be expressed as K(l+1) = nodes, which is crucial for effective contrastive learning.
 >
H(l+1) H(l+1) . However, directly computing H(l+1) is The reconstruction process begins with the kernel matrix K,
impractical due to its implicit nature. Instead, we aim to derive and we construct the augmented adjacency matrix Ã as:
K(l+1) directly from K(l) , thereby bypassing the need to (
 1, if j 6= i and Kij ≥ ci ,
explicit embedding calculations. To achieve this, we establish Ãij = (11)
a relationship between the kernel matrices. For a Gaussian 0, otherwise,
kernel, the updated kernel matrix K(l+1) is defined as: where ci is the threshold corresponding to the k-th largest
 (l+1)
 ! similarity score in each row i. This formulation ensures
 (l+1)
 ∆ij
 K = exp − , (i, j) ∈ [n] × [n], (5) that only the top-k most semantically similar neighbors for
 2γ 2 each node are retained, preserving critical relationships while
 (l+1) (l+1) (l+1) reducing noise-induced distortions.
where ∆ij = kh̄i − h¯j k2 is an element of the To further enhance diversity, we introduce Gaussian noise
 (l+1)
squared distance matrix ∆ for H̄(l+1) , and γ controls injection in the reconstructed graph. This introduces small
sensitivity to feature differences. perturbations to the edge weights in Ãij , simulating minor
 Through a series of derivations, we have: variations in data distribution without compromising the overall semantic consistency. Formally, the noise is applied as:
 ∆(l+1) = (Âq )i K(l) (Âq )> q (l) q >
 i − 2(Â )i K (Â )j
 Ãij ← Ãij + N 0, σ 2 ,
 
 + (Âq )j K(l) (Âq )> (12)
 j , (6)
 
 where N 0, σ 2 represents Gaussian noise with zero mean
where Âq is the normalized adjacency matrix raised to the
 and variance σ 2 .
q-th power, enabling multi-hop propagation. For convenience,
 Once the augmented adjacency matrix is constructed, we
this can be written in a more compact matrix form:
 apply normalization and sparsification to ensure computational
 ∆(l+1) = dK̄(l+1) 1> >
 n + 1n dK̄(l+1) − 2K̄
 (l+1)
 , (7) efficiency and numerical stability. Normalization is performed
 as:
where ˆ = D̃− 12 ÃD̃− 21 ,
 Ã (13)
 dK̄ = [K̄11 , K̄22 , . . . , K̄nn ]> , (8) where D̃ is the degree matrix corresponding to Ã. This step
 (l+1)
 K̄ q (l)
 = Â K (Â ) . q >
 (9) preserves key semantic information while optimizing the graph
 for graph learning tasks.
 This propagation step enriches the kernel matrix to include By leveraging the kernel matrix to guide graph reconstrucstructural information from the graph while preserving node- tion, our KerCL effectively balances semantic preservation
to-node similarity relationships. Consequently, the updated with meaningful diversity. This dependency-guided mechakernel matrix can be computed as: nism mitigates the semantic disruption typically associated
 ! with random augmentation methods. As a result, the graph
 (l+1)
 dK̄(l+1) 1> >
 n + 1n dK̄(l+1) − 2K̄
 (l+1)
 K = exp − 2 . reconstruction mechanism generates high-quality augmented
 2γ(l+1) views that meet the requirements of contrastive learning and
 (10) enhance model generalization.
 Note that now this formulation avoids the explicit representation from ψ(l) (H̄(l+1) ), but is directly obtained from K(l) . D. HSIC-Based Semantic Alignment
Our kernel-enhanced approach effectively addresses the oversmoothing problem of traditional GNNs by avoiding deep While the kernel-based graph convolution provides
architectures, while learning rich semantic information from embeddings with good initial separability, we introduce
encrypted traffic graphs to capture both structural and behav- a self-supervised semantic alignment step to make these
ioral patterns, enabling robust detection of subtle malicious representations more robust to noise. This improved
behaviors in EMTD. robustness, in turn, further enhances the final class separability.
 To achieve this, we design a graph contrastive learning method
 that incorporates semantic alignment through the Hilbert-
C. Dependency-Guided Graph Reconstruction Schmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) [38]. This method
 Existing augmentation techniques for graph contrastive ensures that the representations from the original graph and
learning, such as random node or edge removal and fea- its augmented view remain consistent with the underlying
ture masking, are commonly used to enhance data diversity. semantics, addressing challenges such as semantic drift
However, these heuristic approaches often disrupt the intrin- and representation collapse, which are often encountered in
sic semantic structure of the graph, leading to suboptimal self-supervised learning on graphs.
learning outcomes. To address these limitations, we propose (1) Contrastive Learning with Instance-Level Alignment.
a dependency-guided graph reconstruction mechanism, which At the core, our method begins with a contrastive loss
leverages the kernel matrix K(L) (abbreviated as K hereafter) term designed to promote instance-level consistency between
to generate an augmented adjacency matrix. This process gen- embeddings of the original graph and its augmented counerates an augmented graph that is structurally different from terpart. Let Z and Z̃ represent the node embeddings learned
1516 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

from the original and augmented graphs, respectively. The Algorithm 1 The training algorithm of KerCL.
contrastive loss is formulated as:
 1 X exp(sim(Z̃i , Z̃i )/τ )
 Lc = − log P , (14)
 |V| j∈V exp(sim(Zi , Z̃j )/τ )
 i∈V

where sim(·, ·) denotes a similarity measure (e.g., cosine similarity), τ is the temperature parameter, Zi is the embedding
of node i in the original graph, and Z̃i is the corresponding
embedding in the augmented graph. This loss aligns individual
node embeddings across views while ensuring separability
between embeddings of different nodes.
 (2) Semantic Alignment via HSIC.
 While the contrastive loss ensures instance-level alignment,
it does not enforce the global consistency across the graph’s
semantic structure. To address this, we introduce a semantic
alignment mechanism based on HSIC. HSIC could measures
statistical dependency between kernel matrices K and K̃,
which are derived from the embeddings Z and Z̃, respectively.
Similarly, through KGC” we can calculate K̃ in the following
matrix form: !
 ∆˜
 K̃ = exp − 2 . (15)
 2γ

where ∆˜ is the squared distance matrix of H̄(L+1) for the
 E. Training Objective
augmented graph, and γ matches the definition given in
 Our downstream task is C-class node classification. Binary
Eq. 5.
 benign malicious classification corresponds to C = 2, while
 HSIC quantifies the dependency between original and augother datasets use C > 2. To perform this classification, we
mented representations, estimated as:
 attach a lightweight classifier head to the final embeddings
 HSIC(Z,
 \ Z̃) = kE[KK̃> ] − E[K]E[K̃]> k2HS (Z and Z̃) from the original and augmented graphs. This
 tr(QKQK̃Q) classifier is an MLP that maps the embeddings to predicted
 = , (16) ˆ respectively:
 label distributions Ŷ and Ỹ,
 (n − 1)2
where Q = In − n1 1n 1> ˆ = MLP(Z̃),
 n is the centering matrix, and tr(·) Ŷ = MLP(Z), Ỹ (19)
denotes the matrix trace. ˆ ∈ RN ×C represent the predicted
 In addition to enforcing embedding uniformity and stability, where Ŷ ∈ RN ×C and Ỹ
we incorporate regularization terms to penalize high-variance probability distributions over C classes for the nodes in the
representations. Specifically, we include self-dependence terms original and augmented graphs, respectively.
HSIC(Z,
\ \ Z̃, Z̃), which minimize variance
 Z) and HSIC( The training process leverages ground truth labels Y ∈
within the original and augmented graph embeddings, respec- RN ×C for a subset of nodes Vtrain ⊂ V. For the original graph
tively. To balance these objectives, we define the overall kernel embeddings, we calculate the cross-entropy loss LCE as:
dependence maximization loss as: C
 1 X X
 LCE = − Yi,c log Ŷi,c , (20)
 Ls = −HSIC(Z,
 \ Z̃) |Vtrain |
 i∈Vtrain c=1
 1
 + ξ1 · HSIC(Z,
 \ \ Z̃, Z̃)− 12 ,
 Z)− 2 + ξ2 · HSIC( (17) where Yi,c is the ground truth label for node i in class c, and
where ξ1 and ξ2 control the importance of the regularization Ŷi,c is the predicted probability of node i belonging to class c.
terms. These terms ensure that embeddings remain well- Similarly, for the augmented graph embeddings, we compute
distributed and stable during training. the augmented cross-entropy loss LCE A .
 (3) Integration with Contrastive Learning. By jointly optimizing these loss, the model learns embed-
 To combine instance-level alignment with global semantic dings that are predictive of node labels and robust to structural
consistency, we integrate Ls with the contrastive loss Lc , and feature variations from graph augmentations. Finally, the
forming the final contrastive training objective: joint loss function is defined as follows:
 LHSICSA = λc · Lc + λs · Ls , (18) L = LCE + λe · LCE A + LHSICSA , (21)
where λc and λs are hyperparameters controlling the con- where λe is a hyperparameter controlling the contribution of
tributions of the contrastive and kernel dependence terms, the augmented view’s classification loss. Algorithm 1 provides
respectively. This integrated loss enhances KerCL’s robust- the pseudo algorithm of the whole process of our method.
ness, mitigating semantic drift and noise-induced distortions. We compute the classification cross-entropy only on labeled
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1517

 TABLE I
nodes, while both the contrastive objective and the HSIC view- DATASET S TATISTICS
alignment objective are computed on all nodes and require no
labels.

 IV. E VALUATION
 We conduct experiments to address the following Research
Questions (RQs):
 RQ1: How is the efficiency of KerCL (Section IV-B)?
 RQ2: How is the robustness of KerCL (Section IV-C)?
 RQ3: How is the usefulness of each component
(Section IV-D)?
 RQ4: To what extent can changes in hyper-parameters affect
the effectiveness of KerCL (Section IV-E)? generates representations based on byte streams and uses a
 lightweight decoder to reconstruct the masked bytes;
A. Experimental Setup YaTC [45]. It utilizes the raw traffic data of the first n pack-
 Datasets. We benchmark our proposed KerCL against the ets of flow as their input. It also uses the MAE paradigm as its
following approaches. pre-training method by reconstructing the masked traffic. After
 (i) TONIoT [39]: This dataset represents a new generation that, it uses fine-tuning as its tuning method for downstream
of Internet of Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet of Things tasks as well;
(IIoT) traffic. It comprises 796,380 normal and 21,542,641 TrafCL [32]. It enhances session-level data by creating augmalicious instances with 10 distinct types, encompassing 39 mented, incomplete views of the sessions. These incomplete
statistical features; views are then input into a contrastive learning framework,
 (ii) DoHBrw [40]: This dataset is designed for the analysis, enabling better representation learning from partial data;
testing, and evaluation of DNS over HTTPS (DoH) encrypted FeCoGraph [17]. It is a label-aware federated GCL frametraffic. This dataset offers 19,807 normal and 354,996 mali- work optimizing intra-class and inter-class distances for flow
cious instances, each characterized by 28 statistical features; embedding discriminability.
 (iii) CICIDS [41]: This dataset contains both normal com- Metrics. Our model aims to classify encrypted traffic into
munication patterns and 14 distinct attack scenarios, with normal and various malicious types. Given the inherent class
931,873 normal instances and 18,028 malicious instances. imbalance in malicious and normal traffic, we evaluate our
Each sample is described by 70 features, extracted using the KerCL and other using accuracy (AC), precision (PR), and
CICFlowMeter-V3 [42]. F1-score (F1).
 Baselines. To benchmark our KerCL, we choose the fol- Testbeds.. Our experiments are conducted on a platform
lowing approaches for evaluation: with an Intel i5-14600KF 3.50 GHz CPU, an NVIDIA
 (i) Supervised based EMTD, including GeForce GTX 4060 Ti GPU, and 32GB of system memory.
 MTSecurity [7]. It integrates raw byte-level features (via We implemented graph-based encoders for baselines models
Transformers) and graph-based traffic interaction features (via using the PyTorch Geometric (PyG) library. Additionally, since
GNNs) to enhance encrypted traffic representations, capturing Kitsune cannot handle high-rate traffic, we evaluate it with
sequence and network patterns despite payload invisibility. offline experiments on the same testbed.
 (ii) Unsupervised based EMTD, including Implementation Details. To further evaluate the robustness
 Kitsune [2]. It detects anomalies using unsupervised learn- of KerCL, all experiments were conducted under a noise
ing on raw traffic, adapted here for supervised classification; level of 0.3 to simulate real-world noisy environments. Unless
ContraMTD [12]. It models both sequence and topological otherwise specified, Gaussian noise was applied to the original
relationships in host interaction graphs using proposed SEC data, and the number of training nodes was limited, with 1,000
and DE-GAT mechanisms. It employs contrastive learning labeled samples per category used. The Adam optimizer is
with vertical and horizontal views of traffic behavior. This employed for model training. Early stopping was employed,
enables comprehensive modeling of normal network behavior halting training if no parameter improvement was observed for
across different views. 50 consecutive epochs.
 (iii) Pre-train based EMTD, including:
 ET-BERT [43]. It utilizes the raw traffic data of the first
 B. Overall Performance Evaluation (Q1)
n packets of flow as their input. It transforms the datagram
of bytes to a language-like token and uses BERT pre-training To validate the generalizability of the proposed KerCL, we
methods for learning the contextualized datagram presentation conducted extensive evaluations on three benchmark datasets
from large unlabeled datasets. After that, it uses fine-tuning as representing diverse traffic patterns and malicious behaviors.
its tuning method to transfer the well-learned presentation to The results, shown in Table II, demonstrate that KerCL condownstream tasks; sistently achieves SOTA performance across key evaluation
 Flow-MAE [44]. It improves upon ET-BERT framework by metrics. These highlight KerCL’s ability to effectively learn
adopting an asymmetric encoder-decoder architecture, which robust and discriminative representations of encrypted traffic,
is similar to masked autoencoder (MAE). This architecture even in challenging conditions with limited labeled samples.
1518 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE II
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF K ER CL W ITH BASELINES U NDER A E NVIRONMENT OF E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP ACROSS T HREE DATASETS .
 T HE B EST AND RUNNER - UP R ESULTS A RE H IGHLIGHTED IN B OLD AND UNDERLINED , R ESPECTIVELY

 Supervised methods, such as MTSecurity, heavily rely various noise levels and label-scarce conditions. Robustness
on large amounts of labeled data for training, a limita- in EMTD is critical due to the inherent noise and incomplete
tion in real-world scenarios where annotated datasets are session information present in real-world network environeither scarce or expensive to obtain. While these methods ments. We designed experiments focusing on two key aspects:
perform well on datasets with abundant labels, their effective- effectiveness under limited labeled data and resistance to noise
ness diminishes significantly in label-scarce environments. In perturbation.
contrast, unsupervised models like ContraMTD and Kitsune We first evaluated KerCL’s performance under label-scarce
achieve relatively satisfactory performance without requir- scenarios by varying the number of labeled samples per
ing labeled data. KerCL takes this further by leveraging class during training process. As shown in Figure 3, KerCL
unlabeled datasets with kernel-enhanced global dependency achieves superior performance compared to other pretrainingmodeling and a self-supervised mechanism. For instance, based models. With only 100 labeled samples per class,
KerCL achieves an 14.62% higher F1-score than MTSecurity KerCL maintains high classification F1-score. This highlights
on the TONIoT dataset, capitalizing on its ability to cap- KerCL’s ability to captured the key semantic information in
ture both local and global traffic patterns. Kitsune, however, the traffic graph through its kernel-enhanced global depenfocuses exclusively on individual packets, neglecting inter- dency modeling, and contrastive learning based on sematic
relations, while ContraMTD’s graph-based approach models alignment further utilized the data effectively.
primarily pairwise host interactions, overlooking broader Next, we assessed KerCL’s resistance to noise by intronetwork-wide dependencies. KerCL addresses these limita- ducing synthetic noise (randomly corrupting node features
tions by employing global kernel dependency modeling to and edge connections) at increasing rates. Figure 4 illustrates
capture comprehensive traffic interactions across the graph, performance trends of KerCL and baselines under increasing
providing deeper insights into network behavior. noise levels on DoHBrw dataset. Notably, KerCL consis-
 Pretraining-based methods, indicating the promise of pre- tently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, maintaining high
training for EMTD. Among these, ET-BERT achieves com- accuracy and F1-scores even when subjected to substanpetitive results by adopting transformer-based architectures tial data corruption. Additionally, after 100 training runs,
for feature extraction. However, its reliance on complex KerCL exhibits significantly lower variance compared to other
architectures and large-scale models incurs high compu- methods.
tational costs, limiting its versatility for more complex From a theoretical perspective, the robustness of KerCL
detection tasks. TrafCL, relying on heuristic augmentations, arises from the following: 1) the HSIC-based alignment,
often disrupts the intrinsic semantic structure of traffic which constrains the learned representations by maximizing
data, resulting in suboptimal representations. Flow-MAE and mutual dependence between original and augmented views,
YaTC adopt MAE approaches to model traffic data, but preserving semantic consistency despite noisy augmentations;
both struggle to preserve semantic consistency and global 2) the kernel enhanced global dependency modeling module,
dependencies, particularly under noisy or fragmented traf- which captures global dependencies while minimizing the
fic scenarios. KerCL distinguishes itself by addressing these impact of local feature noise, providing an implicit smoothing
limitations through its dependency-guided graph reconstruc- effect that avoids over-smoothing issues in traditional GNNs;
tion and dependency-aligned contrastive mechanism, ensuring 3) and the combined contrastive and HSIC losses that reduce
semantically consistent augmented views and robust global the generalization bound by ensuring diverse yet semantically
representations. aligned representations, thereby improving performance under
 both noise-free and noisy conditions.
C. Robustness of the Model (Q2) Moreover, our HSIC-based regularization not only aligns
 augmented representations with their originals but also
 To evaluate the robustness of the proposed KerCL frameenhances robustness to input noise and perturbations. By
work, we conducted comprehensive experiments across
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1519

Fig. 3. Comparison of hidden dimensions and k similarity impacts on F1-Score.

 TABLE III
 A BLATION S TUDY OF O UR K ER CL

 alignment loss (Ls ). Removing either component leads to a
 significant performance drop. As shown in row (b), removing
 the contrastive loss causes the most severe degradation, with
 the F1-score on TONIoT plummeting by over 12% (from
 88.23% to 75.66%). This highlights the critical role of the
 contrastive objective in learning discriminative features. Furthermore, removing the HSIC term (row (a)) also notably
 harms performance, indicating that instance-level discrimination is not enough; the global semantic consistency enforced
 by HSIC is crucial for robustness. The superior performance
 of the KerCL demonstrates a clear synergy: CL provides
 instance-level discrimination, while HSIC provides the global
 semantic regularization needed for robust representations.
Fig. 4. Different noise level study w.r.t. F1-score within the DoHBrw dataset Importance of the Supervised Signal. While KerCL is
(higher is better).
 designed to learn effectively from unlabeled data, the supervised signal remains vital for achieving optimal performance.
constraining kernel matrix variance, this regularization ensures In row (c), we train the model without the cross-entropy loss
embeddings are roughly uniformly distributed, retaining (LCE ). The performance drop is substantial across all datasets,
maximal data information while maintaining stability and confirming that the self-supervised objectives, while powerful
uniformity in high-dimensional spaces [46]. for representation learning, are best utilized when fine-tuned
 with even a small amount of labeled data to align the learned
D. Ablation Study (Q3) features with the final classification task.
 In this section, we conduct a comprehensive ablation study Effectiveness of Kernel-Based Graph Reconstruction.
to evaluate the contributions of each component in proposed Finally, we validate our proposed dependency-guided graph
KerCL, with results summarized in Table III. We structure our reconstruction by comparing it against a standard kNN
analysis around three key findings. baseline (rows (d)-(g)). The full kNN-based variant (‘s-k’
 Synergy of CL and HSIC Alignment. The core of our in row (d)) underperforms our KerCL by a large margin
self-supervised framework relies on the interplay between across all metrics. For instance, on the CICIDS dataset, our
the instance-level contrastive loss (Lc ) and the global HSIC default model achieves an F1-score of 90.06%, whereas the
1520 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. F1-Score w.r.t. different parameters across three datasets.

 TABLE IV
 C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS OF THE P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK

Fig. 6. Distribution density of traffic duration across three datasets
(log-scaled).
 carefully selecting k to balance representation quality and
 computational cost.
kNN-based model only reaches 86.58%. This performance gap Impact of KGC Layer Number. Figure 5(c) investigates
underscores the necessity of the global semantic information the effect of kernel propagation layer number on F1-score.
captured by our kernel-based modeling, which is more effec- It shows that deeper networks exhibit more stable pertive than the simpler, feature-based similarity used by kNN. formance compared to deep GCNs. As the layer number
 increases, KGC’s performance initially improves and then
 slightly decreases. Notably, KGC with a fixed number of layers
E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis (Q4)
 performs better, showing less performance degradation and
 To investigate the impact of hyper-parameters and traffic maintaining greater stability.
data scale on KerCL’s performance, we conduct experiments Impact of the Importance Parameters ξ in Ls . We
across the TONIoT, DoHBrw, and CICIDS datasets. Figure 6 evaluated the performance of the KerCL under different comshows the flow duration density distribution on these datasets. binations of importance parameters across 25 different view
Among them, we log the data to eliminate the difference embeddings. Specifically, we adjusted the trade-off parameters
between the maximum and minimum values. Furthermore, it ξ1 and ξ2 within the range of {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1}. The
can be seen that the three datasets represent the distribution results of the sensitivity analysis are shown in Figure 7. The
of different traffic in the real network respectively. figure shows performance fluctuations below 1.5%.
 Impact of Network Dimensions. Figure 5(a) illustrates On the whole, our method is insensitive to these parameters
that increasing the dimensions of hidden units initially boosts on different datasets, and the performance difference of model
performance. However, beyond a certain threshold, the perfor- is not significant as long as they are within a reasonable range.
mance stabilizes, yielding similar results across datasets.
 Impact of the Number of Neighboring Nodes (k).
Figure 5(b) examines the sensitivity of performance to the F. Analysis of Scalability and Overhead
number of neighboring nodes (k) used for augmented views. Analysis of Scalability. We analyze the complexity of our
The results reveal that the model achieves optimal performance KerCL in terms of both time complexity and space complexity,
across all three datasets at k = 5. Using fewer than 5 as summarized in Table IV. Here, n is the number of nodes,
neighbors can result in information loss in the augmented d is the feature dimension, l is the number of KGC layers,
views, whereas including more neighbors introduces noise |E| denotes the number of edges. Let b denote the number
and irrelevant information from unrelated nodes. Furthermore, of nodes in a batch, k is the number of neighboring nodes,
larger k values reduce computational efficiency without sig- and e represent the number of neighborhood nodes per node
nificant performance gains, underscoring the importance of during the reconstruction process. The framework consists of
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1521

Fig. 7. Impact of importance parameters (ξ1 , ξ2 ) on F1-Score across three datasets.

 TABLE V
 H YPER -PARAMETER C ONFIGURATIONS FOR K ER CL

three major steps, i) kernel-based graph convolutions, ii) graph
reconstruction, and iii) sematic alignment. It is worth noting
 Fig. 8. The confusion matrix for the CICIDS dataset.
that the kernel matrix generation step (i.e., the first step) is
executed only once and reused during the training process.
Consequently, its quadratic time complexity (O(n2 d)) is computationally feasible for large graphs despite n.
 Analysis of Hyper-Parameter Configurations. We demon- To illustrate how the learned representations support this
strate the hyper-parameter configuration used in our exper- behaviour, we use t-SNE to visualize the embedding of benign
iment. Table V summarizes the key hyper-parameters, their samples and malicious samples across three datasets. Figure 9
descriptions, and values employed. These hyper-parameters and Figure 10 provide insights into the capability of these
are carefully selected to balance model performance, conver- methods to learn differentiated embedding.
gence stability, and computational efficiency. Figure 9 plots the embeddings produced by KerCL together
 with the decision regions of a linear SVM. Benign flows (blue)
 and malicious flows (gray) form well-separated clusters across
G. Case Study TONIoT, DoHBrw, and CICIDS, yielding accuracies of 96.6%,
 Figure 8 shows the confusion matrix for the CICIDS dataset 97.5%, and 94.8%, respectively. These clear margins confirm
and allows a fine-grained view of class-level performance. that KerCL captures both local and global dependencies and
Most entries lie on the main diagonal, confirming the model’s remains robust under noise and label scarcity.
high overall accuracy. Two security-critical findings stand out. In contrast, Figure 10 visualizes the embeddings and deci-
First, false alarms are rare: only a handful of benign flows sion accuracy achieved by YaTC on the same datasets. While
were tagged as attacks. Second, missed detections are equally YaTC also achieves competitive accuracy (e.g., 95.2% on
limited: very few malicious flows slipped through as benign. TONIoT and 95.2% on DoHBrw), there is more overlap
The remaining errors arise mainly from confusions among between benign and malicious traffic clusters, particularly on
related attack types, for example between different denial-of- CICIDS dataset. For instance, on CICIDS, YaTC achieves an
service or web-based attacks, rather than between benign and accuracy of only 90.7%, which is significantly lower than
malicious traffic. These observations demonstrate that KerCL KerCL’s 94.8%. This overlap indicates that YaTC struggles to
fulfils the primary requirement of reliably separating malicious learn the hidden, differentiated contextual information needed
activity from normal traffic. to separate traffic classes effectively, likely due to its limited
1522 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 9. Embedding visualizations of KerCL on three datasets.

Fig. 10. Embedding visualizations of YaTC on three datasets.

ability to capture global dependencies and semantic consis- [5] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
tency across augmented views. encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Aug. 2024.
 [6] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
 In this work, we propose KerCL, a novel kernel-enhanced [7] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
contrastive learning framework tailored for EMTD. By inte- Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural
grating global dependency modeling, kernel-based graph network and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21,
 no. 3, pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
reconstruction, and HSIC-guided semantic alignment, KerCL [8] Z. Cheng et al., “Information diffusion prediction via meta-knowledge
effectively addresses challenges posed by limited labels, learners,” Inf. Sci., vol. 707, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 122034.
insufficient structural context, and noise sensitivity in graph- [9] Z. Cheng, Y. Liu, T. Zhong, K. Zhang, F. Zhou, and P. S. Yu,
 “Disentangling inter{-} and intra-cascades dynamics for information
based learning. Experimental evaluations on three datasets diffusion prediction,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 8,
demonstrate that KerCL outperforms state-of-the-art methods, pp. 4548–4563, Aug. 2025.
particularly in noisy environments and scenarios with limited [10] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe:
 A unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels
labeled data. Our future work will focus on reducing this based on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
complexity. Furthermore, we plan to validate our method’s Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024.
robustness against more sophisticated adaptive threats and [11] C. Liu, B. Li, J. Zhao, Z. Zhen, X. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “FewM-HGCL:
 Few-shot malware variants detection via heterogeneous graph contrastive
extend its applicability by incorporating temporal dynamics learning,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Oct.
and protocol-agnostic modeling for emerging traffic patterns. 25, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3216902.
 [12] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
 detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. World
 R EFERENCES Wide Web Conf. (WWW), pp. 1680–1689, 2024., 2024, pp. 1680–1689.
[1] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning [13] S. Suresh, P. Li, C. Hao, and J. Neville, “Adversarial graph augmentation
 enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., to improve graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, Dec. 2022. Syst. (Neurips), 2021, pp. 15920–15933.
[2] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [14] Y. Min, F. Wenkel, and G. Wolf, “Scattering GCN: Overcoming overensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in smoothness in graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018. Process. Syst. (Neurips), 2020, pp. 14498–14508.
[3] X. Zhang, W. Geng, Y. Song, H. Cheng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Privacy- [15] R. Yang, W. Dai, C. Li, J. Zou, and H. Xiong, “Tackling over-smoothing
 preserving and lightweight verification of deep packet inspection in in graph convolutional networks with EM-based joint topology optimizaclouds,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 159–174, Feb. tion and node classification,” IEEE Trans. Signal Inf. Process. Over
 2024. Netw., vol. 9, pp. 123–139, 2023.
[4] J. Fan, C. Guan, K. Ren, Y. Cui, and C. Qiao, “SPABox: Safeguarding [16] M. Lin, T. Xiao, E. Dai, X. Zhang, and S. Wang, “Certifiably robust
 privacy during deep packet inspection at a MiddleBox,” IEEE/ACM graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Trans. Netw., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 3753–3766, Dec. 2017. 2023, pp. 17008–17037.
ZHONG et al.: NOISE RESISTANT EMTD THROUGH KERNEL-ENHANCED CONTRASTIVE VIEW ALIGNMENT 1523

[17] Q. Mao et al., “FeCoGraph: Label-aware federated graph contrastive [40] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. Habibi
 learning for few-shot network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Lashkari, “Detection of DoH tunnels using time-series classification
 Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025. of encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Dependable, Auto-
[18] J. Wen, Z. Zhang, Y. Xu, and Z. Zhong, “Incomplete multi-view nomic Secure Comput., Int. Conf Pervasive Intell. Comput., Int. Conf
 clustering via graph regularized matrix factorization,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Cloud Big Data Comput., Int. Conf Cyber Sci. Technol. Congr.
 Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 2019, pp. 593–608. (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), Aug. 2020, pp. 63–70.
[19] X. Pu, S. L. Chau, X. Dong, and D. Sejdinovic, “Kernel-based graph [41] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 learning from smooth signals: A functional viewpoint,” IEEE Trans. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 Signal Inf. Process. Over Netw., vol. 7, pp. 192–207, 2021. in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2018,
[20] X. Liu et al., “Mapping the unseen: Robust IP geolocation through the pp. 108–116.
 lens of uncertainty quantification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 269, Sep. 2025, [42] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 Art. no. 111405. “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
[21] W. Mayer and M. Schmiedecker, “TLScompare: Crowdsourcing rules in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
 for HTTPS everywhere,” in Proc. 25th Int. Conf. Companion World pp. 407–414.
 Wide Web - WWW Companion, 2016, pp. 471–476. [43] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
[22] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,” contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. Int. World Wide Web Conf.
 Aug. 2016, pp. 785–794. (WWW), pp. 633–642, 2022., 2022, pp. 633–642.
[23] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- [44] Z. Hang, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, and Y. Xie, “Flow-MAE: Leveraging
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE masked AutoEncoder for accurate, efficient and robust malicious traf-
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018. fic classification,” in Proc. 26th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions
[24] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- Defenses, Oct. 2023, pp. 297–314.
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using [45] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. no. 3, pp. 2012–2025, Jun. 2024.
[25] Y. Liu, X. Wang, B. Qu, and F. Zhao, “ATVITSC: A novel encrypted [46] T. Wang and P. Isola, “Understanding contrastive representation learning
 traffic classification method based on deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere,” in Proc. Int.
 Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 9374–9389, 2024. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), 2020, pp. 9929–9939.
[26] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
 ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[27] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence Meihui Zhong received the M.S. degree from the College of Computer and
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- Cyber Security, Fujian Normal University, in 2024. She is currently pursuing
 put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. the Ph.D. degree with the University of Electronic Science and Technology
[28] H. Xu, S. Li, Z. Cheng, R. Qin, J. Xie, and P. Sun, “TrafficGCN: Mobile of China (UESTC). Her research interests include encrypted traffic analysis
 application encrypted traffic classification based on GCN,” in Proc. and trustworthy artificial intelligence.
 IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2022, pp. 891–896.
[29] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based
 network analysis,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, 2022, pp. 495–509.
[30] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
 based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
 vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614. Ting Zhong (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in information and
[31] L. Liu, T. Sun, L. Yang, and J. Bai, “TAM-CNN: An enhanced mali- communication engineering from the University of Electronic Science and
 cious encrypted traffic detection method with feature-threshold images,” Technology of China (UESTC) in 2009. She is currently a Full Professor
 in Proc. ACM Turing Award Celebration Conf. (ACM-TURC), 2024, with the School of Information and Software Engineering, UESTC. Her
 pp. 171–176. current research interests include deep learning, social networks, and cloud
[32] X. Yang, S. Ruan, J. Li, Y. Yue, and B. Sun, “TrafCL: Robust encrypted computing.
 malicious traffic detection via contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int.
 Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage. (CIKM), 2024, pp. 2910–2919.
[33] K. Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification
 based on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
 pp. 17330–17340, May 2024. Yong Wang is currently a Post-Doctoral Fellow at The Hong Kong University
[34] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, and Y. Xiang, ““TCG–IDS: of Science and Technology (HKUST). His research interests include real-time
 Robust network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph IP address-based geolocation, internet measurement, and analysis. He is a
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 1475–1486, member of China Computer Federation (CCF).
 2025.
[35] J. Sun, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, and S. Jin, “CoMDet: A contrastive multimodal pre-training approach to encrypted malicious traffic detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE Annu. Comput., Softw., Appl. Conf. (COMPSAC), Jul. 2024,
 pp. 1118–1125. Kai Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-
[36] G. Wu, X. Wang, and J. Zhang, “PeerG: A P2P botnet detection ence from Northwestern University in 2012. He joined HKUST in July 2012,
 method based on representation learning and graph contrastive learning,” where he directs the Intelligent System and Networking (iSING) Laboratory
 Comput. Secur., vol. 140, May 2024, Art. no. 103775. and the WeChat-HKUST Joint Lab on Artificial Intelligence Technology
[37] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: (WHAT LAB). His research interests include AI-centric networking and
 Robust malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and machine learning systems.
 confidence mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
 pp. 6871–6885, 2024.
[38] A. Gretton, O. Bousquet, A. Smola, and B. Schölkopf, “Measuring
 statistical dependence with Hilbert–Schmidt norms,” in Algorithmic
 Learning Theory (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 3734, Fan Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of
 S. Jain, H. U. Simon, and E. Tomita, Eds., Springer, 2005, pp. 63–77. Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2011. He is currently
[39] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based a Full Professor with the School of Information and Software Engineering,
 security systems at the edge: Network TON IoT datasets,” Sustain. UESTC. His research interests include machine learning and social network
 Cities Soc., vol. 72, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102994. knowledge discovery.