This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

 Normality in Anomaly: Rethinking Traffic Labels
 Chao Zha, Dakun Shen*, Ruyun Zhang, and Kui Ren, Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Network traffic detection plays a critical role in TABLE I
protecting digital infrastructures from increasingly sophisticated COMPARISON WITH REPRESENTATIVE RELATED WORKS
cyber threats. Although AI-based detection methods have shown
clear advantages over traditional rule-based approaches, most ex- Features Closed-Set Open-Set Ours
isting approaches either rely on the unrealistic closed-set assump-
 Historical data
tion or address distribution shifts only through model retraining
 Drifted data
after data drift. As a result, the robustness of detection models
 Label flexibility
under fixed closed-set training conditions remains insufficiently
explored. To address this limitation, we revisit malicious traffic Non-redundant features
modeling from an attacker’s perspective and formulate the de- Generalization
tection process as a Min–Max adversarial optimization problem.
Instead of relying on conventional binary labels, we introduce ( = true, = partially true, = false.)
a self-generating mask mechanism with sparsity constraints,
which dynamically identifies malicious feature components and
produces adaptive labels during training. This design allows Unfortunately, existing studies often prioritize improvethe model to focus on attack-relevant feature dimensions while ments in benchmark metrics, often relying on a set of unsuppressing benign patterns embedded within malicious traffic.
The proposed method is architecture-agnostic and can be inte- realistic assumptions that rarely hold in real-world deploygrated with multiple neural architectures, including multilayer ments [19]. For example, many reported gains are achieved
perceptrons and Transformers. Extensive ablation studies and under the closed-world assumption, where training and testing
comparative evaluations conducted in a real-world environment data are drawn independently and identically from the same
and three public datasets, CICIDS-2017, UNSW-NB15, and distribution [20], [21]. In practice, this assumption is easily
Bot-IoT, demonstrate that the proposed approach consistently
outperforms existing baselines in terms of detection robustness violated: real network environments are inherently dynamic,
and classification performance, achieving improvements of up to where concept drift is prevalent, and diverse attack traffic
138% in accuracy, 65% in the F1 score and 52% in TPR. emerges unpredictably over time [22]. As a result, models
 Index Terms—Network traffic detection, traffic label, robust- trained under the closed-world assumption rapidly degrade,
ness, self-generating mask, adaptive label. since the distribution of test data under concept drift can differ
 substantially from that of the original training set.
 I. I NTRODUCTION To address this challenge, open-set network traffic detection
 research has gradually emerged to mitigate model failures
N ETWORK traffic detection constitutes a critical component of modern security infrastructures, protecting a
wide range of services and applications against diverse and
 caused by concept drift [23], [24]. One line of work periodically trains models [25]–[29]; however, such strategies lack
sophisticated attacks [1]. In recent years, artificial intelligence proactive mechanisms for drift detection, making it difficult
(AI)-driven traffic analysis techniques have been extensively to determine appropriate retraining intervals, and delayed
explored, due to their ability to extract complex patterns updates can lead to model collapse or a surge in false alarms.
from massive volumes of data [2]–[6]. Such capabilities make Another line of work first detects distributional shifts and then
them particularly promising for detecting traffic in open- actively adapts the model after drift occurs [11], [30]–[32].
world settings [7]–[11]. A substantial body of research has These approaches mainly focus on post-drift problems: taking
already emerged, including efforts in traffic classification [12]– action only after new data become available, and according to
[14], intrusion detection [7], [11], [15], [16], and advanced existing definitions, can be classified as open-set research.
persistent threat (APT) detection [17], [18]. Although open set approaches can achieve certain effectiveness after drift occurs [11], [31], they are inherently limited:
 This paper was produced by the IEEE Publication Technology Group. They they rely on the presence of drift data to update the model and
are in Piscataway, NJ.
 Manuscript received April 19, 2021; revised August 16, 2021 (Correspond- therefore cannot provide timely defense or decision-making at
ing author: Dakun Shen). the moment drift emerges. In other words, existing methods
 Chao Zha is with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy typically partition the continuously evolving cyberspace into
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China; the University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100049, China; and the Research Center for High Efficiency a sequence of closed sets and focus on transitions between
Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311500, Zhejiang, China. them, while largely overlooking attempts to study model
(email: zhachao21@mails.ucas.ac.cn). generalization using pre-drift data. Motivated by this gap, our
 Dakun Shen, Kui Ren are with the School of Cyber Science and
Technology, and the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhe- work explores a relatively underexamined direction: whether
jiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China. (email: dakun@zju.edu.cn, pre-drift closed-set data can be leveraged to enhance model
kuiren@zju.edu.cn). generalization in open-set scenarios. Specifically, we aim to
 Ruyun Zhang is with the Research Center for High Efficiency Computing
Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou 311500, Zhejiang, China (email: investigate how a model can proactively withstand potential
zcor2021@gmail.com). unknown attacks or concept drift without relying on post-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2

drift data, thereby enabling preemptive defense and robust c) Evaluation and Development: We conducted perdetection. A more concise comparison between our research formance evaluation experiments in a real-world network
and representative related works is presented in Table I. traffic environment. Raw data were collected from various
 a) Challenges: In existing network traffic detection re- scenarios, including enterprise networks, research institutions,
search, the detection task is typically modeled as a standard educational institutions, and home networks. Malicious traffic
classification problem, where traffic samples are strictly black from publicly available datasets such as CICIDS-2017 [34],
and white labeled as benign or malicious. However, mali- UNSW-NB15 [35], and Bot-IoT [36] was injected, resulting
cious traffic is not always an independent black sample; it in three distinct datasets without overlap samples. One data
is often camouflaged within benign traffic, embedding mali- set was used for training, while the other two served as open
cious content to increase stealth and avoid detection. Models set test sets to evaluate the generalization and robustness
optimized under the closed-set assumption with such black- of the model. We used eight metrics to assess both overall
and-white labels may achieve high classification performance performance and fine-grained detection capability. Through
on test sets, but they often fail to capture traffic features multiple ablation studies, we demonstrated that the proposed
comprehensively, resulting in a large number of redundant self-generating mask strategy in Camero consistently improves
features. Although these redundant features may have little model generalization at both global and local levels. Furtherimpact on classification results within a closed set, they more, comprehensive comparisons with six widely discussed
can substantially undermine model generalization in open set state-of-the-art (SOTA) baselines highlight Camero’s superior
scenarios, including unknown or drifted traffic, leading to detection performance in open-set data, achieved without acdegraded detection performance. Based on this analysis, three cess to open-set samples during training. Camero consistently
core challenges arise: (1) how to enhance model generalization outperforms all baselines in accuracy, F1 score and TPR, with
on open set data using only closed set training data; (2) how improvements of up to 138%, 65% and 52%, respectively.
to redefine traffic labels so that models can more accurately Finally, in the Discussion section, we analyze factors such as
characterize the complexity of anomalous traffic; and (3) how model parameter size and assess the suitability of the method
to mitigate the influence of redundant features during feature for real-world deployment, including its compliance with realextraction, thereby improving the robustness and stability of time requirements.
detection models in open-world environments. d) Contributions: The main contributions of this work
 b) Our Work: We propose a general-purpose network are summarized as follows:
traffic detection method with strong generalization and high • We revisit traffic labeling from an attacker’s perspective
robustness, which we call Camero (Camouflage Removal). and model malicious traffic as benign traffic with em-
First, from the attacker’s point of view, we analyze the bedded perturbations, formulating traffic detection as a
possible strategies by which malicious traffic can masquerade Min-Max adversarial optimization problem.
as benign traffic and model this scenario as a Min-Max • We propose Camero, a mask-based adversarial learning
adversarial optimization problem. This formulation highlights framework that uses a self-generating mask to approxithe limitations of naively classifying traffic as benign or mate hidden perturbations and guide the classifier to learn
malicious (that is, a strictly black-and-white approach). In- perturbation-aware decision boundaries.
stead, malicious traffic should be regarded as the combination • We introduce a sparsity-constrained mask design to enof benign traffic and attacker-crafted deceptive perturbations. sure that the learned perturbations focus on a limited
Building on this framework, we introduce a self-generating set of critical traffic features, improving robustness and
mask mechanism that leverages a mask loss to adaptively preventing trivial solutions where all features are masked.
capture the latent perturbations hidden within benign traf- e) Abbreviations: Table II presents all abbreviations
fic. This approach abandons the traditional binary labeling used in this paper together with their full expressions.
paradigm in favor of a self-generating mask and an adaptive f) Paper Structure: The remainder of this paper is orgalabel modeling strategy. Furthermore, considering that an nized as follows. Section II reviews the related representative
attacker cannot arbitrarily manipulate all feature dimensions, work. Section III describes our threat model. In Section IV,
we incorporate a sparsity-constrained mask loss to ensure that we describe the detailed design of our method. In Section V,
the mask focuses on key features rather than covering all we experimentally evaluate the performance of our method.
features indiscriminately. Finally, Camero jointly optimizes Section VI discusses the usage of decoder in Camero, the
the classification task using traditional cross-entropy loss, limitations of our proposed method and future work. Finally,
mask loss, and sparsity-constrained mask loss, significantly we conclude this paper in Section VII.
improving generalization and robustness to open-set data even
when trained solely on closed-set data. Importantly, Camero II. R ELATED W ORK
is highly versatile, supporting multiple model architectures, In this section, we provide an overview of existing closedincluding multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) and Transformers set and open-set research on network traffic detection and
[33]. Nevertheless, the proposed framework is instantiated on summarize the key findings in Table III.
flow-level tabular representations derived from bidirectional a) Closed-set Methods: In recent years, great effort has
network flows. Therefore, the method is instantiated under the been put into building traffic detection systems using machine
NetFlow/flowmeter telemetry paradigm rather than a modality- learning (ML), which demonstrate superior accuracy comagnostic security data interface. pared to traditional deep packet inspection [37]–[39]. Several

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

 TABLE II for capturing interactive features within network traffic. For
 L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS example, Shen et al. [51] transformed fingerprint identification
 into a graph classification problem by constructing graphs
 Abbreviations Full Expressions
 of traffic interactions. Agiollo et al. [52] employed GNNs
 AI Artificial Intelligence
 APT Advanced Persistent Threat
 to model the global network topology, enabling detection
 MLP Multilayer Perceptron of interest flood attacks based on non-local information. Li
 SOTA State of the Art et al. [53] proposed to construct event provenance graphs
 ML Machine Learning
 Conditional Variational Autoencoders with
 using log correlation analysis to trace complex and previously
 CVAE-EVT unseen APT activities. Zhang et al. [54] proposed a byte-
 Extreme Value Theory
 GNN graph neural network level traffic graph construction method based on point-wise
 PMI Point-wise Mutual Information
 SSF Strategy Selection and Forgetting
 mutual information (PMI) and also designed a temporal fusion
 TFE-GNN Temporal Fusion Encoder using Graph Neural encoder model. Using graph neural networks, their approach
 Network enables efficient feature extraction from encrypted traffic. Fu
 OWAD Open World Anomaly Detection
 TPR True Positive Rate
 et al. [21] used unsupervised graph learning to analyze traffic
 FPR False Positive Rate interaction patterns to detect encrypted traffic. Rehman et
 ROC Receiver Operating Characteristic al. [55] applied GNN to data provenance graphs, capturing
 PRC Precision–Recall
 DoS Denial of Service
 event features through semantic and contextual encodings, and
 DDoS Distributed Denial of Service improving efficiency on large graphs through embedding reuse
 C2 Command and Control mechanisms for APT detection. Furthermore, Ghadermazi et
 XSS Cross Site Script
 al. [56] constructed packet-based graph structures using unsupervised GNN combined with graph autoencoders to perform
 attack detection.
studies used statistical features with ML classifiers for traffic Since the relationship between benign and malicious traffic
detection [40]–[42]. Yang et al. [7] proposed a two-stage is not strictly black-and-white, malicious flows often exhibit
learning framework that integrates Conditional Variational a high degree of similarity to benign ones. This inherent
Autoencoders with Extreme Value Theory (CVAE-EVT) to ambiguity undermines the generalizability of supervised learnclassify known attacks and previously unseen ones, while ing methods that rely on cross-entropy loss and unsupervised
using benign traffic clustering to control the false-positive rate. approaches such as clustering-based [44] or auto-encoders
Mirsky et al. [43] proposed an unsupervised approach using [43], [45]. Although contrastive learning has achieved remarkautoencoders for lightweight malicious traffic detection. Fu able success in other domains, its effectiveness diminishes in
et al. [44] extracted features of the frequency domain via a traffic detection tasks, where indistinct class boundaries make
discrete Fourier transform and combined them with clustering it difficult to construct reliable positive and negative pairs.
algorithms such as K-Means for anomaly detection. Tang et Graph-based learning can capture richer interaction features
al. [45] used recurrent encoder-decoder neural networks to within traffic [21], [51]–[53], [55], [56]; however, building
model the syntactic and semantic patterns of benign requests, graph representations typically incurs substantial computaidentifying incomprehensible requests as potential attacks. tional overhead, which poses a serious challenge for real-time
More recently, Fu et al. [58] introduced an unsupervised point- detection. Moreover, these methods still rely on black-andcloud analysis method that aggregates traffic features into white labeling as the optimization objective, which fails to
voxels and utilizes voxel density to reduce false positives in guide the model in accurately capturing the nuanced charactermalicious traffic detection. Zha et al. [59] proposed FlowXpert, istics of malicious traffic. Finally, due to the absence of drifted
a self-supervised network flow representation learning frame- data, closed-set–based methods often struggle to generalize
work that leverages clustering-generated pseudo labels and when faced with open-set traffic.
contrastive learning to learn discriminative traffic embeddings. b) Open-set Methods: Unlike closed-set research, open-
 Contrastive learning has also been widely applied to traffic set approaches explicitly consider the presence of drifted data
feature extraction. For example, Wu et al. [47] modeled the and update detection models through adaptation strategies
traffic features of the network using a temporal contrastive to improve generalization. One common strategy is periodic
graph neural network (GNN). Huang et al. [48] incorporated model retraining. For example, Cretu et al. [25] constructed
contrastive learning into transfer learning to enhance the lightweight models and used a voting mechanism to autorobustness of intrusion detection models. Wang et al. [49] matically clean training data, thus improving the quality of
combined federated learning with contrastive learning, improv- unlabeled samples and mitigating attacks targeting individual
ing the representation of normal traffic while preserving user sites through cross-network collaboration. In addition, Cretu
privacy. Ma et al. [50] proposed specific data preprocessing et al. [26] introduced a self-calibration phase to achieve fully
and contrastive task construction strategies to improve traffic automated parameter tuning and maintenance for anomaly
classification performance on imbalanced datasets. Further- detection sensors, which, combined with data cleaning, enables
more, Yue et al. [46] applied random masking to network online adaptation to traffic changes. Pendlebury et al. [27]
packet sequences to construct contrastive tasks, thus improving highlighted that the existing Android malware classification
the model’s ability to perceive differences between samples. results are often biased in both space and time. By incor-
 Graph neural networks have increasingly attracted attention porating constrained experimental design, robustness metrics,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

 TABLE III
 COMPARING THE EXISTING NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION METHODS

 High Low False Open-set Realtime
 Category of Detection Methods Key findings Generalization
 Accuracy Positive Rate Detection Detection
 Predefined fix rules,
 Rule-based Methods [37]–[39]
 Explainable.
 Statistical learning Simple implementation, no
 [40]–[42] reliance on plaintext.
 Unsupervised Learning No labeling, reducing
 Closed-set [43]–[45] manual intervention.
 Methods
 Contrastive learning Better feature representation
 [46]–[50] and sample discrimination.
 Graph learning [21],
 Interactive features.
 [51]–[56]
 Retraining regularly
 Improved generalization.
 [25]–[29]
 Open-set
 Methods Adaptive methods [8], Automatically detect drift
 [15], [30], [31], [57] and update.
 Non-redundant features,
 Ours Camero
 Label flexibility

 (= true, = some methods meet this property, = false.)

and tuning algorithms, they enabled reliable evaluation of using the conditional tabular generative adversarial network
classifiers in real-world settings and provided an open source with recent data to update detection models; however, replay
framework to support fair comparison and performance op- through generative models inevitably incurs information loss,
timization. Jan et al. [28] proposed a distribution-aware data leading to degraded performance. Despite their progress, these
synthesis approach to train machine learning models with only methods generally require access to drifted or historical data,
a limited amount of labeled data, facilitating the detection of which not only fails to mitigate the immediate impact of
unknown or future bot behavior and improving model usability adversarial activities during drift events, but also offers limited
and generalization. Wang et al. [29] addressed real-world improvement in model generalization when drifted data are
traffic drift and adversarial attacks by leveraging incremental absent.
feature extraction and subclassifier generation, thus enhancing c) Baselines Selection: We select several representative
detection performance. baselines, including AppScanner [40], Kitsune [43], and Flow-
 Periodic retraining can, to some extent, improve generaliza- Print [41] as classical closed-set traffic classification methods.
tion against drifted data; however, determining the appropriate Meanwhile, we include CVAE-EVT [7], Temporal Fusion
retraining interval is inherently challenging [8], and such Encoder using GNN (TFE-GNN) [54] is adopted for GNNretraining often leads to forgetting historical knowledge, even based traffic analysis, and Open-World Anomaly Detection
though past data may still persist in current network envi- (OWAD) [8] is used for open-world anomaly detection. These
ronments. To address this issue, adaptive drift detection and baselines are chosen because they cover diverse detection
model update techniques have been proposed. For example, paradigms, including closed-set, open-set, and adaptive set-
Andresini et al. [30] employed clustering-based drift detection tings, providing a broad perspective and enabling a more
and leveraged a neighborhood strategy to generate pseudo- comprehensive validation of our approach.
labels to update detection models. Han et al. [8] introduced
a method that assigns different importance weights to the III. T HREAT M ODEL
model parameters, constraining updates to critical parameters In particular, we focus on robust network traffic detection
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting of prior knowledge, while and assume a threat model as illustrated in Fig. 1.
allowing less important parameters to adapt to new distribu- a) Adversary’s Goal: The attacker’s goal is to generate
tions. Yang et al. [31] designed a masking-based approach to open-world camouflage attack samples that can evade detecgenerate drift-sensitive perturbation vectors, align them with tion by the network traffic analysis model. In other words, the
historical representations, and then fine-tune a constrained attacker seeks to conduct malicious activities while preserving
classifier using representative samples from historical data the outward appearance of benign communication, thereby
to achieve adaptive learning. Zhang et al. [57] proposed an avoiding identification. Specifically, the attacker expects the
incremental learning approach for intrusion detection, termed model to correctly classify benign traffic while failing to
SSF (Strategy Selection and Forgetting), which selectively recognize previously unseen malicious traffic as an attack.
retains the most representative new samples to capture concept b) Adversary’s Capabilities: We assume that the attacker
drift, while discarding obsolete ones through a forgetting cannot directly influence the model training process and cannot
mechanism. Zha et al. [11] combined historical data replay manipulate the training data or model parameters. However,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5

 TABLE IV
 D EFINITION OF M ATHEMATICAL S YMBOLS

 Notations Definitions
 D The network traffic data.
 Xi The vectors of traffic flow features.
 yi The traffic labels (benign or malicious).
 yˆi The prediction labels (benign or malicious).
 f (·) The detection model.
 θ The parameters of detection model.
 θ∗ The robust parameters of detection model.
 L The loss function used in model optimization.
Fig. 1. Threat Model. δi The perturbation applied to the input sample Xi .
 ∆ The feasible set of perturbations.
 E(·) The expectation operator over the data distribution.
 Lce The cross entropy loss function.
the attacker can observe and collect partial statistical in- M The mask to capture perturbations δ.
formation about training data and has the ability to design ϵ The mask constraint term.
open-world attack strategies. Given the limited generalization Lmce The mask-based cross entropy loss function.
 Lcon The sparsity constraint loss function.
of traditional closed-set detection methods, the attacker can Lobj The overall optimization goal.
exploit this weakness to evade detection. α, β The hyper-parameters used in Lobj .
 c) Adversary’s Knowledge: We assume that the attacker
has no access to the model architecture, training procedure,
or internal detection mechanisms (e.g., automatic feature fields, adjusting traffic rates, or inserting disguised packets, in
extraction or robustness enhancements). However, they may order to evade detection. Here, δ denotes the set of perturbahave a small set of unlabeled traffic samples from a similar tions that the attacker can apply.
distribution and some known benign examples. The attacker Consequently, the problem can be formalized as the followmay also infer which salient features the system relies on and ing min-max adversarial optimization problem:
exploit this to craft targeted adversarial examples. h i
 d) Defense Assumptions: To counter the aforementioned min E(Xi ,yi )∼D max L fθ (Xi + δi ), yi . (2)
 θ δ∈∆
open-world threats, we assume that the traffic detection system
adopts a detection framework that integrates masking and Specifically:
generative mechanisms. Specifically, the system leverages a • Inner maximization (attacker): Identifies the most misself-generating masking mechanism derived from latent vari- leading perturbations that cause the detector to misclasables during the classification optimization process to enhance sify, thus maximizing the loss function.
generalization while mitigating feature redundancy and model • Outer minimization (defender): Optimizes the parameoverfitting. This design effectively addresses the robustness ters of the detection model to maintain detection accuracy
and generalization limitations of closed-set methods and can even under worst-case perturbations.
be realized solely with closed-set data, without requiring This Min-Max framework characterizes the zero-sum game
access to open-world samples. between the attacker and the defender: The attacker aims
 to compromise the effectiveness of the detector, whereas the
 IV. M ETHODOLOGY defender leverages adversarial training to enhance the robust-
 In this section, we provide a detailed analysis of the attack- ness of the model. The ultimate objective is to obtain robust
defense problem and, on the basis of this formulation, propose parameters θ∗ such that the model maintains high detection
our corresponding practical solution. performance even under optimal perturbations by the attacker,
 that is,
A. Problem Statement θ∗ = arg min max L(fθ (Xi + δi ), yi ). (3)
 θ∈Θ δ∈∆
 In the cybersecurity setting, we formulate an adversarial This modeling approach provides a theoretical foundation
optimization problem from the perspective of the attacker, for analyzing the robustness of traffic detection systems.
where both the attacker and the defender are involved. Table
IV presents all mathematical symbols used in this paper
together with their definitions. B. Practical Solution
 Firstly, let the network traffic data set be denoted as From the defender’s perspective, the primary objective is
 not to impose a simplistic binary judgment that categorizes
 D = {(Xi , yi )}N
 i , yi ∈ {0, 1}, (1)
 an entire flow as benign or malicious. Instead, the goal
where Xi ∈ Rd represents the vectors of traffic flow features is to accurately identify and isolate fine-grained adversarial
and yi denotes the corresponding labels (benign or malicious). perturbations δ hidden within otherwise benign traffic. Such
The detection model f is parameterized by θ ∈ Θ, and its perturbations are often deliberately crafted to embed malicious
associated loss function is denoted as L(fθ (Xi ), yi ). components without disrupting the overall semantics of benign
 In practical deployment scenarios, an attacker may apply traffic, thereby significantly enhancing the stealthiness and
subtle perturbations to benign traffic, such as modifying packet evasiveness of the attack. Conventional detection approaches

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

tend to be fragile when faced with this type of mixed traffic. To Specifically, in addition to the standard cross-entropy loss
address this challenge, we propose a new paradigm: leveraging defined in Eq. (4), Camero incorporates a mask-based crossadversarial training to guide the model in recognizing and cap- entropy loss Lmce , formulated as follows.
turing these hidden perturbations, rather than indiscriminately 
 Lmce = Lce fθ (Xi ⊙ (1 − M )), 0
labeling the entire flow as malicious. ( 
 Lce fθ (Xi ⊙ M ), 0 , yi is benign, (7)
 + 
 Lce fθ (Xi ⊙ M ), 1 , yi is malicious.
 In Eq. (7), the mask employs a soft label strategy, indicating
 that during optimization, the application of the mask does
 not affect the classification of benign traffic. However, for
 malicious traffic, the mask enables the model to correctly
 identify it as malicious when applied and to classify it as
 benign when the mask is inverted.
 Furthermore, considering that real-world attacks do not
 apply perturbations indiscriminately across all feature dimensions, and that the detection model must maintain its ability to
 distinguish between malicious and benign traffic under limited
 perturbations, we introduce a sparsity constraint in the mask
 design. This ensures that the mask focuses on critical features
 rather than covering all dimensions. The corresponding loss
 constraint Lcon is formulated as follows:
 Lcon = max(0, ||M ||1 − ϵ). (8)
Fig. 2. The overview of Camero.
 Therefore, the overall goal of the optimization Lobj of
 Motivated by this insight, we propose a self-generating Camero can be formally expressed as follows:
masking mechanism based on decoder to characterize and
extract potential adversarial perturbations δ and integrate it Lobj = Lce + α · Lmce + Lcon , (9)
with the loss of cross-entropy of standard classification to where α is hyperparameters.
construct a robust network traffic detection model, named
Camero, as illustrated in Fig. 2. In terms of the classification
task, Camero still adheres to the conventional supervised C. Training Process
learning paradigm, consisting of an encoder followed by a Camero effectively addresses the limited generalizability of
fully connected classification head, and optimized with cross- existing traffic detection models when relying solely on closedentropy loss Lce : set data. Unlike conventional binary labeling approaches,
 N
 Camero introduces a more robust self-generating mask mech-
 1 Xh i
 anism that adversarially captures deceptive perturbations em-
 Lce = − yi log ŷi + (1 − yi ) log(1 − ŷi ) (4)
 N i=1 bedded within malicious traffic. By adopting the attacker’s
 perspective, this design enables the construction of a traffic
 The key distinction lies in the fact that we use the latent detection model with significantly improved robustness. The
variables generated during the classification decision process complete training process is detailed in Algorithm 1. Importo produce an effective mask M to capture perturbations δ. As tantly, our approach is model-agnostic: it can be seamlessly apformalized in Eq. (2), the adversarial objective of the attacker plied to different model architectures. In our experiments (see
can be expressed as follows: § V), we verify that Camero consistently improves robustness
 h ′
 i and detection accuracy on both MLP-based and transformermin Lce (fθ , Xi , yi ) + max Lce (fθ , Xi , M, yi ) , (5) based models.
 θ M :∥M ∥1 <ϵ

 ′
 Lce = Lce (fθ (Xi ⊙ M ), 1) + Lce (fθ (Xi ⊙ (1 − M )), 0), (6) V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
where ϵ denotes the mask constraint term. A. Experiment Setup
 In other words, the attacker aims to select a mask M a) Implementation: Our prototype is implemented in
that maximizes the difficulty of the model in distinguishing Python (3.8.12) and C++ (g++ 10.5.0), the feature extraction
between benign and malicious traffic, while the defender tries tool is built using C++, and the other modules are built using
to adjust the model parameters to minimize the overall loss. scikit-learn [60] and PyTorch (2.0.1+cu117) [61].
By explicitly introducing the self-generating mask mechanism, b) Tested: We deployed Camero on a computer with the
the model is guided during optimization to simultaneously following main configuration: Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6138
preserve the overall classification accuracy of the traffic and CPU @ 2.00GHz, Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS, 64GB DRAM, and
capture embedded adversarial perturbations δ. 512GB SSD.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

Algorithm 1 Training process of Camero • Kitsune (K.S.): Mirsky et al. [43] introduced an un-
Require: Network traffic dataset D = {(Xi , yi )}N
 i=1 , detec- supervised method based on autoencoders to enable
 tion model fθ , decoder model Dec, hyperparameters α, β, lightweight detection of malicious traffic.
 mask constraint ϵ, number of epochs E, learning rate η. • Appscanner (A.S.): Taylor et al. [40] proposed a traffic
 detection system that uses statistical traffic features to
 1: for ep := 1, 2, ..., E do identify mobile applications.
 2: # Stage 1: → goal: Compute standard CE loss Lce . • Flowprint (F.P.): Ede et al. [41] introduced a semisu-
 3: ŷ, z ← fθ (X) pervised method that derives application fingerprints by
 4: Lce ← use Eq. (4) exploiting temporal correlations among relevant traffic
 5: features.
 6: # Stage 2: → goal: Compute masked CE loss Lmce . • CVAE-EVT (C.E): Yang et al. [7] proposed a two-stage
 7: M ← Dec(z) learning framework that integrates a CVAE with EVT,
 8: Lmce ← use Eq. (7) while incorporating clustering to reduce false positives.
 9: • TFE-GNN (T.G.): Zhang et al. [54] introduced a PMI-
10: # Stage 3: → goal: Compute constraint loss Lcon . based byte-level traffic graph and a GNN-driven tem-
11: Lcon ← use Eq. (8) poral fusion encoder to efficiently extract features from
12: encrypted traffic.
13: Lobj ← Lce + α · Lmce + β · Lcon • OWAD (O.A.): Han et al. [8] proposed assigning im-
14: fθ ← fθ − η · ∇fθ · Lobj portance weights to parameters, preserving crucial ones
15: Dec ← Dec − η · ∇Dec · Lobj against forgetting while allowing others to adapt.
16: end for • FlowXpert (F.X.): Zha et al. [59] proposed a self-
17: return Detection model fθ . supervised framework that learns network traffic embeddings via clustering-based pseudo labels and contrastive
 learning.
 c) Model Details: To evaluate the general applicability e) Metrics: We use the following metrics [67] to evaluate
of our proposed game-based masking mechanism to enhance the detection accuracy: (i) Accuracy, true positive rates (TPR),
model generalization, we used two widely used base model false positive rates (FPR), (ii) Precision (P.R.), Recall (R.C.),
architectures to construct the encoder and decoder: a mul- F1 score (F.S.), (iii) the area under the Receiver Operating
tilayer perceptron (MLP) [62], [63] and a transformer [33], Characteristic (ROC) curve, and (iv) the area under the Precias illustrated in Fig. 3. The MLP-based encoder and decoder sion–Recall (PRC) curve. Moreover, we measure throughput
are each composed of three fully connected layers inter- and processing latency to demonstrate that Camero achieves
leaved with two LeakyReLU activation layers [64]. In another real-time detection.
configuration, the Transformer-based encoder consists of N
stacked attention blocks, where each block includes a Multi-
Head Self-Attention layer and a Feed-Forward layer, along B. Datasets
with the corresponding Residual Connections [65] and Layer The attack traffic used in our experiments is sourced from
Normalization components [66]. In the following, Camero-M three widely adopted public datasets: CICIDS-2017 [34],
and Camero-T refer to the prototypes built using the MLP and UNSW-NB15 [35], and BoT-IoT [36]. In addition, we capture
Transformer architectures, respectively. benign traffic from a variety of real-world environments,
 including enterprise, industrial, and residential networks, and
 inject the attack traffic into these real flows to construct openworld datasets that allow a thorough evaluation of the generalizability of the model. Specifically, we first extracted attack
 traffic samples from external datasets and then integrated them
 with the target dataset at the flow level, achieving results consistent with traffic replay. Throughout this process, all samples
 employed the same feature representation and identical data
 preprocessing procedures, without introducing any identifiers
 or additional features related to the data source. Moreover,
 during flow feature extraction and model training, we paid
 particular attention to information that could potentially be
 (a) MLP-based Encoder & (b) Transformer-based En-
 Decoder. coder & Decoder. correlated with labels, such as IP addresses and ports. These
Fig. 3. Model Architectures. pieces of information were only used during the construction
 of flows and were not involved in model training, effectively
 d) Baselines: We used seven SOTA methods as baselines eliminating any potential influence on the model. These data
for comparison, in order to evaluate Camero’s generalization sets are denoted as D-I, D-II, and D-III. Importantly, the
ability to open world traffic, demonstrating its superiority over traffic contained in these datasets has no overlap, and each
SOTA methods. originates from distinct network environments. Specifically,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

our evaluation covers a diverse set of attack categories, in- concentrated within a limited set of IPs or ports. Labeling
cluding the following: was performed according to the rules provided in the original
 dataset publications [34]–[36] while addressing known issues
 • Brute-Force Attacks: This includes FTP-Patator, SSHpreviously reported, such as incorrect labels [77].
 Patator, and Web-Bruteforce, which attempt to gain le-
 In addition, context-sensitive session features were used to
 gitimate credentials or session tokens by systematically
 construct model input vectors, as extracted by the proposed
 trying large numbers of username/password combina-
 FlowVision [59] bidirectional flow feature extraction tool. The
 tions. These attacks can lead to account compromise,
 definitions of the specific features used in our experiments are
 data leakage, unauthorized access, and, through lateral
 summarized in Table V. Furthermore, in all our experiments,
 movement, broader network damage [68].
 only a subset of D-I was used for model training, which was
 • Denial of Service (DoS): This includes DoS-GoldenEye,
 divided into training and validation sets with a 7: 3 ratio. The
 DoS-Slowhttptest, DoS-Slowloris, DoS-Hulk, and DDoS-
 D-II and D-III data sets were excluded from the training and
 LOIT, which aim to exhaust target resources (bandwidth,
 only reserved to evaluate the generalizability of the model.
 connections, central processing unit (CPU), or memory)
 and block legitimate access [69]–[71]. Attacks from a
 TABLE V
 single machine are DoS, whereas attacks from multiple FEATURES USED IN OUR EXPERIMENTS
 hosts are distributed DoS (DDoS). Both are common and
 frequent attacks. Type Features Description
 • Scanning and Reconnaissance: This includes Portscan, protocol The protocol of transmission layer.
 Service Scan, and Operation System Scan, which probe flow dur The duration of the flow.
 The mean value of inter-arrival time
 open ports and service versions on target networks or iat mean
 (iat) between packets.
 hosts to identify potential vulnerabilities or entry points Flow-Level The standard deviation of iat between
 iat std
 [72]. Low-speed scans (e.g., slow port scans) are often packets.
 fin num The total FIN packets of the flow.
 difficult to distinguish from legitimate traffic, posing syn num The total SYN packets of the flow.
 challenges for detection systems. rst num The total RST packets of the flow.
 • Distributed Botnets: This includes Botnet, Backdoor, and pkt num The total packets of the flow.
 pkts per sec The packets per second of the flow.
 Worms, where a large number of infected hosts (bots)
 are controlled by a single command-and-control (C2) The number of distinct source ports
 num s port
 used by the same source IP.
 server to launch coordinated DDoS attacks, send spam, Context-Aware
 The number of distinct destination IPs
 propagate malware, or perform proxy attacks [73]. Traffic num d ip
 contacted by the same source IP.
 may exhibit similar patterns originating from numerous The number of distinct destination
 num d port
 ports accessed by the same source IP.
 distributed sources, and periodic communication to the The number of connections established
 same C2 domain or IP can often be observed. con per sec
 per second by the source IP.
 • Web Application Attacks: This includes Cross-Site Script
 (XSS) and Structured Query Language (SQL) injection, It should be noted that a portion of the benign traffic in the
 which target vulnerabilities in web application logic or dataset is overly simplistic and can be easily allowed through
 input validation [74], [75]. XSS injects malicious scripts by rule-based mechanisms in practical deployment. Therefore,
 to compromise client-side behavior, while SQL injection in our experiments, this subset of traffic was excluded from
 manipulates back-end database queries through crafted the testing of both the Camero and the baseline methods.
 inputs, potentially leading to data leakage, session hijack- Including these samples in the evaluation could not only
 ing, persistent backdoors, and unauthorized modification increase network latency, but could also potentially inflate the
 of web content. performance metrics, thereby affecting an accurate assessment
 • Protocol Exploits: This includes Heartbleed, Fuzzers, of the actual performance differences.
 Exploits, and Shellcode, which exploits flaws in protocols
 or their implementations (e.g. Heartbleed vulnerability in C. Evaluation of Camero and Ablation Experiments
 OpenSSL) to read memory that should not be accessible
 In this experiment, we conducted an ablation study on
 or perform unauthorized operations [76]. Such attacks
 Camero in two model architectures, MLP and Transformer,
 can lead to the leakage of sensitive data, including
 to compare performance with and without the self-generating
 cryptographic keys and credentials, and result in severe
 mask mechanism. We perform a comprehensive evaluation of
 trust violations.
 the models using metrics such as accuracy, F1 score, and TPR,
 • Generic or Unknown Attacks: This includes generic atwith the results presented in Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b. During
 tacks that do not fall into standard categories or combine
 training, Camero was trained exclusively on data sets D-I,
 multiple attack patterns. These are useful for evaluating
 while data sets D-II and D-III remained completely unseen
 detection methods against unknown or novel attacks.
 to simulate an open-world scenario.
 Some features that could potentially leak label information, The experimental results demonstrate that incorporating
such as IP addresses and ports, were excluded from the the self-generating mask mechanism consistently improves
training process to explicitly prevent any inadvertent cheating Camero performance in both the MLP and Transformer ar-
[19], as the majority of the samples in the data sets are chitectures. Specifically, on data sets D-II and D-III, all 12

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

 (a) Accuracy, F1 score, TPR of Camero-M. (b) Accuracy, F1 score, TPR of Camero-T.

 (c) Fine grained detection (Recall) of Camero-M. (d) Fine grained detection (Recall) of Camero-T.

 (e) Fine grained detection (F1 score) of Camero-M. (f) Fine grained detection (F1 score) of Camero-T.
Fig. 4. Ablation experiments of Camero.

evaluation metrics show superior results compared to models Based on the experimental results, we observe that both
without the mask, indicating that the self-generating mask Camero-M and Camero-T consistently achieve higher recall
significantly improves the generalization capacity of the model and F1 scores across all 13 fine-grained attack categories
and is effective in different architectures, highlighting its compared to their counterparts without the self-generating
versatility. In detail, in data set D-II, Camero-M achieves an masking strategy. In particular, Camero-M exhibits substanincrease in accuracy from 0.77 to 0.86, an F1 score from 0.73 tial improvements for categories that are traditionally more
to 0.85 and a TPR from 0.59 to 0.76; Camero-T shows an challenging. For example, recall in DoS increases from 0.73
increase in accuracy from 0.81 to 0.90, an F1 score from 0.79 to 0.83, Fuzzers from 0.62 to 0.80, and Reconnaissance from
to 0.90, and a TPR from 0.65 to 0.84, corresponding to an 0.57 to 0.75, corresponding to relative gains of approximately
overall improvement of approximately 10%–30%. In the D- 15%–30%. Even in categories with inherently lower base-
III data set, the accuracy of Camero-M increases from 0.78 line performance, such as Backdoor and Worms, Camero-M
to 0.81, the F1 score from 0.74 to 0.78, and the TPR from achieves notable increases (0.45 to 0.57 and 0.31 to 0.42,
0.61 to 0.66; the accuracy of Camero-T increases from 0.78 respectively). Camero-T also shows even more pronounced
to 0.87, the F1 score from 0.76 to 0.86, and the TPR from improvements. For instance, in DoS, recall rises from 0.75 to
0.64 to 0.78, with overall gains of approximately 5%-20%. 0.88, in Generic from 0.76 to 0.89, and in Exploits from 0.73
 to 0.89. Moreover, in Service Scan and OS Scan, Camero-
 T achieves increases of 0.75 to 0.83 and 0.70 to 0.85,
D. Evaluation of Fine Grained Attack Detection respectively, highlighting the model’s ability to generalize
 Considering the significant class imbalance in network across diverse attack patterns. In general, Camero-T achieves
traffic datasets, for instance, benign traffic samples are often consistent gains ranging from 10% to more than 20% in
several times more numerous than certain attack types, relying most categories, underscoring that the self-generating mask
solely on overall metrics such as accuracy cannot sufficiently not only improves the average detection performance, but also
capture the improvements in detection performance. Therefore, strengthens the robustness in the more unbalanced and difficult
we further evaluate the fine-grained detection capability of attack classes.
Camero. The experimental setup is largely consistent with §
V-C, and we adopt the recall and the F1 score as evaluation
metrics. Recall provides a direct measure of the model’s ability E. Feature Ablation Analysis
to identify each specific attack type, without being obscured Considering that the masking mechanism introduced in
by the dominance of benign traffic or aggregated attack cate- Camero is designed to suppress certain features, reduce the
gories. F1 score, which combines precision (false positives) influence of less informative features during the decision
and recall (false negatives), offers a more comprehensive process, and enhance the impact of more important ones,
assessment of the effectiveness of the model in detecting we further conduct a feature-subset–based ablation study to
individual classes. The evaluation results are presented in Fig. verify the effectiveness of this mechanism and strengthen the
4c - Fig. 4f. persuasiveness of the proposed method. Specifically, we design

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10

a controlled experiment in which, while keeping the model susceptible to the omission of critical traffic statistical informaarchitecture and training parameters as consistent as possible, tion. In contrast, Camero’s masking mechanism is adaptively
half of the features are randomly selected as input and com- optimized during the training process, enabling the model to
pared with Camero using the complete feature set with the assign importance weights to features based on their relevance
masking mechanism enabled. By comparing the performance to the classification objective. This targeted feature modulation
differences between these two settings, we can more clearly not only preserves key discriminative information but also
evaluate the contribution of the masking mechanism to the enhances the overall robustness and reliability of the model.
model’s decision-making capability. The experimental results
are illustrated in Fig. 5.
 F. Sensitivity Analysis
 To evaluate the robustness of the proposed method with
 respect to key hyperparameters, we conducted a sensitivity
 analysis on two important parameters, α and ϵ. As illustrated
 in Fig. 6, we varied α from 0.05 to 0.30 and ϵ from 0.35 to
 0.60, and report the corresponding Accuracy and TPR on three
 (a) Feature Ablation Analysis of Camero-M. datasets (D-I, D-II, and D-III).

 (b) Feature Ablation Analysis of Camero-T.
Fig. 5. Ablation experiments of Camero.

 From the ablation results shown in Fig. 5, the robustness (a) Sensitivity Analysis of α on D-I. (b) Sensitivity Analysis of ϵ on D-I.
advantage of Camero over the random subset (Subset) method
can be clearly observed. Overall, under both the Camero-M
and Camero-T experimental settings, Camero demonstrates
more stable and consistent performance across the Accuracy,
F1-score, and FPR metrics. This indicates that the masking
mechanism employed by Camero is more effective than simple
random feature subset selection in preserving the model’s
discriminative capability. (c) Sensitivity Analysis of α on D-II. (d) Sensitivity Analysis of ϵ on D-II.
 First, regarding Accuracy and F1-score, Camero consistently demonstrates higher or more stable performance across
the three datasets (D-I, D-II, and D-III). For example, on D-I
and D-II, Camero’s Accuracy and F1-score are significantly
higher than those of the random subset method, while on D-
III, the performances are closer but Camero still maintains
a modest advantage. This indicates that Camero’s masking
mechanism can preserve strong classification capability even (e) Sensitivity Analysis of α on D-III. (f) Sensitivity Analysis of ϵ on D-III.
when some features are perturbed or suppressed, whereas Fig. 6. Sensitivity Analysis of Hyperparameters.
randomly selecting a feature subset is more likely to remove
critical discriminative features, causing performance fluctua- From the results, it was observed that the performance
tions. Second, for the FPR metric, Camero shows a more pro- remained relatively stable across most parameter settings,
nounced advantage. Across all three datasets, Camero main- indicating that the proposed method was not highly sensitive
tains a consistently low FPR, while the random subset method to moderate changes in the hyperparameters. However, when
exhibits noticeable variability, with significant increases on the parameter values were relatively small, larger fluctuations
some datasets. This suggests that randomly dropping features in performance were observed. In particular, a small value of
can disrupt the model’s ability to characterize normal traffic α weakened the sparsity constraint imposed by the mask regpatterns, leading to more false positives. In contrast, Camero ularization term, which reduced its ability to effectively guide
learns targeted masks that perturb the input features in a more the model to informative feature dimensions. Similarly, when
informed manner, effectively preserving detection capability ϵ was too small, the proportion of features that participated in
while controlling the FPR. the inference process became limited, weakened the robustness
 This performance discrepancy highlights the fundamental of the model and led to an unstable detection performance.
distinction between Camero’s learned masking mechanism and As the values of α and ϵ increased to moderate ranges, the
a naı̈ve random feature subset approach. The random subset model achieved more stable and reliable performance in all
strategy indiscriminately samples input features, rendering it datasets. Overall, these results demonstrated that the proposed

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11

framework maintained stable performance within a reasonably 5% and 5%, respectively, while also achieving the highest
wide parameter range, while excessively small parameter TPR of 0.832. Importantly, both Camero-M and Camerovalues could reduce the effectiveness of the regularization and T maintain very low FPR values (0.021 and 0.017), which
robustness mechanisms. are comparable to the lowest baseline values. This is crucial
 because a higher FPR would lead to a substantial number
G. Comparison with SOTA Methods of benign flows being falsely flagged as malicious, thereby
 To highlight Camero’s improvements in terms of general- disrupting normal business operations. In the D-III data set,
ization to open-world traffic, we conduct a fair comparison Camero again demonstrates consistent improvements. Cameroagainst six representative state-of-the-art approaches: Kitsune T achieves an accuracy of 0.870 and an F1 score of 0.864,
[43], Appscanner [40], Flowprint [41], CVAE-EVT [7], TFE- improving over the strongest baseline (C.E.) by 7% and 8%,
GNN [54], OWAD [8] and FlowXpert [59]. All methods respectively. Similarly, its TPR reaches 0.782, showing an
are trained on the D-I dataset (where different approaches 11% gain over the best baseline. Meanwhile, Camero-M also
construct their corresponding input representations from the matches or outperforms baselines with accuracy of 0.805 and a
same raw data) to ensure consistency. The evaluation is carried F1 score of 0.780. In particular, both Camero-M and Cameroout multiple times on three complementary aspects, enabling T achieve very low FPRs (0.031 and 0.032), outperforming
a comprehensive and unbiased evaluation. most baselines such as O.A. (0.464) and A.S. (0.152), thus
 1) Evaluation of Overall Performance: We first compared significantly reducing the risk of benign traffic misclassifi-
Camero with six baseline methods using four evaluation cation. Overall, the results in both datasets demonstrate that
metrics. Accuracy, F1 score, TPR and FPR, in order to assess Camero consistently achieves higher accuracy, F1 score, and
overall performance improvement. The results are presented TPR, while maintaining exceptionally low FPR values. This
in Table VI and Table VII. For clarity, the performance balance between strong detection capability and minimal false
differences (improvements or degradations) of the baseline alarms highlights Camero’s effectiveness and practicality for
methods are reported relative to the best results achieved by real-world deployment.
Camero and vise versa. Secondly, we further compared Camero with the baseline
 methods using ROC and PRC curves, as shown in Fig. 7. For
 TABLE VI clarity, baselines with an AUC lower than 0.5 were omitted
 COMPARISON WITH SOTA METHODS ON D-II DATASET from the graphs.
 Methods Accuracy F1 score TPR FPR
 K.S 0.491 ▼41% 0.220 ▼68% 0.136 ▼70% 0.115 ▲10%
 A.S 0.585 ▼32% - - 0.264 ▲24%
 F.P. 0.853 ▼4% 0.853 ▼5% 0.700 ▼13% 0.008 ▼1%
 C.E. 0.755 ▼16% 0.704 ▼20% 0.554 ▼28% 0.022 —
 T.G. 0.380 ▼52% - - 0.010 —
 O.A. 0.741 ▼16% 0.722 ▼18% 0.641 ▼19% 0.148 ▲13%
 F.X. 0.819 ▼8% 0.798 ▼10% 0.682 ▼15% 0.029 —
 Camero-M 0.863 ▲1% 0.854 ▲0% 0.759 ▲6% 0.021 ▲1%
 Camero-T 0.904 ▲5% 0.901 ▲5% 0.832 ▲13% 0.017 ▲1%
 (a) ROC on D-II. (b) PRC on D-II.
 - means that the value is lower than 0.10.

 TABLE VII
 COMPARISON WITH SOTA METHODS ON D-III DATASET

 Methods Accuracy F1 score TPR FPR
 K.S. 0.740 ▼13% 0.715 ▼15% 0.620 ▼16% 0.127 ▲9%
 A.S. 0.807 ▼7% 0.152 ▼71% 0.257 ▼53% 0.152 ▲12%
 F.P. 0.564 ▼31% 0.334 ▼53% 0.211 ▼57% 0.003 ▼3%
 C.E. 0.804 ▼7% 0.784 ▼8% 0.674 ▼11% 0.050 ▲2%
 T.G. 0.639 ▼24% - - 0.002 ▼3% (c) ROC on D-III. (d) PRC on D-III.
 O.A. 0.341 ▼53% 0.210 ▼65% 0.167 ▼62% 0.464 ▲43%
 F.X. 0.713 ▼16% 0.684 ▼18% 0.590 ▼19% 0.149 ▼12% Fig. 7. Comparison with SOTA methods using ROC and PRC curves.

 Camero-M 0.805 ▲0% 0.780 ▲0% 0.657 ▲0% 0.031 ▲3% From the ROC results on D-I and D-III, Camero-M and
 Camero-T 0.870 ▲7% 0.864 ▲8% 0.782 ▲11% 0.032 ▲3%
 Camero-T achieve significantly higher TPR under the same
 - means that the value is lower than 0.10. FPR compared with existing methods, highlighting their
 stronger discriminative capability while maintaining a low
 Comparison with baselines in the D-II and D-III datasets false alarm rate. In the PRC results of D-II and D-III, Camero
highlights the superior performance of Camero in terms of again demonstrates clear advantages, maintaining higher preboth detection capability and reliability. In the D-II data cision across a wide range of recall levels. In contrast, several
set, Camero-T achieves the highest accuracy (0.904) and baselines suffer from a rapid drop in precision when recall
the F1 score (0.901), surpassing the best baseline (F.P.) by increases, indicating that they generate many false alarms

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12

 TABLE VIII
 FINE GRAINED EVALUATION OF CAMERO AND THE BASELINES ON D-II AND D-III DATASET.

 Attacks Metrics K.S. A.S. F.P. C.E. T.G. O.A. F.X. Camero-M Camero-T
 P.R. 0.205 ▼71% - 0.639 ▼28% 0.832 ▼8% 0.326 ▼59% 0.509 ▼41% 0.845 ▼7% 0.891 ▲5% 0.919 ▲7%
 DoS R.C. 0.133 ▼71% - 0.700 ▼15% 0.499 ▼35% - 0.694 ▼15% 0.728 ▼12% 0.782 ▲6% 0.849 ▲12%
 F.S. 0.042 ▼84% - 0.667 ▼22% 0.624 ▼26% - 0.588 ▼30% 0.782 ▼10% 0.833 ▲5% 0.883 ▲10%
 P.R. 0.206 ▼71% - 0.640 ▼27% 0.822 ▼9% 0.184 ▼73% 0.469 ▼44% 0.834 ▼8% 0.881 ▲5% 0.913 ▲8%
 Gen. R.C. 0.149 ▼72% - 0.700 ▼17% 0.519 ▼35% - 0.656 ▼21% 0.741 ▼13% 0.788 ▲5% 0.869 ▲13%
 F.S. 0.173 ▼72% - 0.668 ▼22% 0.637 ▼27% - 0.547 ▼34% 0.785 ▼11% 0.832 ▲5% 0.890 ▲11%
 P.R. 0.162 ▼73% - 0.654 ▼24% 0.834 ▼6% 0.194 ▼70% 0.389 ▼50% 0.777 ▼11% 0.848 ▲1% 0.891 ▲6%
 Rec. R.C. 0.127 ▼65% - 0.700 ▼7% 0.645 ▼13% - 0.540 ▼23% 0.589 ▼18% 0.675 ▼2% 0.775 ▲7%
 F.S. 0.142 ▼68% - 0.676 ▼15% 0.728 ▼10% - 0.452 ▼38% 0.670 ▼16% 0.752 ▲2% 0.829 ▲10%
 P.R. 0.187 ▼70% - 0.655 ▼24% 0.830 ▼6% - 0.416 ▼48% 0.780 ▼11% 0.862 ▲3% 0.894 ▲6%
 Fuz. R.C. 0.151 ▼65% - 0.700 ▼10% 0.625 ▼17% - 0.607 ▼20% 0.600 ▼20% 0.759 ▲6% 0.800 ▲10%
 F.S. 0.167 ▼68% - 0.676 ▼17% 0.713 ▼13% - 0.494 ▼35% 0.678 ▼17% 0.808 ▲9% 0.845 ▲13%
 P.R. 0.170 ▼73% - 0.654 ▼25% 0.777 ▼12% 0.287 ▼61% 0.469 ▼43% 0.820 ▼8% 0.871 ▲7% 0.903 ▲8%
 Exp. R.C. 0.135 ▼76% - 0.700 ▼17% 0.447 ▼43% - 0.753 ▼12% 0.768 ▼11% 0.818 ▲5% 0.875 ▲11%
 F.S. 0.150 ▼74% - 0.676 ▼21% 0.567 ▼32% - 0.578 ▼31% 0.793 ▼9% 0.844 ▲5% 0.889 ▲9%
 P.R. 0.103 ▼72% - 0.568 ▼26% 0.754 ▼7% - 0.254 ▼57% 0.667 ▼12% 0.761 ▲1% 0.828 ▲7%
 Shco. R.C. 0.128 ▼65% - 0.700 ▼7% 0.663 ▼11% - 0.491 ▼28% 0.573 ▼20% 0.653 ▼5% 0.772 ▲7%
 F.S. 0.114 ▼68% - 0.627 ▼17% 0.705 ▼9% - 0.335 ▼46% 0.617 ▼18% 0.703 — 0.799 ▲9%
 P.R. 0.013 ▼54% - 0.390 ▼16% 0.317 ▼24% - 0.101 ▼45% 0.388 ▼17% 0.483 ▲9% 0.553 ▲16%
 Anal. R.C. 0.075 ▼91% - 0.700 ▼29% 0.504 ▼49% - 0.813 ▼18% 0.908 ▼8% 0.959 ▲5% 0.990 ▲8%
 F.S. 0.023 ▼69% - 0.501 ▼21% 0.390 ▼32% - 0.180 ▼53% 0.544 ▼17% 0.643 ▲10% 0.710 ▲17%
 P.R. 0.025 ▼51% - 0.351 ▼18% 0.341 ▼19% - 0.095 ▼44% 0.342 ▼19% 0.455 ▲10% 0.532 ▲18%
 Bac. R.C. 0.132 ▼71% - 0.700 ▼14% 0.520 ▼32% - 0.701 ▼14% 0.687 ▼16% 0.793 ▲9% 0.842 ▲14%
 F.S. 0.042 ▼61% - 0.467 ▼19% 0.420 ▼21% - 0.167 ▼49% 0.456 ▼20% 0.578 ▲11% 0.652 ▲19%
 P.R. 0.013 ▼37% - 0.219 ▼17% 0.250 ▼13% - - 0.224 ▼16% 0.302 ▲5% 0.386 ▲13%
 Wor. R.C. 0.111 ▼67% - 0.700 ▼8% 0.566 ▼22% - 0.645 ▼14% 0.645 ▼5% 0.696 — 0.786 ▲8%
 F.S. 0.023 ▼49% - 0.333 ▼18% 0.347 ▼17% - 0.100 ▼41% 0.332 ▼18% 0.422 ▲8% 0.517 ▲17%
 P.R. 0.666 ▼27% - 0.516 ▼42% 0.897 ▼3% 0.428 ▼50% - 0.721 ▼21% 0.935 ▲3% 0.936 ▲3%
 OSSc. R.C. 0.403 ▼38% 0.742 ▼4% - 0.694 ▼9% - - 0.622 ▼16% 0.712 ▼3% 0.784 ▲4%
 F.S. 0.502 ▼35% - - 0.783 ▼7% 0.100 ▼75% - 0.668 ▼19% 0.810 ▲3% 0.854 ▲7%
 P.R. 0.760 ▼15% - 0.785 ▼12% 0.842 ▼6% 0.772 ▼13% 0.206 ▼70% 0.597 ▼31% 0.881 ▲4% 0.909 ▲6%
 SeSc. R.C. 0.960 ▲19% 0.100 ▼67% 0.381 ▼39% 0.639 ▼13% - 0.292 ▼48% 0.535 ▼24% 0.549 ▼41% 0.772 ▼19%
 F.S. 0.849 ▲1% - 0.513 ▼32% 0.727 ▼11% - 0.242 ▼59% 0.564 ▼27% 0.677 ▼17% 0.835 ▼1%
 P.R. 0.248 ▼32% - 0.731 ▲16% 0.454 ▼12% - - 0.217 ▼46% 0.574 ▼15% 0.565 ▼16%
 DDoS. R.C. 0.997 — 0.999 — 0.800 ▼20% 0.997 — - 0.987 ▼ 1% 0.999 — 0.999 — 0.999 —
 F.S. 0.397 ▼32% - 0.764 ▲3% 0.624 ▼10% - 0.149 ▼57% 0.356 ▼37% 0.729 ▼3% 0.722 ▼4%
 P.R. - - 0.919 ▲52% 0.195 ▼20% 0.230 ▼17% - 0.041 ▼36% 0.371 ▼54% 0.399 ▼52%
 Theft R.C. - 0.242 ▼36% 0.862 ▲26% 0.341 ▼26% - 0.161 ▼44% 0.183 ▼42% 0.514 ▼35% 0.601 ▼26%
 F.S. - - 0.861 ▲38% 0.248 ▼24% - - 0.067 ▼42% 0.431 ▼43% 0.480 ▼38%

 - means that the value is lower than 0.10.
 - Gen: Generic, Rec: Reconnaissance, Fuz: Fuzzers, Exp: Exploits, Shco: Shellcode, Anal: Analysis, Bac: Backdoor, Wor: Worms, OSSc: OSScan, SeSc:
 ServiceScan.

when attempting to capture more malicious samples. Taken substantial improvements on major attack categories such as
together, both ROC and PRC analyzes verify that Camero DoS, Generic, Reconnaissance, Fuzzers, and Exploits, typiachieves a favorable trade-off between detection effectiveness cally stabilizing above 0.85, while the baseline methods often
and reliability, which makes it more suitable for practical fall below 0.7, with some dropping below 0.3. This indicates
deployment in real-world intrusion detection scenarios. that Camero offers a clear advantage in reducing false posi-
 2) Evaluation of Fine Grained Performance: Finally, we tives. For Recall, Camero also demonstrates superior detection
conducted a more fine-grained comparison between Camero capability. Even in more challenging attack types such as
and the baseline methods by evaluating the precision, recall, Reconnaissance, Fuzzers, and Shellcode, Camero maintains a
and F1 score in different attack categories. This analysis level of 0.75 to 0.85, while baselines generally lag behind
highlights Camero’s improvements at a more granular level. in the range of 0.5 to 0.7. This suggests that Camero is
The results are summarized in Table VIII. more robust in covering attack samples and mitigating false
 As shown in the fine-grained evaluation results in Ta- negatives. When considering the F1 score, which integrates
ble VIII, Camero consistently outperforms existing baseline both precision and recall, the superiority of Camero becomes
methods in the vast majority of attack types. Specifically, in even more evident. For both common attacks (e.g. DoS and
terms of precision, both Camero-M and Camero-T achieve

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13

Generic) and stealthier ones (e.g. Exploits, Analysis, and TABLE IX
Backdoor), Camero-T consistently achieves scores above 0.80, C OMPARISON OF MODEL PERFORMANCE AND INFERENCE TIME WITH AND
 WITHOUT THE DECODER
significantly outperforming all baselines and demonstrating
strong consistency and stability. The only exception arises Datasets Methods ACC F1 TPR Time
in the theft category, where Camero’s performance is less M-With-Dec 0.9779 0.9794 0.9677 2.6795
pronounced compared to other types of attack. However, this M-Without-Dec 0.9798 0.9812 0.9687 1.9025
 D-I
does not indicate a limitation of the model itself; rather, it T-With-Dec 0.9921 0.9927 0.9865 5.7005
 T-Without-Dec 0.9928 0.9933 0.9874 3.0043
stems from the extremely limited number of samples (only
slightly over one hundred), which introduces statistical vari- M-With-Dec 0.9265 0.9261 0.8754 2.4504
 M-Without-Dec 0.8631 0.8535 0.7588 1.4974
ability into the evaluation. Therefore, results on Theft should D-II
 T-With-Dec 0.8486 0.8321 0.7136 4.7559
be interpreted with caution. T-Without-Dec 0.9036 0.9007 0.8317 2.8422
 M-With-Dec 0.7793 0.7454 0.6135 2.4787
 M-Without-Dec 0.8046 0.7798 0.6568 1.4129
 VI. D ISCUSSION D-III
 T-With-Dec 0.9065 0.9045 0.8405 5.3765
 T-Without-Dec 0.8699 0.8635 0.7817 2.9462
 In this section, we discuss the usage of the decoder, applicability in encrypted traffic scenarios, model interpretability, - The inference time reported in the table is measured in milliseconds.
outline its current limitations, and highlight potential directions - The above inference time corresponds to the time cost per batch, where
 the batch size is 256.
for future work.

 B. Applicability in Encrypted Traffic Scenarios
A. Usage of the Decoder
 The widespread adoption of traffic encryption has made
 In Camero, the decoder acts as an auxiliary module that gentraffic analysis more difficult. It has also motivated a growing
erates a self-supervised mask from the latent representations
 body of research to rely on flow-level statistical features,
produced by the encoder to characterize potential adversarial
 such as those used in this work, which have been extensively
perturbations in the input traffic. During training, this mask is
 validated in prior studies [6], [7], [20], [43], [59]. In this
used to construct a mask-based cross-entropy loss, guiding
 section, we select a fully encrypted drift scenario to evaluate
the model to focus on potentially perturbed features and
 the applicability of Camero. The data are drawn from the
learn more robust representations. Once training is completed,
 MAWI dataset [78], [79], which contains network traces
this perturbation-aware capability has already been absorbed
 collected from a real backbone network. We first filter out
into the encoder parameters, making the decoder unnecessary
 encrypted traffic and then train the model using the data set
during inference. Removing the decoder does not change
 collected on March 1, 2021. The evaluation is conducted on
the prediction pipeline and generally maintains comparable
 data collected three weeks later, namely March 22, 2021. The
detection performance, while significantly reducing computaresults are presented in Table X.
tional overhead and improving real-time efficiency. In contrast,
involving the decoder during inference would make the pre-
 TABLE X
diction dependent on the generated mask, whose semantics P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION IN E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC S CENARIOS
are not stable due to its indirect optimization through training
objectives, potentially introducing additional uncertainty. Date Methods ACC F1 FPR TPR
 For memory overhead, Camero-M contains approximately Unmasked 0.9812 0.9695 0.0001 0.9409
 2021/3/1
3.5K parameters, which corresponds to about 14 KB of Masked 0.9809 0.9691 0.0011 0.9425
FP32 weight storage. Camero-T consists of roughly N × 1K Unmasked 0.6350 0.0002 0.0005 0.0001
 2021/3/22
parameters, where N denotes the number of attention layers, Masked 0.8506 0.7472 0.0085 0.6052
resulting in less than 4N KB of memory overhead. Moreover,
we compared the differences in inference time and model The results show that on the training data, Camero achieves
performance between the settings with and without the decoder performance comparable to methods optimized with the coninvolved during inference. The results are presented in the ventional cross-entropy objective. However, in terms of gen-
Table IX below. eralization to the data collected three weeks later, Camero
 As shown in Table IX, removing the decoder during in- demonstrates a clear improvement. Specifically, the accuracy
ference consistently reduces the inference time across all increases from 0.63 to 0.85, the F1 score improves to 0.74, and
datasets. For example, on D-I, the inference time of Camero- the true positive rate reaches approximately 0.60, indicating
M decreases from 2.6795 ms to 1.9025 ms, while Camero-T that Camero remains effective even in encrypted traffic scenardecreases from 5.7005 ms to 3.0043 ms. In terms of detection ios. Further analysis reveals that although the payload content
performance, the results remain generally comparable, and in of the packet cannot be accessed directly after encryption,
some cases even slightly improve without the decoder. Al- the statistical features of the flow-level can still reflect the
though minor fluctuations can be observed on certain datasets, structural patterns of communication behavior. In particular,
the overall results indicate that excluding the decoder can flow statistical features are primarily derived from connectioneffectively improve inference efficiency while maintaining level metadata, including flow duration, packet counts, packet
competitive detection performance. size distributions, inter-arrival times, and bidirectional traffic

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14

ratios. These features describe communication patterns rather between normal and anomalous communication patterns. For
than the specific data content, and therefore are not directly instance, attack traffic often exhibits more bursty or irregular
affected by encryption mechanisms. inter-arrival time distributions. Consequently, these features
 can still contribute useful discriminative signals, although their
 importance is relatively lower than that of the aforementioned
C. Model Interpretability
 connection-related statistical features.
 The mask generated by Camero provides a degree of interpretability regarding the importance of input features for the
 D. Limitations and Future Work
final prediction. Specifically, it reveals which input features
play a more significant role in the model’s decision to classify Our proposed approach effectively enhances robustness in
a sample as an attack, as well as their potential semantic detecting mixed traffic and adversarial perturbations, yet sevrelevance. To illustrate this, we randomly select one attack eral limitations remain to be explored. For example, our cursample as an example and rank the corresponding features rent evaluation assumes a black-box attacker with no access to
according to the magnitude of their mask weights and their model parameters or training data, stronger adversaries, such
positions, as shown in Fig. 8. as adaptive, query-based, or partially informed attackers, could
 potentially craft malicious flows that evade detection. Such
 adversarial perturbations may exploit the latent representations
 or mask mechanism, challenging the robustness of the model.
 Evaluating and enhancing the model’s resilience against these
 stronger attack scenarios constitutes an important direction
 for future research. Possible approaches include adversarial
 training targeting the mask generation process, dynamic or
 stochastic mask updates, and extending the method to handle
 categorical or sequence-level features, which may be exploited
 by sophisticated attackers.

 VII. C ONCLUSION
 We present a network traffic detection system with strong
Fig. 8. Interpretability Analysis of Input Feature Importance. generalization and robustness, namely Camero, designed to
 address the challenge of generalizing from closed-set training
 As illustrated in Fig. 8, different traffic features exhibit data to open-world traffic. We first model malicious behavior
noticeably different importance distributions under the mask- from the attacker’s point of view as a min-max adversarial
ing mechanism, with several features receiving significantly optimization problem, exposing the limitations of conventional
higher weights than others. For example, features such as black-or-white traffic labeling and its adverse impact on the
syn num, num s port, num d ip, fin num, and con per sec robustness. Building on this formulation, we proposed a selfobtain the highest mask weights (approximately 0.71–0.73), generating mask strategy with sparsity constraints, replacing
indicating that the model tends to focus more on the network binary labeling with a combination of self-generating masks
connection behavior patterns reflected by these features during and adaptive labels. This approach is model-agnostic and
the learning process. From the perspective of network security compatible with various architectures. Finally, we conducted
semantics, these features are mainly associated with connec- extensive ablation and comparative experiments in a real-world
tion establishment behavior and connection frequency. For network environment and in three public datasets CICIDSinstance, the number of SYN packets and FIN packets reflects 2017, UNSW-NB15 and Bot-IoT, evaluating both overall and
interaction characteristics during the connection establishment fine-grained performance using eight metrics. The results show
and termination phases, while the number of source ports that Camero consistently outperforms all baselines in key
and destination IP addresses can capture patterns of scanning measures such as accuracy, F1 score, TPR, and FPR.
behavior or large-scale connection attempts. Such patterns
are typical indicators of attack activities, such as scanning ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
attacks or denial-of-service attacks. Therefore, the higher mask This work was supported by the National Key R&D Proweights assigned to these features suggest that the masking gram of China under Grant No. 2024YFE0203800.
mechanism enables the model to automatically capture key
statistical features that are highly correlated with anomalous
 R EFERENCES
behaviors.
 In contrast, statistical features related to traffic inter- [1] K. He, D. D. Kim, and M. R. Asghar, “Adversarial machine learning
 for network intrusion detection systems: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE
arrival time and traffic volume, such as iat std, iat mean, Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 538–566, 2023.
and num d port, exhibit moderate weights (approximately [2] T. Bilot, B. Jiang, Z. Li, N. El Madhoun, K. Al Agha, A. Zouaoui, and
0.61–0.65). These features typically reflect the temporal char- T. Pasquier, “Sometimes simpler is better: A comprehensive analysis
 of {State-of-the-Art}{Provenance-Based} intrusion detection systems,”
acteristics of network traffic and the scale of data transmis- in 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25), 2025, pp.
sion, which provide auxiliary information for distinguishing 7193–7212.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15

 [3] H. Kheddar, D. W. Dawoud, A. I. Awad, Y. Himeur, and M. K. Khan, [24] X. Yang, F. Tong, F. Jiang, and G. Cheng, “A lightweight and dynamic
 “Reinforcement-learning-based intrusion detection in communication open-set intrusion detection for industrial internet of things,” IEEE
 networks: A review,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2024. Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2025.
 [4] A. Awadallah, K. Eledlebi, M. J. Zemerly, D. Puthal, E. Damiani, [25] G. F. Cretu, A. Stavrou, M. E. Locasto, S. J. Stolfo, and A. D. Keromytis,
 K. Taha, T.-Y. Kim, P. D. Yoo, K.-K. R. Choo, M.-S. Yim et al., “Casting out demons: Sanitizing training data for anomaly sensors,” in
 “Artificial intelligence-based cybersecurity for the metaverse: Research 2008 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (sp 2008). IEEE, 2008,
 challenges and opportunities,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tuto- pp. 81–95.
 rials, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 1008–1052, 2024. [26] G. F. Cretu-Ciocarlie, A. Stavrou, M. E. Locasto, and S. J. Stolfo,
 [5] F. Wei, H. Li, Z. Zhao, and H. Hu, “{xNIDS}: Explaining deep “Adaptive anomaly detection via self-calibration and dynamic updating,”
 learning-based network intrusion detection systems for active intrusion in International workshop on recent advances in intrusion detection.
 responses,” in 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23), Springer, 2009, pp. 41–60.
 2023, pp. 4337–4354. [27] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro,
 [6] C. Zha, T. Liu, C. Lin, B. Bai, and R. Zhang, “Sparse gaussian markov “{TESSERACT}: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classifimodeling for robust and trustworthy unknown cyber defense,” IEEE cation across space and time,” in 28th USENIX security symposium
 Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, 2026. (USENIX Security 19), 2019, pp. 729–746.
 [7] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational [28] S. T. Jan, Q. Hao, T. Hu, J. Pu, S. Oswal, G. Wang, and B. Viswanath,
 auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning ap- “Throwing darts in the dark? detecting bots with limited data using
 proach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” neural data augmentation,” in 2020 IEEE symposium on security and
 IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp. privacy (SP). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1190–1206.
 3538–3553, 2021. [29] X. Wang, “Enidrift: A fast and adaptive ensemble system for network
 [8] D. Han, Z. Wang, W. Chen, K. Wang, R. Yu, S. Wang, H. Zhang, intrusion detection under real-world drift,” in Proceedings of the 38th
 Z. Wang, M. Jin, J. Yang et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Annual Computer Security Applications Conference, 2022, pp. 785–798.
 Normality shift detection, explanation, and adaptation.” in NDSS, 2023. [30] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
 [9] K. Borders, J. Springer, and M. Burnside, “Chimera: A declarative lan- L. Cavallaro, “Insomnia: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
 guage for streaming network traffic analysis,” in 21st USENIX security intrusion detection,” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM workshop on
 symposium (USENIX Security 12), 2012, pp. 365–379. artificial intelligence and security, 2021, pp. 111–122.
[10] H. Li, H. Hu, G. Gu, G.-J. Ahn, and F. Zhang, “vnids: Towards elastic [31] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, X. Wang, and E. C. Ngai, “Recda:
 security with safe and efficient virtualization of network intrusion de- Concept drift adaptation with representation enhancement for network
 tection systems,” in Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference intrusion detection,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conferon Computer and Communications Security, 2018, pp. 17–34. ence on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2024, pp. 3818–3828.
[11] C. Zha, Z. Wang, Y. Fan, B. Bai, Y. Zhang, S. Shi, and R. Zhang, “A- [32] R. Jordaney, K. Sharad, S. K. Dash, Z. Wang, D. Papini, I. Nouretdinov,
 nids: adaptive network intrusion detection system based on clustering and L. Cavallaro, “Transcend: Detecting concept drift in malware
 and stacked ctgan,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and classification models,” in 26th USENIX security symposium (USENIX
 Security, 2025. security 17), 2017, pp. 625–642.
[12] J. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Xiang, W. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Robust network [33] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
 traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM transactions on networking, vol. 23, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
 no. 4, pp. 1257–1270, 2014. neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[13] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic [34] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, A. A. Ghorbani et al., “Toward generating
 paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.”
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166– ICISSp, vol. 1, no. 2018, pp. 108–116, 2018.
 2181, 2022. [35] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
[14] X. Xiao, S. Wang, G. Hu, Q. Li, K. Mao, X. Luo, B. Zhang, and network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),”
 S. Xia, “Rbljan: Robust byte-label joint attention network for network in 2015 military communications and information systems conference
 traffic classification,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure (MilCIS). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Computing, 2024. [36] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards
[15] C. Zha, Z. Wang, Y. Fan, X. Zhang, B. Bai, Y. Zhang, S. Shi, and the development of realistic botnet dataset in the internet of things
 R. Zhang, “Skt-ids: Unknown attack detection method based on sigmoid for network forensic analytics: Bot-iot dataset,” Future Generation
 kernel transformation and encoder–decoder architecture,” Computers & Computer Systems, vol. 100, pp. 779–796, 2019.
 Security, vol. 146, p. 104056, 2024. [37] S. Gupta, D. Gosain, M. Kwon, and H. B. Acharya, “Deep4r: Deep
[16] C. Zha, Z. Wang, Y. Fan, B. Bai, Y. Zhang, S. Shi, and R. Zhang, “Dm- packet inspection in p4 using packet recirculation,” in IEEE INFOCOM
 ids-a network intrusion detection method based on dual-modal fusion,” 2023-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2023,
 IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management, 2025. pp. 1–10.
[17] K. A. Akbar, Y. Wang, G. Ayoade, Y. Gao, A. Singhal, L. Khan, [38] L. Deri and F. Fusco, “Using deep packet inspection in cybertraffic
 B. Thuraisingham, and K. Jee, “Advanced persistent threat detection analysis,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cyber Security
 using data provenance and metric learning,” IEEE Transactions on and Resilience (CSR). IEEE, 2021, pp. 89–94.
 Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3957–3969, 2022. [39] P. Wu, J. Ning, X. Huang, R. Chen, K. Zhang, and K. Liang, “Privbox:
[18] Z. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Shen, M. Simsek, B. Kantarci, H. T. Mouftah, Privacy-preserving deep packet inspection with dual double-masking
 and P. Djukic, “Machine learning-enabled iot security: Open issues and obfuscated rule generation,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
 challenges under advanced persistent threats,” ACM Computing Surveys, Secure Computing, 2025.
 vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1–37, 2022. [40] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Appscanner:
[19] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network
 learning for network intrusion detection,” in 2010 IEEE symposium on traffic,” in 2016 IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
 security and privacy. IEEE, 2010, pp. 305–316. (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2016, pp. 439–454.
[20] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “Mth-ids: A multitiered hybrid [41] T. Van Ede, R. Bortolameotti, A. Continella, J. Ren, D. J. Dubois,
 intrusion detection system for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Internet of M. Lindorfer, D. Choffnes, M. Van Steen, and A. Peter, “Flowprint:
 Things Journal, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, 2021. Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting on encrypted network traf-
[21] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown fic,” in Network and distributed system security symposium (NDSS),
 encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Net- vol. 27, 2020.
 working, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, 2024. [42] L. Invernizzi, S. Miskovic, R. Torres, C. Kruegel, S. Saha, G. Vigna,
[22] D. Arp, E. Quiring, F. Pendlebury, A. Warnecke, F. Pierazzi, C. Wress- S.-J. Lee, and M. Mellia, “Nazca: Detecting malware distribution in
 negger, L. Cavallaro, and K. Rieck, “Dos and don’ts of machine learning large-scale networks.” in NDSS, vol. 14, 2014, pp. 23–26.
 in computer security,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX [43] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: an
 Security 22), 2022, pp. 3971–3988. ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” arXiv
[23] L. Du, Y. Chai, Y. Jia, B. Fang, H. Li, and Z. Gu, “Toward open-world preprint arXiv:1802.09089, 2018.
 network intrusion detection via open recognition and inspection,” IEEE [44] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
 Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 2025. detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2021

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16

 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, [65] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
 2021, pp. 3431–3446. recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
[45] R. Tang, Z. Yang, Z. Li, W. Meng, H. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Sun, D. Pei, and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
 T. Wei, Y. Xu et al., “Zerowall: Detecting zero-day web attacks through [66] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” arXiv
 encoder-decoder recurrent neural networks,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2020- preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2020, pp. [67] N. Japkowicz and M. Shah, Evaluating learning algorithms: a classifi-
 2479–2488. cation perspective. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[46] Y. Yue, X. Chen, Z. Han, X. Zeng, and Y. Zhu, “Contrastive learning [68] Z. Huang, E. Ayday, J. Fellay, J.-P. Hubaux, and A. Juels, “Genoguard:
 enhanced intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Protecting genomic data against brute-force attacks,” in 2015 IEEE
 Service Management, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 4232–4247, 2022. Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 2015, pp. 447–462.
[47] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “Tcg- [69] C. L. Schuba, I. V. Krsul, M. G. Kuhn, E. H. Spafford, A. Sundaram,
 ids: Robust network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph and D. Zamboni, “Analysis of a denial of service attack on tcp,” in
 learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, Proceedings. 1997 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (Cat. No.
 2025. 97CB36097). IEEE, 1997, pp. 208–223.
[48] M. Huang, Y. Lin, N. Li, X. Chen, and E. Bertino, “Card: Robustness- [70] G. Carl, G. Kesidis, R. R. Brooks, and S. Rai, “Denial-of-service attackpreserving transfer learning for network intrusion detection via con- detection techniques,” IEEE Internet computing, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 82–
 trastive adversarial representation distillation,” IEEE Transactions on 89, 2006.
 Dependable and Secure Computing, 2025. [71] K. Pelechrinis, M. Iliofotou, and S. V. Krishnamurthy, “Denial of
 service attacks in wireless networks: The case of jammers,” IEEE
[49] N. Wang, S. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “Feco: Boosting
 Communications surveys & tutorials, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 245–257, 2010.
 intrusion detection capability in iot networks via contrastive learning,”
 [72] S. Roy, N. Sharmin, J. C. Acosta, C. Kiekintveld, and A. Laszka,
 IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, 2025.
 “Survey and taxonomy of adversarial reconnaissance techniques,” ACM
[50] Y. Ma, Z. Li, H. Xue, and J. Chang, “A balanced supervised contrastive Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1–38, 2022.
 learning-based method for encrypted network traffic classification,” [73] S. Salamatian, W. Huleihel, A. Beirami, A. Cohen, and M. Médard,
 Computers & Security, vol. 145, p. 104023, 2024. “Why botnets work: Distributed brute-force attacks need no synchro-
[51] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized nization,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
 application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 2288–2299, 2019.
 neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and [74] D. Mitropoulos, P. Louridas, M. Polychronakis, and A. D. Keromytis,
 Security, vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021. “Defending against web application attacks: Approaches, challenges and
[52] A. Agiollo, E. Bardhi, M. Conti, R. Lazzeretti, E. Losiouk, and implications,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
 A. Omicini, “Gnn4ifa: Interest flooding attack detection with graph vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 188–203, 2017.
 neural networks,” in 2023 IEEE 8th European Symposium on Security [75] J. Kaur, U. Garg, and G. Bathla, “Detection of cross-site scripting
 and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, 2023, pp. 615–630. (xss) attacks using machine learning techniques: a review,” Artificial
[53] T. Li, X. Liu, W. Qiao, X. Zhu, Y. Shen, and J. Ma, “T-trace: Construct- Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 12 725–12 769, 2023.
 ing the apts provenance graphs through multiple syslogs correlation,” [76] D. R. dos Santos, “Access control vulnerabilities in network protocol
 IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 21, no. 3, implementations: How attackers exploit them and what to do about it,”
 pp. 1179–1195, 2023. in Proceedings of the 28th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models
[54] H. Zhang, L. Yu, X. Xiao, Q. Li, F. Mercaldo, X. Luo, and Q. Liu, and Technologies, 2023, pp. 5–6.
 “Tfe-gnn: A temporal fusion encoder using graph neural networks for [77] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion
 fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the ACM detection dataset: the cicids2017 case study,” in 2021 IEEE Security and
 web conference 2023, 2023, pp. 2066–2075. Privacy Workshops (SPW). IEEE, 2021, pp. 7–12.
[55] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehensive [78] MAWI Working Group, “MAWI Working Group Traffic Archive,” https:
 approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation //mawi.wide.ad.jp/mawi/, 2000, accessed: 2025-05-22.
 learning,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). [79] R. Fontugne, P. Borgnat, P. Abry, and K. Fukuda, “Mawilab: Com-
 IEEE, 2024, pp. 3552–3570. bining diverse anomaly detectors for automated anomaly labeling and
[56] J. Ghadermazi, S. Hore, A. Shah, and N. D. Bastian, “Gtae-ids: performance benchmarking,” in Proceedings of the 6th International
 Graph transformer-based autoencoder framework for real-time network COnference, 2010, pp. 1–12.
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 Security, 2025.
[57] X. Zhang, R. Zhao, Z. Jiang, H. Chen, Y. Ding, E. C. Ngai, and S.-H.
 Yang, “Continual learning with strategic selection and forgetting for network intrusion detection,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2025-IEEE Conference
 on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–10.
[58] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ml-based
 malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
 in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
 Communications Security, 2023, pp. 1005–1019.
[59] C. Zha, H. Pan, B. Bai, J. Wu, and R. Zhang, “Flowxpert: Context- Chao Zha is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Comaware flow embedding for enhanced traffic detection in iot network,” puter Science and Technology through a combined
 IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2026. M.S. - Ph.D. program since 2021 at the Institute
[60] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of
 O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg et al., Sciences, Beijing, China. His research focuses on
 “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in python,” the Journal of machine network security, with particular interests in network
 Learning research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. intrusion detection systems (NIDS), encrypted traffic
[61] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, detection, malware analysis, and intelligent defense
 T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An systems. He has published some papers in peerimperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” Advances in reviewed journals, including IEEE Transactions on
 neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019. Information Forensics and Security (TIFS), IEEE
[62] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning repre- Transactions on Mobile Computing (TMC), Computers & Security, and IEEE
 sentations by back-propagating errors,” nature, vol. 323, no. 6088, pp. Transactions on Network and Service Management (TNSM), among others.
 533–536, 1986.
[63] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol. 521,
 no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[64] J. Xu, Z. Li, B. Du, M. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Reluplex made more
 practical: Leaky relu,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium on Computers and
 communications (ISCC). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–7.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3688655

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17

 Dakun Shen is a Scientific Researcher at Zhejiang
 University, where he has worked since 2024. Prior to
 this role, he was a Principal Investigator at Zhejiang
 Lab from 2022 to 2024, and an Assistant Professor
 in the Department of Computer Science at Central
 Michigan University from 2019 to 2022. He received
 his Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from the
 University of South Florida in 2019.

 Ruyun Zhang received his Ph.D. degree in Communications and Information Systems in 2011. Having
 been a researcher and Ph.D. supervisor for years,
 he is currently working as principal investigator of
 the Research Center for High-Efficiency Computing
 Infrastructure at Zhejiang Lab. His research interests include communication networks and security.
 He has published several papers in international
 conferences and peer-reviewed journals, including
 IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
 Security (TIFS), IEEE Transactions on Dependable
and Secure Computing (TDSC), IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
(TMC), Computers & Security, and IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management (TNSM), among others.

 Kui Ren is a Professor and Associate Dean of
 College of Computer Science and Technology at
 Zhejiang University, where he also directs the Institute of Cyber Science and Technology. Before that,
 he was SUNY Empire Innovation Professor at State
 University of New York at Buffalo. He received his
 Ph.D. degree from Worcester Polytechnic Institute.
 His current research interests include Data Security,
 IoT Security, AI Security, and Privacy. Kui is a
 Fellow of ACM and IEEE. He currently serves as
 an area/associate editor for ACM Transactions On
Cyber Physical Systems, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, IEEE Transactions on Service Computing, IEEE Transactions
on Networking, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, IEEE Wireless
Communications, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, and Computer Networks.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.