This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 1

 NOS-Gate: Queue-Aware Streaming IDS for
 Consumer Gateways under Timing-Controlled
 Evasion
 Muhammad Bilal , Senior Member, IEEE, Omer Tariq Hasan Ahmed

 Abstract—Timing and burst patterns can leak through benign device rhythms while still pursuing a hidden attack
encryption, and an adaptive adversary can exploit them. This objective [10], [11]. This raises an operational IDS question
undermines metadata-only detection in a stand-alone consumer that is not captured well by offline accuracy alone: can a
gateway. Therefore, consumer gateways need streaming intrusion
detection on encrypted traffic using metadata only, under tight gateway detect quickly enough to act, at a low false-alarm rate,
CPU and latency budgets. We present a streaming IDS for using only metadata, against timing-shaped adversaries?
stand-alone gateways that instantiates a lightweight two-state We address this question with NOS-Gate, a streaming IDS for
unit derived from Network-Optimised Spiking (NOS) dynamics stand-alone gateways derived from Network-Optimised Spiking
[1] per flow, named NOS-Gate. NOS-Gate scores fixed-length (NOS) dynamics [1], [12]. NOS-Gate instantiates a lightweight
windows of metadata features and, under a K-of-M persistence
rule, triggers a reversible mitigation that temporarily reduces the two-state dynamical unit per flow. An excitability-like state
flow’s weight under weighted fair queueing (WFQ). We evaluate accumulates evidence from normalised metadata deviations,
NOS-Gate under timing-controlled evasion using an executable while a recovery-like state provides short-term memory and
worlds benchmark that specifies benign device processes, auditable suppresses repeated triggering. The detector emits an event-like
attacker budgets, contention structure, and packet-level WFQ surrogate and applies a persistence rule to stabilise decisions.
replay to quantify queue impact. All methods are calibrated
label-free via burn-in quantile thresholding. Across multiple This design is deliberately simple: compact state updates
reproducible worlds and malicious episodes, at an achieved 0.1% fit gateway budgets while still expressing persistence and
false-positive operating point, NOS-Gate attains 0.952 incident hysteresis, which are hard to add to a simple window-based
recall versus 0.857 for the best baseline in these runs. Under score with no memory. [13], [14].
gating, it reduces p99.9 queueing delay and p99.9 collateral delay Crucially, we connect detection to a gateway-safe action.
with a mean scoring cost of ≈ 2.09 µs per flow-window on CPU.
 When alarms persist, NOS-Gate temporarily reduces the weight
 Index Terms—consumer gateway, metadata-only intrusion of the flagged flow under weighted fair queueing (WFQ). This
detection, timing-controlled evasion, network-optimised spiking
 aims to reduce queue-tail harm while limiting collateral impact
(NOS), weighted fair queueing
 on benign traffic [15]–[18]. Figure 1 summarises the online
 loop (windowing, scoring, persistence, and WFQ gating) and
 I. I NTRODUCTION the offline evaluation harness used to measure queue impact.
 Home gateways and consumer hubs sit between consumer Recent encrypted-traffic security systems have improved
devices and encrypted services (web and cloud). Encryption robustness and deployment realism, but they usually make
limits payload inspection at the edge, but it does not remove different assumptions than a consumer gateway IDS.
traffic side channels such as timing, packet sizes, and burst HyperVision detects unknown encrypted malicious traffic
structure [2], [3]. These signals have been used for device using flow-interaction graphs [19]. RAPIER studies detection
identification and security monitoring [4]–[7], but the gateway under low-quality training data [20]. Wedjat targets evasive
setting imposes two constraints that shape what is practical. behaviour using real-time causal analysis [21]. ET-SSL explores
First, detection must run continuously with low latency and self-supervised contrastive learning for encrypted-traffic
modest CPU, which makes large models and heavy training anomaly detection [22]. These works reinforce that encrypted
difficult to justify [8], [9]. Second, an attacker can often change side channels remain useful, but they typically do not evaluate
packet timing without changing endpoints, ports, or encrypted the full gateway action loop (detection → mitigation → queue
content. impact) under an explicit timing-control budget, and they do
 Timing control is therefore a realistic evasion surface. Prior not standardise a stand-alone label-free calibration protocol.
work shows that timing and burst patterns can still leak structure NOS-Gate is built around those gateway requirements. Table IV
under encryption [3]. The same idea can be used offensively: an provides an explicit mapping from NOS symbols to their IDS
attacker can reshape inter-arrival times and bursts to resemble interpretation in NOS-Gate, so readers can audit what is reused
 unchanged and what is reinterpreted for detection and action.
 Muhammad Bilal and Hasan Ahmed are with the School of Computing and A second contribution is evaluation methodology. Public
Communications, Lancaster University, LA1 4WA, Lancaster, U.K. E-mail: IoT corpora and botnet traces are valuable, but they often
m.bilal@ieee.org, h.ahmed@lancaster.ac.uk. provide limited coverage of timing-controlled evasion and rarely
 Omer Tariq is with the School of Computing, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea. E-mail: offer an auditable link from attacker constraints to queue-level
omertariq@kaist.ac.kr harm at the gateway [23]–[25]. We therefore introduce an

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 2

executable worlds benchmark that specifies benign device at a fixed cadence. Time is divided into non-overlapping
processes and contention structure, constrains adversaries by windows of length ∆t = 250 ms (Section III-A). The detector
auditable budgets, and uses packet-level WFQ replay to quantify operates on directed five-tuple flows and is calibrated without
user-visible impact. We evaluate all detectors under the same labels using an assumed-benign burn-in segment. Flows may
stand-alone, label-free protocol: an assumed-benign burn-in start and stop during a horizon. For a newly observed flow,
segment, per-flow thresholds set by high quantiles of burn-in we compute scores immediately, but we enable thresholded
scores, and labels used only for reporting on held-out time [8], alarming only after the burn-in segment needed for quantile
[9], [26]. calibration has accrued; before that, we suppress alarms and
 Encrypted-traffic IDS work often improves detection do not allow WFQ gating.
performance under a dataset protocol, but at least one Inputs and operating protocol.: The feature stream is
gateway-facing element is commonly left implicit: (i) a limited to fields visible at the gateway: packet headers,
stand-alone, label-free protocol that fixes an explicit false-alarm timestamps, and sizes, plus DNS and TLS handshake metadata
budget without supervised tuning, (ii) an explicit timing-control when present (for example, SNI and certificate validity days).
threat model with auditable operational budgets, and (iii) an We do not use payload bytes, deep packet inspection features,
action-impact evaluation that measures whether mitigation or host logs. If DNS/TLS fields are absent, NOS-Gate falls
improves user-visible queue outcomes rather than only back to timing and size features without changing the model.
producing alarms. This paper adds all three in a single To avoid mixing feature dimensions within a run, we evaluate a
executable loop: NOS-Gate as a compact two-state streaming fixed feature contract per run (for example, timing+contention
detector calibrated without labels, worlds as a reproducible only, or timing plus DNS/TLS when uniformly available). The
benchmark with auditable timing and contention budgets run manifest records the feature contract used.
(including feasibility reporting), and packet-level WFQ replay For each flow i and window t, the detector outputs a score
to quantify queue-tail and collateral impact under reversible si,t and an alarm ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi }.
gating. Thresholds are calibrated label-free from the burn-in segment.
 We make three contributions that together support a practical, Let the horizon be H windows and let the burn-in length be
auditable gateway IDS under timing-controlled evasion: Hburn = ⌊0.6H⌋. In our worlds, H = 57,600 and Hburn =
 • We propose a two-state detector NOS-Gate, a streaming, 34,560 windows at ∆t = 250 ms (about 2.4 hours). We  set
 metadata-only gateway IDS with a direct action hook: a ϑi = Quantileq {si,t : t = 0, . . . , Hburn − 1} , (1)
 per-flow two-state detector with persistence-based alerting with q ∈ {0.99, 0.999} as the operating knob (we report
 that drives WFQ deprioritisation. both). Before ϑi is available, we compute si,t causally but
 • We introduce a reproducible worlds benchmark with suppress alarms (ai,t = 0) and do not trigger gating; after
 published contention structure, auditable attacker budgets, burn-in, thresholds are frozen and performance is reported on
 and packet-level WFQ replay, enabling queue-tail and the held-out segment, including achieved benign false-positive
 collateral evaluation under timing-shaped attacks. rate.
 • We standardise a stand-alone operating protocol at explicit
 To avoid flapping, we apply a K-of-M persistence rule. A
 false-alarm budgets using burn-in quantile thresholding flow becomes actionable only if at least K alarms occur in the
 and persistence, and we report achieved false-positive most recent M windows K = 3, M)= 8):
 ( (defaults
 rates, incident recall, and time-to-detect under the same X t
 calibration rule. zi,t = I ai,τ ≥ K , (2)
 We do not claim payload inspection, DPI deployment in τ =t−M +1
 where the actionable indicator zi,t is defined by the rolling
ISP-grade firmware, or that our synthetic worlds reproduce
 K-of-M rule above. WFQ gating is implemented as a reversible
any single public dataset. Instead, under the published feature
 quarantine timer: when zi,t = 1 for a flow, we apply ωi = ω−
contract and attacker budgets, NOS-Gate provides a stronger
 for a fixed quarantine duration Tg . If further actionable triggers
detection-and-action trade-off than the evaluated label-free
 occur while a flow is already gated, the quarantine interval
baselines: higher incident detection at the same achieved
 is extended accordingly. If no further triggers occur, the flow
false-alarm budget, and improved queue-tail outcomes when
 returns automatically to ω0 when the quarantine timer expires.
WFQ gating is enabled. This work do not claim payload
 Queueing model and WFQ action.: We evaluate action
inspection, DPI deployment in ISP-grade firmware, or that
 impact through packet-level queue replay at the gateway. Flows
synthetic worlds reproduce any single public dataset. We
 that share the uplink enter a work-conserving weighted fair
present the benchmark as a falsifiable protocol: new worlds,
 queueing (WFQ) scheduler. Let ωi (t) be the weight assigned
budgets, and contention structures can be added to test
 to flow i at time t. Under normal operation, ωi (t) = ω0 . Under
generality and failure modes. Table I groups representative
 gating, a flow that is actionable (zi,t = 1) is deprioritised by
encrypted-traffic systems by operating model and evaluation
 setting ωi (t) = ω− with ω− < ω0 for a quarantine duration Tg
axes that matter for consumer gateway comparability.
 (or until the flag clears, whichever is longer). We report both
 detection metrics and queue-tail metrics, including collateral
 II. S YSTEM MODEL ( CONSUMER GATEWAY ) delay experienced by benign flows. WFQ gating is reversible
 We model a stand-alone consumer gateway that observes and avoids immediate blocking while still limiting queue-tail
packet metadata behind NAT and produces streaming decisions harm when alarms persist (Figure 1).

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 3

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF E NCRYPTED -T RAFFIC S ECURITY S YSTEMS FOR S TAND -A LONE G ATEWAY D EPLOYMENT

 Group / work Inputs Training & calibration Online Robustness / evasion Action / impact Fit to NOS-Gate
 assumptions

 G0. Gateway action loop (detection → mitigation → queue impact)
 NOS-Gate (this paper) Per-flow metadata + Label-free burn-in; Yes Explicit timing-control WFQ weight gating; Direct match: stand-alone
 contention signals per-flow high-quantile budgets; feasibility queue-tail & collateral calibration and action-impact
 thresholds; K-of-M reported via replay loop
 persistence
 G1. Interaction-aware encrypted-traffic detection (detection-first)
 HyperVision [19] Encrypted traffic Dataset-trained; Yes Targets unknown/novel No mitigation or queue Closest on online inference,
 features + calibration follows threats (not posed as impact but different calibration and
 flow-interaction paper/dataset protocol timing-budget shaping) threat model
 graph
 G2. Robust learning under weak supervision / data quality shift
 RAPIER [20] Encrypted traffic Robust training under Often Robustness to data No action loop Useful robustness angle, but
 detection features low-quality data; quality shift (rather not an action-coupled gateway
 typically offline than timing budgets) protocol
 G3. Evasion emphasis (action-free evaluation)
 Wedjat [21] Encrypted traffic Dataset-driven learning Yes Explicit evasion No mitigation or queue Threat focus is closer, but
 signals + causal and evaluation protocol emphasis; real-time impact lacks stand-alone calibration
 analysis components framing and impact loop
 G4. Self-supervised representation learning (pretrain then downstream scoring)
 ET-SSL [22] Encrypted traffic Self-supervised Often Not formulated as No action loop Promising feature learning,
 features pretraining; downstream timing-budget shaping; but comparability hinges
 calibration varies by use robustness depends on on calibration and impact
 case downstream task evaluation

 Runtime measurability and clique approximation.: In TABLE II
worlds, contention cliques and weights W are specified by S CALE OF THE worlds BENCHMARK USED IN THIS PAPER . O FFERED - LOAD
 STATISTICS ARE DERIVED FROM BENIGN GENERATOR PARAMETERS ( MEAN
construction to make interference and ρ(W ) auditable. In IAT FAMILY PARAMETERS AND MEAN PACKET SIZES ); REALISED TRACES
a consumer gateway, clique membership is not given as an VARY STOCHASTICALLY AROUND THESE MEANS .
explicit graph label, but the relevant observables are available
at the scheduler boundary: per-queue backlog/occupancy Quantity Value (this paper)

(or delay estimates), per-class service counters, and Window length ∆t 250 ms
 Horizon H 57,600 windows (4 hours)
WFQ configuration/state (weights and per-class rate share). Devices / directed flows 32 devices; 64 directed flows (2 per
Operationally, we approximate a “clique” as the set of flows device)
that share the same constrained scheduling domain, such as Malicious flows / episodes 3 malicious flows per world (active at
 any given time)
a WAN egress queue and traffic class. Per-flow membership Clique structure 4 cliques, size 16 each
is obtained from the gateway’s own flow-to-class mapping Contention density 0.25 (world construction setting)
(five-tuple classification or policy rules). This is sufficient ρ(W ) band (achieved) ≈ 0.90 per clique (by construction;
 narrow band around target)
for the contention features we use (share, q) and for Per-flow rate (pkts/s) min / median / max
implementing reversible weight gating without requiring an ≈ 0.16/4.68/14.15
 Per-flow offered load (kb/s) min / median / max
online oracle for W . ≈ 0.61/15.32/60.85
 Total offered load (Mb/s) ≈ 1.59 (sum over 64 flows)

A. Worlds benchmark: contract and outputs
 The primary evidence in this paper is produced by a
 threat model (Section III-D, Table III) and report feasibility
reproducible synthetic benchmark called worlds. A world is
 rates for each budget setting. Within each world, time is
a fully specified, executable instance that fixes benign device
 split chronologically into burn-in, validation, and test. During
processes, malicious episode generators, contention structure,
 burn-in we update the online normaliser, train label-free
and an evaluation harness for queue impact. Each world
 baselines, and collect burn-in scores to set per-flow thresholds
publishes: (i) benign device classes and traffic generators,
 ϑi . Validation is used only for design-time selection from a
(ii) malicious episode generators, (iii) contention structure
 small fixed hyperparameter grid. Test uses frozen detectors and
(cliques and weights W , including a target band for ρ(W )),
 frozen ϑi to report achieved false-positive rate, recall, detection
(iv) a packet trace with flow keys, (v) the derived windowed
 delay, and queue-tail outcomes with and without gating.
feature stream, (vi) labels used only for reporting, and (vii)
WFQ replay configuration and queue summaries. The released
artefacts include world ids, random seeds, configuration hashes, III. T HREAT MODEL
and manifests linking raw and derived outputs. We consider a stand-alone consumer gateway that observes
 Budgets, feasibility, and timeline.: Timing-controlled packet metadata behind NAT and emits streaming, flow-level
evasion is defined by auditable operational budgets (Rimin , ε, δq ) decisions at a fixed window cadence. The attacker can reshape
and a feasibility protocol. We define these budgets in the packet timing and, within bounds, packet sizes. Evasion is

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 4

 Scheduling domain available at the gateway (Section V). No payload content and
 no host logs are used.
 WFQ scheduler
 ω0 → ω −
 for Tg
 Queue state packets B. Benign traffic and malicious episodes
 backlog, service share
 Within a world, each flow i is generated by either a benign
 contention Gateway runtime process or a malicious episode generator. Let Pben i and Pmal
 i
 signals
 denote the per-window distributions of xi,t in benign and
 Windowing + features packets malicious modes. Flows that share the same uplink scheduling
 (metadata-only)
 domain are grouped into contention cliques. We represent
 NOS-Gate state update clique-level interference using a nonnegative weight matrix
 state (v, u), S = σk (v) W = [wij ], and we report its spectral radius ρ(W ) as a compact
 summary of contention intensity.
 Threshold ϑi
 burn-in quantile

 timestamps, sizes, headers
 + persistence K-of-M

 Traffic (flows)
 C. Adversary capabilities and knowledge
 Actionable zi,t We assume a remote adversary that can compromise IoT
 devices and generate malicious traffic while remaining behind
 Offline evaluation
 NAT. The adversary can: (i) use encrypted channels, (ii)
 Worlds generator
 choose protocols and endpoints consistent with common device
 budgets (Rmin , ε, δq ) behaviour, and (iii) reshape packet timing and, within bounds,
 Trace-driven
 traffic packet sizes. The adversary knows the feature contract and the
 Packet trace window length ∆t.
 gating log
 The defender calibrates thresholds in a label-free, stand-alone
 way during an assumed-benign burn-in segment (Section II).
 WFQ replay
 This reflects a standard operational assumption: burn-in is not
 Report
 dominated by malicious behaviour.
 FPR, recall, TTD
 p99/p99.9, collateral
 (Labels for reporting only)
 D. Operational budgets for timing-controlled evasion
 Evasion is constrained by three budgets that capture objective,
 timing stealth, and contention stealth. For a flow i, the budgets
Fig. 1. Online, the gateway windows metadata-only traffic, updates NOS-Gate
 are (Rimin , ε, δq ) and are enforced by the worlds generator
state (v, u), applies burn-in quantile thresholding and a K-of-M persistence
rule to produce an actionable flag zi,t , and temporarily reduces WFQ weight
 (Table III).
ω0 → ω− for Tg . Offline, worlds generates trace-driven traffic and labels,
 For timing stealth, each malicious flow i is paired with a
runs the same runtime to log gating decisions, and replays WFQ to report
 benign IAT reference distribution Piben,iat constructed within
detection metrics and queue-tail and collateral outcomes; labels are used only
for reporting. Solid arrows: deployed online loop. Dashed arrows: offline
evaluation harness. the same world, using the benign process that matches i’s
 device class and endpoint template. This makes the timing
 constraint auditable per world. For readability, we use Piben,iat
constrained by explicit operational budgets that make attacks to denote the (fixed) benign IAT reference distribution for flow
auditable in our worlds benchmark. iat
 i, and Pbi,t for the empirical IAT distribution observed within
 window t; this notation is used consistently throughout the
 threat model and Algorithm 1.
A. Observation model and feature access
 IAT-based distortion is undefined when Ni,t < 2. We
 Packets are indexed by n, with arrival times tn ∈ R≥0 and therefore apply the timing distortion constraint only on windows
lengths ℓn ∈ [ℓmin , ℓmax ]. A directed flow i is the five-tuple that contain at least two packets:
(srcIP, dstIP, srcPort, dstPort, proto). Time is partitioned Ti = {t ∈ {0, . . . , H − 1} : Ni,t ≥ 2}. (5)
into non-overlapping windows of length ∆t, indexed by This does not remove constraints in sparse windows. The
t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , H − 1}. detector still observes packet counts, rates, and size-based
 Let Ni,t be the number of packets from flow i in window t, features in every window. The restriction applies only to the
 Ni,t = |{n ∈ i : tn ∈ [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)}| . (3) IAT distortion term because it is undefined otherwise.
When Ni,t ≥ 2, define the inter-arrival-time (IAT) multiset For contention stealth, let C(i) be the contention clique
within the window as containing flow i. Under baseline WFQ replay without defensive
Ii,t = {tn+1 − tn : n, n + 1 ∈ i, tn , tn+1 ∈ [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)} .gating, let dn be the queueing delay (enqueue-to-dequeue time)
 (4) experienced by packet n in clique C. Define the clique mean
The detector receives a feature vector xi,t ∈ Rd computed delay over the horizon as
causally from packet timestamps and sizes, optional DNS/TLS 1 X
 DC = dn , (6)
handshake metadata when visible, and contention signals |PC |
 n∈PC

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 5

 TABLE III Algorithm 1 Budget-projection evasive C2 generator (per flow)
 O PERATIONAL BUDGETS DEFINING TIMING - CONTROLLED EVASION IN
 worlds.
 Require: Benign IAT reference Piben,iat , size bounds
 [ℓmin , ℓmax ], window size ∆t, horizon H, bytes floor Rimin ,
 Budget Symbol Units Definition distortion radius ε, delay tolerance δq , max iters Imax
 Throughput floor Rimin bytes
 P
 n∈i, tn ∈[0,H∆t) ℓn ≥ Ri
 min Ensure: Packet times {tn } and sizes {ℓn } for flow i over
 Timing distortion ε s 1
 |T |
 i
 P
 t∈T W
 i
 1 (Pbiat , P ben,iat ) ≤ ε
 i,t i
 [0, H∆t), or infeasibility flag
 atk ben
 Contention δq s D C(i) − D C(i) ≤ δq 1: Initialise a proposal schedule with packet times and sizes
 stealth
 satisfying n ℓn ≥ Rimin
 P
 2: for t = 0 to H − 1 do
 3: Extract packets in window t and compute Ni,t
where PC is the set of packets belonging to flows in clique C 4: if Ni,t ≥ 2 then
 ben atk
during [0, H∆t). We write DC and DC for the mean delays 5: Compute Pbi,tiat iat
 and dt ← W1 (Pbi,t , Piben,iat )
under benign-only and attack-injected traces, respectively. 6: if dt > ε then
 Some triples (Rimin , ε, δq ) are infeasible for a given world 7: Project timing in window: apply an
and clique load, so feasibility is treated as a first-class outcome. order-preserving time-warp on [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t)
When a requested triple is infeasible, the generator either so the resulting IAT empirical distribution satisfies
declares infeasibility under the requested budgets or attempts W1 ≤ ε
to restore feasibility by reducing offered load while preserving (implementation: quantile mapping on sorted IATs
the throughput floor when possible. If the throughput floor with minimal interpolation)
cannot be met jointly with (ε, δq ), the attempt is declared 8: end if
infeasible. We report feasibility rates for each budget setting. 9: end if
 10: Repair throughput locally: adjust packet sizes within
E. Defender evaluation under stand-alone thresholding [ℓmin , ℓmax ] to keep cumulative bytes on track for Rimin
 11: end for
 For flow i and window t, the detector outputs a score si,t
 12: Run baseline WFQ replay (no gating) for clique C(i) to
and a binary alarm atk
 ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi }, (7) estimate DC(i)
 13: for ℓ = 1 to Imax do
where ϑi is set by high-quantile burn-in thresholding (Eq. (1)). atk ben
Let A(Rimin , ε, δq ) denote the admissible adversarial policies 14: if DC(i) − DC(i) ≤ δq then
that satisfy Table III. For a fixed quantile q, we evaluate 15: return packet times and sizes
robustness through the achieved detection probability under 16: end if
admissible attacks, 17: Reduce offered load: P decrease packet emission while
 min Pr [s(x) ≥ ϑi | mal] , (8) attempting to preserve n ℓn ≥ Rimin
 P ∈A(Rimin ,ε,δq ) x∼P 18: Re-apply the per-window projection and size repair
and we report the achieved benign false-positive rate induced steps
by the same ϑi on the held-out test segment. atk
 19: Re-estimate DC(i) by baseline WFQ replay
 20: end for
F. Evasive policy class: projection-based C2 21: return infeasible under (Rimin , ε, δq )

 To avoid cherry-picked evasions, we use a fixed, auditable
policy class that directly enforces the three budgets. The
 G. Optional protocol side-channel constraints
generator starts from a malicious proposal schedule, then (i)
projects timing within each window to satisfy the Wasserstein When DNS or TLS handshake metadata is available, we
constraint, (ii) repairs sizes to maintain the throughput floor, include the DNS/TLS features listed in Table V as part of the
and (iii) enforces contention stealth through iterative load fixed contract for that run. When such metadata is not present
reduction with baseline WFQ replay. To satisfy the three for a particular flow-window, the corresponding DNS/TLS
budgets, we apply the projection-based procedure summarized feature values default to zero under the fixed contract. We
in Algorithm 1. The term budget-projection refers to taking also report results under a timing+contention-only contract
an initial malicious packet schedule and projecting it into the (i.e., without DNS/TLS features) when those fields are not
feasible set defined by (Rimin , ε, δq ) via an order-preserving available in a uniform way. The run manifest records the
time warp (quantile mapping of within-window IATs) plus feature contract and discrete settings (including B and the
local size repair to maintain the throughput floor. Here z-score clip magnitude).
“projection” is used in the optimisation sense: starting from
a proposed malicious schedule, we apply an order-preserving IV. NOS-G ATE DETECTOR : MAPPING IDS TO NOS
time-warp within each window (implemented as quantile DYNAMICS
mapping of sorted IATs with minimal interpolation) to satisfy NOS-Gate instantiates the NOS two-state unit as a
the Wasserstein radius constraint, then repair sizes to maintain streaming intrusion detector at a consumer gateway. The
the throughput floor and iterate load reduction to satisfy two-state dynamics, bounded excitability, recovery coupling,
contention stealth. and damping terms are inherited from NOS. The change is

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 6

the meaning of the exogenous drive: in NOS networking delay τij ∈ Z≥0 beyond this inevitable pipeline delay and
it represents queue and interference forcing, whereas in define Lij = 1 + τij , so τij = 0 corresponds to the minimum
NOS-Gate it is a metadata-only evidence signal computed one-window lag.
per flow per window. This retains the NOS structure while
changing what the “input” represents. C. State interpretation for IDS
 Table IV provides an auditable correspondence between the NOS-Gate reuses the two NOS states with an IDS
NOS symbols and their IDS interpretation, and makes clear interpretation that preserves their mathematical roles:
what is reused unchanged and what is reinterpreted for detection v 7→ bounded evidence accumulation (suspicion),
and action. u 7→ recovery state (suppression resource).
 Operationally, v behaves like a virtual evidence queue that
A. Design rationale: why a two-state NOS unit helps under rises when metadata features deviate from benign patterns and
timing control drains under damping. The recovery state u increases under
 NOS-Gate targets the gateway loop in Figure 1: flows must sustained elevation and pulls v down via the explicit −u term,
be scored online at a fixed cadence, thresholds must be set which reduces rapid re-triggering after a burst of alarms. When
without labels, and decisions should drive a reversible action we include u in a score readout, we treat it as a persistence
with measurable queue impact. Under the threat model, the indicator correlated with sustained deviation, not as a direct
attacker can time-warp within windows and reshape burst alarm trigger by itself.
structure subject to a throughput floor and a timing-distortion
budget. This often reduces sharp per-window signatures and D. Evidence drive as a magnitude input
pushes attacks toward smaller deviations that persist over longer For each flow i and window t, we compute a normalised
periods. feature vector x̂i,t ∈ Rd (Section V) and map it to a scalar
 Stand-alone thresholding makes this harder. Each flow evidence drive
threshold ϑi is set by a high burn-in quantile (Eq. (1)) and Ei,t = ζ ∥x̂i,t ∥p , (10)
then frozen. A detector that relies on rare, high-amplitude where p ≥ 1 and ζ > 0 are hyperparameters. We treat
score spikes is easier to suppress because the attacker only Ei,t as constant over the window [t∆t, (t + 1)∆t). Because
needs to keep scores below a tail threshold. A detector that x̂i,t is produced by online z-scoring, the norm aggregates
can accumulate modest deviations over time is more likely to multi-feature deviations without labels and avoids learning
cross a high quantile without requiring any single window to per-feature weights.
look extreme.
 With coupling disabled by default (g = 0), NOS-Gate E. NOS dynamics for IDS (windowed discretisation)
acts as a per-flow streaming mechanism driven by the scalar NOS-Gate runs once per window, so we discretise the NOS
evidence Ei,t in Eq. (10). Around the benign operating band, two-state dynamics with an explicit Euler step of size ∆t. Let
the v-update behaves like a leaky evidence accumulator, while vi,t ≈ vi (t∆t) and ui,t ≈ ui (t∆t).
the recovery state u provides slower negative feedback. The Event surrogate (readout used for coupling and scoring).
leak terms prevent unbounded accumulation, the bounded 1
 Si,t = σk (vi,t − θ) = . (11)
nonlinearity reduces sensitivity to rare transients, and the 1 + exp −k (vi,t − θ)
explicit −u term suppresses repeated triggering after sustained Neighbour drive (optional). When coupling is enabled,
elevation. The event surrogate Si,t = σk (vi,t ) converts this the NOS graph-local term is Eq. (9). We update all flows
filtered state into a bounded readout that is straightforward tosynchronously once per window. Since Sj,t is produced at
calibrate using a high-quantile rule. window t and is only available when advancing to t+1, the
 minimum realised coupling lag is one window. We therefore
 parameterise an additional delay τij ∈ Z≥0 and implement
B. From gateway flows to NOS nodes Lij = 1 + τij , so τij = 0 corresponds to the minimum
 We model each active directed flow i as a node in a one-window lag.
contention structure with nonnegative weights W = [wij ]. Two Bounded excitability. We use the NOS bounded nonlinearity
flows are neighbours if they compete for the same gateway αv 2
 fsat (v) = , (12)
scheduling domain (uplink WFQ domain or a contention clique). 1 + κv 2
The NOS graph-local inputX is retained: with α > 0 and κ > 0. For numerical safety, the
 Ii,t = g wij Sj,t−Lij , (9) implementation may clip v to [0, v max ]
 State update (same NOS core, with IDS-specific drive).
 j∈N (i)
where g is a global coupling gain, Lij ∈ Z≥0 is an integer Define the total exogenous drive as the sum of the IDS evidence
delay in windows, and Sj,t is an event surrogate emitted by and (optionally) the neighbour drive: Ai,t = Ei,t + Ii,t (set
flow j (defined below). In the main results we set g = 0 unless Ii,t = 0 when coupling is disabled). The per-window updates
stated otherwise; coupling is evaluated in ablations. We update are
all flows synchronously once per window. Since the neighbour 
surrogate Sj,t is emitted at window t and is only available v i,t+1 = vi,t + ∆t fsat (vi,t ) + βvi,t + γ − ui,t + Ai,t
 (13)
when advancing to t+1, the smallest realised coupling lag 
 −λvi,t − χ vi,t − vrest c + ξi,t − r Si,t ,
is one full window. We therefore parameterise an additional

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 7

 TABLE IV term proportional to Si⋆ = σk (vi⋆ − θ) in the discrete-time
 AUDITABLE MAPPING FROM NOS ( MAIN MODEL ) TO NOS-G ATE (IDS update in Eq. (13).)
 INSTANTIATION ).
 For conservative calibration checks, we isolate the coupling
 Symbol NOS meaning NOS-Gate (IDS) meaning
 gain. Since maxx σk′ (x) = k/4, the linearised coupling path
 in the v-update is bounded by ∆t g ρ(W ) k/4. In experiments
 vi Normalised congestion Bounded evidence
 proxy accumulation, optionally we choose (g, k), ∆t, and the world-specific ρ(W ) band so
 clipped to [0, vmax ] that this bound remains below the local damping and recovery
 ui Recovery / slowdown Suppression state damping margin induced by (λ, χ) and (a, b, µ), and the local slope of
 resource repeated alarms
 fsat (v) Bounded excitability Bounded evidence growth fsat around the operating band. The IDS evidence Ei,t enters
 (finite buffers) under deviation only as exogenous forcing.
 βvi + γ Residual slope and offset Bias and linear drift We emphasise that the bound ∆t g ρ(W ) k/4 is used as
 correction
 −ui Post-burst recovery drag Refractory suppression a conservative heuristic sufficient check for selecting safe
 after alarms coupling settings in our discrete-time implementation; it is
 −λvi Service-like drainage Evidence decay toward not a formal stability guarantee for the full nonlinear, driven
 baseline
 −χ(vi − vrest ) Small-signal damping Stabilisation around benign system under arbitrary time-varying evidence inputs.
 baseline
 Ii (t) Graph-local coupling Contention-driven V. M ETHODS
 neighbour propagation
 (ablation) NOS-Gate operates on per-flow packet metadata at a fixed
 Si (t) Presynaptic event train Event surrogate Si,t = cadence. We treat each directed five-tuple flow as a stream and
 σk (vi,t − θ)
 (a, b, µ) Recovery sensitivity and Suppression build-up and summarise its packets in non-overlapping windows of length
 decay persistence ∆t = 250 ms. Each window yields one feature vector xi,t for
 Exogenous drive Telemetry forcing Total drive Ai,t = Ei,t + flow i at window index t. In synthetic worlds, flow keys and
 Ii,t with Ei,t = ζ∥x̂i,t ∥p
 Reset pathway Differentiable reset Optional continuous reset (when needed) device identifiers are known by construction.
 option −rSi,t In the optional corpus mode, we extract the same directed
 Operational Operator control WFQ gating: alarms reduce five-tuple flows from PCAP or flow logs. Device identity is
 action weight ωi
 not required for scoring, but when a stable identifier exists
 (for example, a MAC address or a DHCP lease), we maintain
 separate normalisation statistics per device.
  
 ui,t+1 = ui,t + ∆t ab vi,t − (a + µ) ui,t . (14)
 A. Causal windowing and online normalisation
Here ξi,t is an optional zero-mean noise term (set to 0 unless
enabled) and vrest is the benign baseline (we use vrest = 0 All feature computation is causal. Features for window
unless stated). The optional term −rSi,t is a continuous reset t use only packets with timestamps in [t∆t, (t+1)∆t), and
pathway (set r = 0 when not used). This is the only structural any running statistics depend only on earlier windows. After
difference from NOS: the “input” is now Ai,t , whose IDS computing xi,t , we normalise online to reduce drift and make
component is Ei,t from Eq. (10). thresholds comparable across flows.
 Let d(i) be the device identifier for flow i when available
 (otherwise a single global bucket). For each feature index k
F. Score, alarm, and WFQ gating action
 and device bucket d, we maintain exponential running mean
 NOS-Gate converts state into an anomaly score and variance,
 si,t = η1 Si,t + η2 ui,t . (15) (d,k)
 mt+1 = (1 − λm )mt
 (d,k)
 + λ m xt ,
 (d,k)
 (17)
An alarm is ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi }, where ϑi is set per flow by  2
 (d,k) (d,k) (d,k) (d,k)
burn-in quantile thresholding (Eq. (1)). We stabilise alerts with qt+1 = (1 − λv )qt + λ v xt − mt , (18)
the K-of-M persistence rule (Section II). When actionable, and emit a z-score
 (d,k) (d,k)
WFQ gating assigns ωi = ω− for Tg ; otherwise ωi = ω0 . (d,k) x − mt
 x̂t = tq . (19)
 In the main results we use η2 = 0, so the operational score (d,k)
 qt +ϵ
is driven by Si,t . We use η2 > 0 only in ablations, where ui,t
 Operationally, we compute x̂i,t using (mt , qt ), score window
acts as a slow-burn persistence cue. The run manifest records
 t, and then update (mt+1 , qt+1 ) using xi,t . We use separate
(η1 , η2 ).
 rates λm and λv so that the variance adapts more cautiously
 than the mean under bursty traffic. If a window has no packets,
G. Fixed points and stability rate features are set to zero and IAT summaries are marked as
 For constant drives (that is, Ei,t ≡ Ei⋆ and Ii,t ≡ Ii⋆ ), with missing (the evidence drive in Eq. (10) remains defined through
ξi,t = 0 and r = 0, a steady state (vi⋆ , u⋆i ) of the underlying other features). We clip z-scores to a fixed magnitude (default
NOS core satisfies 8) to prevent a single spike from dominating. Thresholds are
0 = fsat (vi⋆ ) + βvi⋆ + γ − u⋆i + Ei⋆ + Ii⋆ − λvi⋆ − χ vi⋆ − vrest ,
 
 fixed after burn-in. To limit post burn-in drift, online mean and
 (16) variance updates use a small adaptation rate and are clipped to
together with ab vi⋆ = (a+µ) u⋆i from Eq. (14). (If the optional prevent abrupt shifts. We also evaluated freezing normalisation
reset r > 0 is enabled, it adds an additional negative feedback after burn-in and observed similar qualitative trends, at the

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 8

 TABLE V C. End-to-end loop and replay-based impact evaluation
 F EATURE CONTRACT USED IN THE MAIN RUNS (d = 14, B = 10).
 The online pipeline is identical in synthetic and corpus
 Group Features modes. The worlds generator emits packet traces with flow
 Timing/volume rate, byte_rate, mean_iat, cv_iat
 keys, timestamps, and sizes, together with contention structure
 Size/burstiness mean_size, small_frac, duty_cycle and evasion budgets (Table III). We window packets to produce
 (B = 10) xi,t , normalise online to obtain x̂i,t , and run NOS-Gate as a
 Contention share, q
 DNS dns_churn, dns_ttl_var, dns_q per-flow streaming update (Section IV).
 TLS tls_sni_entropy, All detectors, including baselines, follow the same
 tls_cert_valid_days
 stand-alone operating protocol. An assumed-benign burn-in
 segment is used for training (where applicable) and for
 TABLE VI collecting burn-in scores. Each flow threshold is then set as a
 NOS-G ATE PARAMETERS AND DEFAULTS USED IN THE MAIN RUNS ( SEE
 RELEASED CONFIG SNAPSHOT ).
 high quantile of burn-in scores (Eq. (1)) and frozen for test.
 Labels are used only for reporting on held-out time.
 Parameter Default Meaning Queue impact is evaluated by packet-level WFQ replay
 ∆t 0.25 window length
 in two conditions: (i) baseline replay without gating and (ii)
 k 20 sigmoid slope in Si,t = σk (vi,t − θ) replay with gating driven by each method’s actionable flags zi,t .
 θ 1.0 sigmoid threshold Replay logs are produced in microseconds; we report queue
 αv 2
 α 1.0 saturation numerator in fsat (v) = 1+κv 2 metrics in milliseconds for readability. Efficiency is reported as
 κ 0.75 saturation denominator scale
 β 0.10 linear term in v update
 microseconds per (flow, window) record, since gateway cost
 γ 0.25 offset in v update scales primarily with active flows and the window cadence.
 λ 0.35 decay in v update We compare NOS-Gate against three lightweight label-free
 χ 0.10 stabilisation around vrest
 a, b, µ 1, 1, 0.01 recovery build-up and decay (defaults when not overridden)
 baselines trained on the same burn-in segment and calibrated
 p 2 evidence norm ∥x̂i,t ∥p (L2) with the same high-quantile thresholding protocol. KitNET
 ζ 1.0 evidence scale (default feature scaling) is implemented as an ensemble of single-hidden-layer
 vmax 3.0 optional clipping bound when enabled √
 autoencoders over feature groups of size ⌈ d⌉ (default
 grouping), with per-group hidden width set to 0.5 of the
 group size and an aggregator autoencoder with hidden width
cost of slightly higher false positives; we leave systematic 8 operating on the vector of per-group reconstruction errors.
adversarial drift handling to future work. Autoencoder is a compact one-hidden-layer MLP autoencoder
 Linear(d → 32) + ReLU + Linear(32 → d) trained by
B. Feature contract reconstruction loss. TinyGRU is a one-layer GRU forecaster
 with hidden size 24 and lookback 8 windows, followed by a
 The feature stream is deliberately small and restricted
 linear head that predicts the next normalised feature vector; its
to fields visible at the gateway: headers, timestamps, and
 anomaly score is the one-step prediction error. All learnable
sizes, plus DNS and TLS handshake metadata when present.
 baselines minimise mean squared error (reconstruction for
From timing and burstiness we include packet rate, simple
 KitNET/autoencoder; one-step prediction for TinyGRU) using
inter-arrival summaries (mean and coefficient of variation when
 Adam (learning rates as in the released configuration), with a
at least two packets exist), and a low-frequency pacing indicator
 fixed small number of epochs. We do not use early stopping
computed from counts in B fixed micro-bins within the window.
 in the reported runs; dropout is disabled and weight decay is
From contention we include (i) clique-level rate share and (ii)
 set to zero unless stated otherwise.
an interference index derived from the contention weights W
used by the worlds generator.
 For the main results, we use a fixed d = 14 feature contract VI. R ESULTS
per flow-window; Table V lists the features, and Table VI lists We report results on reproducible worlds containing
the defaults of NOS used in the main runs. The duty-cycle malicious episodes under the timing-controlled threat model.
feature uses B = 10 micro-bins within each window. All methods operate in a stand-alone, label-free mode: per-flow
 We densify to a full (flow, window) grid. If a flow has no thresholds are set from the burn-in segment using the same
packets in window t, rate and byte-rate are set to zero; IAT high-quantile rule and then frozen for test (Eq. (1)). We report
summaries are set to zero when fewer than two packets are two alert budgets, FPR = 1% and FPR = 0.1%, and we always
present in the window (since IAT is undefined). In runs that show the achieved benign false-alarm rate on the held-out test
include DNS/TLS features (Table V), when DNS/TLS metadata segment under that protocol. We report the achieved benign
is not present for a particular flow-window, the corresponding false-positive rate induced by the frozen per-flow thresholds
DNS/TLS feature values default to zero under the fixed contract. on the held-out test segment. Concretely, for each method
We also report results under a timing+contention-only contract we compute the fraction of benign flow-windows in the test
(i.e., without DNS/TLS features) when those fields are not segment that produce an alarm under ai,t = I{si,t ≥ ϑi },
available in a uniform way. The run manifest records the where ϑi is set from the burn-in segment (Eq. (1)) and then
feature contract and discrete settings (including B and the frozen. Because this estimate aggregates over a very large
z-score clip magnitude). number of benign flow-windows per world in our evaluation,

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 9

small world-to-world differences can fall below the precision TABLE VII
implied by typical rounded tables. We therefore state operating S CORING COST ON CPU ( MICROSECONDS PER WINDOW- ROW ). T IMINGS
 ARE WALL - CLOCK PER ( FLOW , WINDOW ) FEATURE ROW ON I NTEL C ORE
points by their target alert budgets and always report the I 7-1355U, USING W INDOWS 11 AND [P YTHON 3.14.2]; MEASUREMENTS
achieved rate under the same protocol. In our harness, achieved WERE TAKEN IN [ SINGLE - THREAD ] MODE . R EPORTED TIME INCLUDES
FPR is estimated on a benign-only episode over the full horizon, ONLINE NORMALISATION AND MODEL UPDATE / SCORING GIVEN
 PRECOMPUTED WINDOW FEATURES ; IT EXCLUDES PACKET
which yields 64 × 57,600 ≈ 3.69 × 106 flow-windows per CAPTURE / PARSING AND WINDOW FEATURE EXTRACTION .
world at ∆t = 250 ms. At target FPR = 0.1%, the sampling
variability of an empirical false-positive fraction at this n is Method Mean (µs/row) p90 (µs/row) Max (µs/row)
on the order of 10−5 , so values rounded to three decimals NOS-Gate 2.09 2.97 2.99
can appear identical across worlds. For this reason we state Autoencoder 2.03 2.78 2.80
 KitNET 11.68 16.72 16.80
operating points in terms of the target budget and clarify the TinyGRU 31.10 46.57 49.24
estimation volume, and we report achieved values at higher
precision in the artefact summaries.
 that improves both metrics consistently across the 7 worlds.
A. Incident detection under timing-controlled evasion Relative to baseline replay without gating, NOS-driven gating
 Figure 2 summarises incident recall and time-to-detect (TTD) reduces p99.9 queueing delay by about 3.24 ms on average
at FPR = 0.1%. Time-to-detect (TTD) is measured from across worlds and reduces p99.9 collateral delay by about 3.16
the first malicious-labelled window of an episode to the first ms. In contrast, gating driven by KitNET and the autoencoder
threshold-crossing alarm ai,t = 1 (i.e., the first window where increases mean p99.9 queueing delay in these runs (about
si,t ≥ ϑi on the attacked flow), and is reported separately from +0.30 ms and +0.91 ms, respectively), which is consistent
the persistence-based actionable signal used for WFQ gating. with less targeted gating under the same strict alert budget.
This operating point is intentionally strict. Because ϑi is a high Figure 3(c) summarises the central deployment question:
burn-in quantile and is then frozen, a detector must exceed a under a strict alert cap, does the detector sit in the favourable
tail threshold on each flow. Under timing-controlled evasion region of higher incident recall and lower tail delay. Under the
(Table III), the attacker can often reduce sharp per-window shared stand-alone protocol, NOS-Gate occupies that region in
anomalies by spreading activity across windows while still these worlds.
meeting the throughput floor. This makes methods that depend
on occasional high-amplitude windows easier to suppress below C. Efficiency on CPU
ϑi , while methods that accumulate modest deviation energy
 Table VII reports scoring cost in microseconds per
across time are more likely to trigger without relying on a
 window-row. NOS-Gate remains lightweight (mean ≈
single extreme window.
 2.09 µs/row), comparable to the compact autoencoder and
 At FPR = 0.1%, NOS-Gate misses 1 of 21 incidents
 substantially faster than KitNET and TinyGRU in these runs.
(incident recall 0.952). The strongest baseline in these runs,
 This matters because gateway cost scales with active flows and
TinyGRU, misses 3 incidents (recall 0.857). The remaining
 window cadence. A method that is expensive per window is
baselines miss 5 incidents (recall 0.762).
 harder to sustain without adding latency. All methods are timed
 Figure 2(a) shows per-world recall and indicates that the gain
 under the same measurement protocol; we report per-row cost
is not driven by a single outlier world. Figure 2(b) shows the
 because gateway compute scales primarily with active flows
TTD distribution over detected incidents. Several baselines can
 and the fixed window cadence.
trigger quickly when they trigger, but under the strict budget
they fail to trigger on more episodes. NOS-Gate trades some
latency on the hardest cases for fewer missed incidents, which D. Summary
is the relevant trade-off when false alarms must remain rare. Across these runs, NOS-Gate is the only method that meets
 Figure 2(c) provides episode-level discordant counts pooled the three constraints that define the gateway setting at once: (i)
across the same 21 episodes. NOS-Gate detects more episodes under a strict false-alarm budget it misses fewer incidents, (ii)
that each baseline misses than vice versa (KitNET: 5 vs 1; its actionable flags drive a reversible WFQ action that reduces
TinyGRU: 3 vs 1; autoencoder: 5 vs 1). The sample is modest, both queue-tail delay and collateral tail delay in replay, and (iii)
so we treat this as supporting evidence rather than a standalone it achieves this with a small, stable per-window compute cost.
statistical claim, but the direction is consistent across baselines. Under looser thresholds, baselines can appear closer. The strict
 stand-alone calibration exposes the failure mode that matters
B. Queue impact of WFQ gating operationally: missed incidents and action-triggered latency
 Detection is evaluated here through its control effect. We when alerts must be rare.
therefore assess WFQ gating using packet-level replay, driven
by each method’s actionable flags under the strict operating VII. C ONCLUSION
point (FPR = 0.1%). Queue logs are produced in microseconds Consumer gateways in the networks sit at the point where
and reported in milliseconds. encrypted services meet heterogeneous IoT devices, but
 Figure 3 reports tail queueing delay and tail collateral encryption leaves timing, size, and burst structure visible.
delay under gating (p99.9). NOS-Gate is the only method Those side channels support metadata-based IDS, yet they

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 10

(a) Incident recall per world (FPR = 0.1%). (b) TTD distribution (FPR = 0.1%). (c) Discordant episode counts vs baselines
 (FPR = 0.1%).

Fig. 2. Detection under the strict false-alarm budget (TTD is defined to the first alarm ai,t = 1, not to the first actionable trigger under K-of-M persistence.).
Panels (a) and (b) show per-world behaviour and latency dispersion, not only pooled totals. Panel (c) summarises episode-level discordants (NOS-Gate only vs
baseline), pooled across worlds.

 (a) p99.9 queueing delay under gating. (b) p99.9 collateral delay under gating. (c) Incident recall vs ∆p99.9 delay (gated
 minus base).
Fig. 3. Action-level evaluation under the strict operating point (FPR = 0.1%). NOS-Gate is the only method that improves both queue-tail delay and collateral
tail delay while maintaining the highest incident recall under the same label-free calibration protocol. Delays are reported in ms (raw logs are in µs).

also create a practical evasion surface: an adaptive adversary every real deployment. Instead, we offer a falsifiable protocol,
can reshape timing while still meeting an attack objective. artefacts, and budgets that make both evasion and queue impact
This paper addressed a deployment-centred question: under measurable. NOS-Gate operates per flow with a persistence rule,
a strict false-alarm cap and without labels, can a gateway which is appropriate when malicious activity is sustained on a
detect quickly enough to act, using only metadata, and small number of flows. An adaptive adversary could attempt
can that action reduce user-visible queue harm rather than to dilute evidence by increasing flow churn (many short-lived
add to it? We introduced NOS-Gate, a streaming IDS flows) or by spreading activity across multiple endpoints so
that instantiates a lightweight two-state unit derived from that no single flow accumulates enough alarms within the
Network-Optimised Spiking (NOS) dynamics per flow. The persistence window to trigger action. We do not evaluate such
model is structurally faithful to NOS and changes only the multi-flow strategies in this paper; addressing them may require
interpretation of the exogenous drive, which becomes a scalar lightweight aggregation above the five-tuple (for example,
evidence signal derived from online normalised metadata per-device or per-destination persistence) or coupling across
features. The resulting state update provides controlled leak, flows sharing a scheduling domain, while preserving the same
bounded growth, and recovery-driven suppression, producing stand-alone calibration and auditable action constraints. Future
a stable score that is calibrated stand-alone by burn-in work should expand the benchmark with additional device
quantile thresholding and stabilised by a K-of-M persistence processes, and explore how learned feature representations can
rule. Crucially, NOS-Gate connects detection to an auditable be introduced without breaking the stand-alone calibration and
mitigation path by temporarily reducing WFQ weights for action-audit requirements.
persistently suspicious flows. To evaluate this action loop under
timing-controlled evasion, we introduced an executable worlds
benchmark with explicit attacker budgets and packet-level R EFERENCES
WFQ replay. Under the strict operating point (0.1% achieved
benign false-positive rate), NOS-Gate achieved the highest [1] M. Bilal, “Network-optimised spiking neural network for event-driven
incident recall among the tested label-free baselines while also networking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23516, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.23516
improving tail queue outcomes under gating, including reduced [2] M. Conti, L. V. Mancini, R. Spolaor, and N. V. Verde, “Analyzing android
p99.9 queueing delay and reduced collateral tail delay. Its encrypted network traffic to identify user actions,” IEEE Transactions on
per-window scoring cost remained small and stable on CPU, Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 114–125, 2016.
which matches gateway scaling constraints.Finally, we do not [3] A. Panchenko, F. Lanze, J. Pennekamp, T. Engel, A. Zinnen, M. Henze,
 and K. Wehrle, “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Network
claim payload-level coverage or that synthetic worlds capture and Distributed System Security Symposium, 2016. [Online]. Available:
 https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15302617

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCE.2026.3682516

 11

 [4] A. Sivanathan, H. H. Gharakheili, F. Loi, A. Radford, C. Wijenayake, [25] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, “The rise of
 A. Vishwanath, and V. Sivaraman, “Classifying iot devices in smart traffic classification in iot networks: A survey,” Journal of Network and
 environments using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Transactions Computer Applications, vol. 154, p. 102538, 2020.
 on Mobile Computing, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, 2019. [26] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and
 [5] M. Miettinen, S. Marchal, I. Hafeez, N. Asokan, A.-R. Sadeghi, and machine learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE
 S. Tarkoma, “Iot sentinel: Automated device-type identification for Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176,
 security enforcement in iot,” in 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference 2016.
 on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2017, pp. 2177–2184.
 [6] I. Hafeez, M. Antikainen, A. Y. Ding, and S. Tarkoma, “Iot-keeper:
 Detecting malicious iot network activity using online traffic analysis
 at the edge,” IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management,
 vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 45–59, 2020.
 [7] T. D. Nguyen, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, H. Fereidooni, N. Asokan, and
 A.-R. Sadeghi, “DÏot: A federated self-learning anomaly detection system
 for iot,” in 2019 IEEE 39th International Conference on Distributed
 Computing Systems (ICDCS), 2019, pp. 756–767.
 [8] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A survey,”
 vol. 41, no. 3, 2009.
 [9] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2018.
[10] C. V. Wright, S. E. Coull, and F. Monrose, “Traffic morphing: An efficient
 defense against statistical traffic analysis,” in Network and Distributed
 System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2009.
[11] X. Cai, R. Nithyanand, T. Wang, R. Johnson, and I. Goldberg, “A
 systematic approach to developing and evaluating website fingerprinting
 defenses.” New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
 2014.
[12] M. Bilal and X. Xu, “Network-optimised spiking neural network
 (nos) scheduling for 6g o-ran: Spectral margin and delay-tail
 control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11291, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.11291
[13] A. Tavanaei, M. Ghodrati, S. R. Kheradpisheh, T. Masquelier, and
 A. Maida, “Deep learning in spiking neural networks,” Neural Networks,
 vol. 111, pp. 47–63, 2019.
[14] D. Marković, A. Mizrahi, D. Querlioz, and J. Grollier, “Physics for
 neuromorphic computing,” Nature Reviews Physics, 2020.
[15] A. Demers, S. Keshav, and S. Shenker, “Analysis and simulation of a fair
 queueing algorithm,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 19, no. 4,
 p. 1–12, 1989. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/75247.75248
[16] A. Parekh and R. Gallager, “A generalized processor sharing approach
 to flow control in integrated services networks: the single-node case,”
 IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 344–357,
 1993.
[17] A. K. Parekh and R. G. Gallager, “A generalized processor sharing
 approach to flow control in integrated services networks: The
 multiple-node case,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 2,
 no. 2, 1994.
[18] K. Nichols and V. Jacobson, “Controlling queue delay,” Queue, vol. 10,
 no. 5, 2012.
[19] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious
 traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Network and
 Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2023.
[20] Y. Qing, Q. Yin, X. Deng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, K. Sun, K. Xu, J. Zhang, and
 Q. Li, “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework for detecting
 encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Network and Distributed System
 Security Symposium (NDSS), 2024.
[21] L. Gao, C. Fu, X. Deng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Wedjat: Detecting
 sophisticated evasion attacks via real-time causal analysis,” in
 Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
 Discovery and Data Mining V.1, ser. KDD ’25. New York, NY, USA:
 Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, p. 342–353. [Online].
 Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3690624.3709218
[22] S. Sattar, S. Khan, M. I. Khan, A. Akhmediyarova, O. Mamyrbayev,
 D. Kassymova, D. Oralbekova, and J. Alimkulova, “Anomaly
 detection in encrypted network traffic using self-supervised learning,”
 Scientific Reports, vol. 15, p. 26585, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-08568-0
[23] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, Y. Mathov, Y. Mirsky, A. Shabtai,
 D. Breitenbacher, and Y. Elovici, “N-baiot—network-based detection of
 iot botnet attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing,
 vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
[24] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security,
 privacy and trust in internet of things: The road ahead,” Computer
 Networks, vol. 76, pp. 146–164, 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
 //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128614003971

 Authorized licensed use limited to: National Institute of Technology- Delhi. Downloaded on May 18,2026 at 09:54:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.