4278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 NT-Transformer: A Non-Pretrained Encrypted
 Network Traffic Classification Model
 Zhenzhen Yan , Member, IEEE, Lizhi Peng , Member, IEEE, Peiqiang Liu, Yingshuo Bao ,
 and Bo Yang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network traffic classification plays an indispensable
role in network management, Quality of Service (QoS),
and cybersecurity. With the widespread encryption techniques
applied to network traffic, it has become increasingly challenging
to classify network traffic into different management groups
accurately. In recent years, pre-training Transformer-based
models have been successfully applied to Natural Language
Processing (NLP), and researchers have also introduced such
models into encrypted network traffic analysis. However, besides
the similarities of words in NLP and byte codes in network
traffic, there exist essential differences between them, which
may cause inefficacy of the pretrained model when being
applied to new traffic data. In this paper, we propose a nonpretrained encrypted network traffic classification model based
on Transformer called NT-Transformer, which can directly learn
labeled network traffic features at two levels of granularity,
namely, byte level (uni-gram or bi-gram) and flow level
(packet size and packet inter-arrival time), without the relatively
expensive pre-training procedure of unlabeled data. This method
is validated on three public datasets and three sets of recently
collected network traffic data. Experimental results indicate that
in some scenarios, pretrained models offer limited performance
gains when applied to new encrypted network traffic data not
encountered during pre-training, and NT-Transformer with
uni-gram byte representation outperforms the state-of-the-art
models in terms of pushing the F1 score up by 0.25% - 2.24%.
 Index Terms—Encrypted network traffic classification, transformers, byte representation, uni-gram, pre-training, deep
learning.
 Fig. 1. Global encrypted traffic protocols and classes.
 I. I NTRODUCTION

N ETWORK traffic classification, aiming at identifying and
 classifying network traffic into different management
groups, plays an essential role in network planning, network
monitoring, Quality of Service (QoS), and intrusion/malware and demand for data security and user privacy, network
detection. In recent years, with the increasing requirement traffic encryption has been widely utilized. According to the
 Google Transparency Report, the percentage of data that is
 Received 1 July 2025; revised 1 December 2025 and 14 January 2026; encrypted across Google products and services has grown from
accepted 8 April 2026. Date of publication 13 April 2026; date of current 50% to 96% [1] in the last ten years. Fig. 1 illustrates the
version 28 April 2026. This work is supported by Shandong Provincial
Natural Science Foundation under Grant No. ZR2022QF151, in part by the contributions to the global encrypted traffic by the top three
the Opening Fund of Shandong Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Intelligent encryption protocols and the top four traffic classes. TLS 1.3
Computing, in part by the Jinan Scientific Research Leader Studio, China, and QUIC(which also incorporates elements of the TLS 1.3
under Grant No.202228114, and in part by the TaiShan Scholars Program
under Grant No. tstp20240828. The associate editor coordinating the review standard) account for 65.84% of encrypted traffic [2], [3],
of this article and approving it for publication was N. Limam. (Corresponding and video streaming is responsible for over 80% of encrypted
author: Zhenzhen Yan.) traffic volume [4]. The ubiquity of encryption has protected
 Zhenzhen Yan and Peiqiang Liu are with Shandong Technology and
Business University, Yantai 264005, China (e-mail: zhengina27@163.com). Internet users and data to a great extent, while at the same
 Lizhi Peng and Bo Yang are with Shandong Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous time posing major challenges to network traffic classification.
Intelligent Computing, University of Jinan, Jinan 250022, China, and also Cybercriminals and malware can take advantage of advanced
with the Quan Cheng Laboratory, Jinan 250103, China.
 Yingshuo Bao is with Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai 519087, China. encryption techniques, such as TLS, VPN, etc., to evade the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3683410 detection of firewalls, Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), and
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4279

Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), which makes the work of language features and rules usually do not change rapidly over
accurate network traffic classification indispensable. time, which is the key point to the success of pretrained models
 There are three main categories of methods for net- in the NLP field because we use languages to communicate
work traffic classification: port-based, Deep Packet Inspection between individuals, interpret each other’s ideas, and make
(DPI)-based, and Machine Learning (ML)-based [5]. The ourselves understood, and fast-evolving rules contradict these
accuracy of port-based methods is relatively low due to purposes of languages. Another aspect of natural languages
the commonly used port disguises and dynamic ports. The is that encryption is rarely used, because it contradicts the
DPI-based methods focus on inspecting packet payload to purpose of communication. Such characteristics of languages
find keywords or patterns, which can raise privacy concerns make the pretrained models advantageous when dealing with
because they need to dig deep into the content of packets. various downstream tasks, in that there is no need to build
Besides the privacy issues, DPI-based methods often incur models from scratch, and optimization can usually be reached
high computational overhead and are only applicable for with a relatively insignificant amount of fine-tuning data and
unencrypted network traffic [6]. The ML-based methods can computational cost.
be further divided into two classes of models [7] based The story is different when analyzing network traffic.
on whether the input to ML models is raw traffic or not: Besides the application (e.g., Gmail, Youtube, etc.) and service
1) divide-and-conquer model, where packet and flow features (e.g., email, video, etc.) fingerprints applied to the data,
are manually selected or designed from raw network traffic as the content being transferred is largely dominated by end
the input to ML models. The performance in terms of accuracy users, e.g., in a chat scenario, the end users may send any
and computational cost is highly dependent on the quality combinations of words, pictures, videos, and voice messages,
and quantity of the hand-selected or hand-designed features; without following any specific rules about which item should
2) end-to-end model, where raw traffic is fed directly into ML come after which. For security purposes, encryption has been
models without any human expertise, which may be prone to widely applied to network traffic. Languages aim to convey
misinterpretation and overgeneralization. Either one of these meaning, while network traffic tries to prevent understandtwo models may overlook some useful information that the ing of its content until it is decrypted. These facts indicate
other model covers, e.g., the divide-and-conquer model ignores that there are more unpredictable features to learn in the
the byte-level details, and the end-to-end model doesn’t take network traffic classification scenario compared to NLP, and
the flow-level knowledge into consideration. pretrained models using one pool of datasets may not add the
 In recent years, Transformer-based deep learning frame- expected value when applied to another pool of previously
works have achieved great breakthroughs in Natural Language unseen datasets. The instability characteristic of network traffic
Processing (NLP) [8], [9], [10], Computer Vision (CV) [11], undermines the reusability and transferability of pretrained
speech processing [12], multi-modal [13], and many other models, which usually require a significant amount of time
fields [14]. These deep learning frameworks usually consist of and computational resources to be pretrained.
two steps: pre-training and fine-tuning. During pre-training, In this paper, we propose a non-pretrained encrypted
the models learn from a tremendous amount of unlabeled network traffic classification model, called Network Trafficdata, which is typically computationally expensive, but com- Transformer (NT-Transformer), which can directly learn
promising on data can lead to performance degradation. For labeled network traffic features from both byte level (uni-gram
fine-tuning, the models’ parameters can be initialized with the or bi-gram) and flow level (packet size and inter-packet arrival
pretrained values as a starting point, and further tuned using time), without the relatively expensive pre-training procedure
labeled data from specific downstream tasks. of unlabeled data. The main contributions are as follows:
 The Transformer-based pre-training and fine-tuning models • We validate that when data used for fine-tuning is samhave been applied to encrypted network traffic classifica- pled from the same pool as data used for pre-training,
tion in the last two years [15], [16], [17], [18], where the pretrained models can both improve the success rate
unlabeled traffic payload data are transformed to pattern- of fine-tuning tasks and expedite the tuning process;
preserved tokens for pre-training, and a small portion of However, pretrained models often provide limited gains
these unlabeled data are used in the fine-tuning phase after when applied to new, previously unseen datasets.
adding the labels back. These models have demonstrated • We propose a hybrid model, namely NT-Transformer,
superior performance compared to the classic deep learning combining the divide-and-conquer and end-to-end model,
models, such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and in which both packet and flow level features are encoded
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), with the overhead of a as the input to the model. The byte-level features enable
massive amount of data and computing power required in the model to learn contextual semantics, while the flowthe pre-training step. The pretrained models are built with level features provide information about the fingerprints
the intention of “once and for many”, which means that of applications and services, as well as user behaviors,
once a pretrained model is created, it is expected to facilitate network conditions, etc.
many future downstream tasks. However, there exist significant • NT-Transformer is able to classify network traffic at three
differences between words/sentences/paragraphs in a natural levels of granularities, i.e., application level, flow level,
language and bytes/flows/sessions in network traffic. During and content level, and NT-Transformer with uni-gram
the pre-training step of NLP, phrases, grammar rules, idiomatic encoding plus flow level encoding outperforms the stateexpressions, etc., of a language are learned. These learned of-the-art models on one public dataset and three newly
4280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 collected datasets by 0.25% - 2.24%, which demonstrates models. Sirinam et al. apply CNNs to extract representations
 its effectiveness and generalization ability. from raw packet direction sequences [27]. Shapira and Shavitt
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II sum- [23], [24] convert packet sizes in consecutive time slices
marizes the related work. Section III describes our proposed of flows into FlowPic images which are fed into a CNN.
model, NT-Transformer, in detail. Experiments and analyses Based on this approach, Horowicz et al. [25] propose miniare presented in Section IV. Finally, we conclude this paper FlowPic with augmentation techniques in few-shot learning.
in Section V. Liu et al. adopt Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [28]
 to learn representative features from raw flows. Combination
 II. R ELATED W ORK models of both CNNs and RNNs have been designed to obtain
 both packet and flow features [5], [33], [35], [36], [37] or
 In this section, we briefly summarize the methods that
 both spatial and temporal characteristics [32], [46] [30]. Graph
have been applied to the network traffic classification field,
 Neural Networks (GNNs) models [47] are also developed
including fingerprint-based methods, feature engineeringusing raw traffic and packet/flow features [38], [39]. These
based methods, deep learning methods, and Transformer
 DL-based methods have achieved superior performance until
models. A comparative overview of these related works is prothe attempt to apply Transformer-based models to the network
vided in Table I, which details their methodological categories,
 traffic classification field is made.
classifiers, utilized features, use of multi-granular features,
adoption of two-phase training, and evaluation datasets. D. Transformer Models
 In recent years, Transformer-based models have pushed the
A. Fingerprint-Based Methods performance on tasks in many fields to unprecedented levels,
 Unlike traditional DPI-based methods that can raise privacy especially the advancements in NLP, CV, speech processing,
concerns and fail when being applied to encrypted traffic, etc. [48]. Since natural languages and communication proto-
FlowPrint [19] introduces a semi-supervised approach for cols share some common characteristics, researchers have been
constructing mobile app fingerprints by combining temporal, inspired to apply Transformer models to the network traffic
device, destination, and packet size features, without inspect- classification field. ConViTML [42] applies CNNs to the byte
ing packet payload information. However, these fingerprints images created using the first 784 bytes of packets, and then
have the potential to be tampered under VPN or proxy scenar- divides the images into patches, which are then flattened as
ios, making traffic in these virtual networks evade detection. the input to Transformer. YaTC [18] processes each flow into
 a multi-level flow representation matrix. These works embed
B. Feature Engineering-Based Methods byte/packet/flow level information into fixed-sized images, but
 have not considered that some pixels may not enhance the
 Feature engineering-based methods (or divide-and-conquer
 traffic classification results, e.g., the encrypted packet payload
methods [7]) divide the complex network traffic classification
 pixels may not be as informative as packet header pixels. PERT
problem into several simpler sub-problems. The workflow
 [40], ET-BERT [15], and TrafficFormer [17] use byte-pair to
usually includes three sequential steps: 1) Task-specific feaencode the hexadecimal raw byte sequences, because with
tures are first hand-designed; 2) These features are then
 byte-pair, the range of byte values is comparable to the size
extracted or generated from raw network traffic; 3) Finally, the
 of a common NLP vocabulary. However, these works mainly
feature data is input to classic statistical-based or behavioralfocus on how to prepare the network traffic to be as close
based machine learning approaches [44]. Based on the traffic
 as possible to NLP words in order to apply the Transformer
discriminators summerized by Moore et al., there can be as
 model, and overlook the unique and intrinsic characteristics of
many as 249 features to characterize Internet flows [45], and
 network traffic. PEAN [41] and FlowBERT [16] use both raw
feature engineering-based methods generally adopt a subset of
 bytes and length sequence as their inputs, which extends the
these for their specific research goals, e.g., AppScanner [20]
 type of tokens. They lack the analysis of whether their byte
generates statistical features from flows, BIND [21] adopts
 representations are optimal, and the packet inter-arrival time
both burst size and burst time as input to ML classifiers,
 is also neglected.
and Xie et al. propose a new feature: byte code distribution
 To the best of our knowledge, existing Transformer-based
[22], which is generated from raw traffic bytes. However,
 traffic analysis models follow the framework of pre-training
these methods heavily rely on human-engineered task-specific
 and fine-tuning, in which a model is pretrained on enorfeatures, which may limit their generalizability.
 mous unlabeled data to learn the contextual representations
 of network traffic, especially through the “mask” process that
C. Deep Learning Methods randomly masks a certain percent, e.g., 15%, of the tokens,
 Deep learning (DL), the hottest branch of ML that uses to predict the masked token by fusing bidirectional (i.e., both
deep neural networks as learning methods, has been widely the left and right) context [9]. When fine-tuning task-specific
applied to network traffic classification with raw traffic as models, the downstream tasks can take advantage of the
input to automatically learn discriminative features. In 2017, pretrained model to reduce the demand for labeled input data
Wang et al. firstly tried to use Convolutional Neural Networks and computing power. However, besides the characteristics
(CNNs) to learn features from raw traffic [7], [44]. Since in common, one major difference between natural languages
then, many researchers have followed this way of applying DL and network traffic is whether the representations learned can
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4281

 TABLE I
 R ELATED W ORKS IN N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION TASKS
4282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 2. NT-transformer framework.

represent a considerable amount of future downstream tasks, PERT [40], ET-BERT [15], and TrafficFormer [17], ensuring
which can highly influence the reusability and effectiveness of equitable comparisons. This base configuration substantially
the pretrained models. lowers computational demands, often reducing training time
 by more than two-thirds on identical hardware compared to
 III. NT-T RANSFORMER larger variants [49]. Nonetheless, pre-training with this base
 architecture remains resource-intensive, a finding consistent
 NT-Transformer differs from the related Transformer-based with existing literature [40] and corroborated in Section IV-E.
models in that it learns from labeled input directly, without
the pre-training step. Our hypothesis is: network traffic, in
 A. Raw Traffic to Tokens
terms of packets and payload bytes, has the representations
of actual data, user behaviors, application/service signatures, Raw network traffic data in.pcap or.pcapng format is first
and network conditions. This combination of representations cleaned and processed to remove noise and anomalies, e.g.,
can be learned to classify network traffic within the lifespan of ARP and DHCP packets are deleted; Ethernet header is
flows/sessions and a longer period if these representations stay removed, since it does not pertain to the end-to-end traffic
relatively unchanged. Compared with natural languages, which classification task; IP addresses and port numbers are masked
have grammar rules, idiomatic expressions that are supposed to prevent dependence on easily spoofed fields. The cleaned
to be invariable at least for years, network traffic can vary traffic is grouped into flows or sessions based on task-specific
frequently when end users decide to send/receive something requirements. A flow is defined as a sequence of packets
different, change their sending/receiving behaviors, or there that share the same 5-tuple: (source IP address, destination
is an application update, etc. The variability characteristic of IP address, source port, destination port, and the transport
network traffic can compromise the transferability and gener- layer protocol identifier), f lowi = {pi1 , pi2 , . . . , pin , i, n ∈
alizability of pretrained models. An experimental analysis is Z+ }. A session is defined as a pair of flows with both
provided in Section IV to discuss the reusability of pretrained source/destination IP addresses and source/destination port
models on previously unseen datasets. numbers switched to represent a conversation between two
 The framework of NT-Transformer is shown in Fig. 2.
 i
 endpoints. sessioni = {f low(src−dst) i
 , f low(dst−src) , i ∈
We transform a combination of raw traffic bytes, packet Z+ }. A flow is unidirectional, and a session is bidirectional.
size, and packet inter-arrival time into tokens as the input After traffic is grouped into sessions, a slicing procedure is
to the NT-Transformer model. NT-Transformer adopts a base performed to divide the sessions into a series of bursts [15] as
Transformer encoder architecture comprising L = 12 layers shown in the following equation(1):
(i.e., Transformer blocks), each with A = 12 self-attention
 (
 i bursti(src−dst) = {pi(src−dst),1 , . . . , pi(src−dst),k }
heads. The model uses a hidden size H = 768 (i.e., dimension) burst =
and accepts input sequences of up to N = 512 tokens. bursti(dst−src) = {pi(dst−src),1 , . . . , pi(dst−src),l },
This parameterization aligns with benchmark models including i, k, l ∈ Z+ , pi ∈ sessioni , bursti ⊆ sessioni (1)
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4283

where k and l denote that there are k packets from previous works that require fixed-size input from packets/flows
f low(src−dst) , and l packets from f low(dst−src) in this burst. [18], [42] [15], [43], NT-Transformer has the flexibility to
In our model, we try two values for the burst size: k+l = 1000 adjust input byte sequence length, append or remove the
or 100. For most comparisons, we use 1000 as the burst size; packet size or inter-arrival time sequences to achieve the
for some datasets that contain classes with a smaller number best performance. At last, labels are attached to the token
of packets, we choose 100 as the burst size for all classes in sequences, which are then ready to be divided into training
order to have enough samples per class. So, a burst can have dataset, validation dataset, and testing dataset according to the
1000 or 100 packets, and a burst is a subset of a session. ratio of 8:1:1.
 For each packet in a burst, we keep the first 40, 60, or i
 T okenSequencei = {[CLS], BT1i , BT2i , . . . , BTm , [BSS],
80 bytes of L2 payload for the next encoding step, since
40 bytes contain IP and transport layer headers, 60 bytes
 i
 ST1i , ST2i , . . . , STni , [ST S], T T1i , T T2i , . . . , T Tn−1 }
contain extra optional fields and application header, and 80 i, m, n ∈ Z+
bytes also contain the first few bytes of the actual payload. (BT : ByteT oken, ST : SizeT oken, T T : T imeT oken)
NT-Transformer tries all these options and picks one with the (2)
best performance. A study of these three L2 byte choices is
performed in Section IV-F.
 B. Training NT-Transformer
 Since encrypted network traffic has no semantic meaning
that can be interpreted by humans, in order to leverage the Both the input tokens and their sequence positions are
Transformer model, traffic bursts are transformed into word- embedded into vectors of dimension d=768, the token veclike tokens similar to natural languages. Specifically, bytes of tors and position vectors are added together to generate the
packets in a burst are encoded as hexadecimal numbers. We final embeddings, so the final embedding of each token in
use two representations: uni-gram and bi-gram, which mean the input sequences is represented by the sum of its token
one byte and two bytes per encoding unit. For the bi-gram embedding and position embedding. The token embeddings
representation, the hexadecimal number of every two adjacent contain features of network traffic byte, packet size, and packet
bytes is encoded, and for two bytes, the decimal value of inter-arrival time, while the position embeddings help to learn
each token can range from 0 to 216 − 1 = 65535, and the the order and temporal relationships of these features. We use
encoding dictionary size is 65536 plus the special tokens that the same sine and cosine functions of different frequencies for
are introduced next. For the uni-gram representation, although positional encodings as introduced in the Transformer paper
only 28 =256 entries are needed, we still stick with 65536 [8]. The NT-Transformer model is trained on the final labeled
plus the number of special tokens as our dictionary size to embeddings. The core concept of Transformer self-attention
accommodate the packet size and inter-arrival time features is to first calculate the scaled dot product attention of Query
that are introduced later. A comparison of these two payload (Q), Key (K), and then the scaled attention scores are passed
byte representations is conducted in Section IV-G. through a softmax function to obtain attention weights that
 Although byte-level feature is the finest granularity of sum to 1, finally, the dot product of attention weights and
network traffic representation, which represents the nitty-gritty Value matrix (V ) is calculated as shown in equation(3) to get
details of a burst, there are still more features that a burst can the matrix of attention outputs.
provide, e.g., if a file is transferred using different applications QK T
  
or services, the bytes of the file are encapsulated in packets, Attention(Q, K, V ) = sof tmax √ V
 dk
and different applications, services can adopt different packet
 dk is the dimension of queries and keys (3)
sizes, and the packet inter-arrival time feature can also reflect
the user-specific behaviors, network-specific conditions, and Q, K, and V are linearly transformed from the same
OS-specific patterns [6]. Therefore, we further encode a burst input matrix X through three learned weight matrices WQ ,
at a coarser level of granularity: flow level. Both packet WK , and WV . The output of the 12 transformer layers is
size and packet inter-arrival time are encoded as hexadecimal passed to a fully connected layer, and then a softmax function
numbers as well. Packet size fits well with the same encoding is applied to get the predicted classification probabilities.
dictionary of size 65536. For packet inter-arrival time, which During the training phase, the model parameters are updated
is too small to fit the encoding dictionary, we multiply 100,000 through minimizing the cross-entropy loss function as shown
to each number to scale it while changing the time unit from in equation(4), where y is the true label one-hot encoding
seconds to hundredths of milliseconds. We use two special vector, and ŷ is the predicted probability vector. Both vectors
tokens, namely byte size separator token [BSS] and size time are of length q. The algorithm is summarized in algorithm 1.
separator token [STS], to separate byte stream, packet size, q
 X
and packet inter-arrival time token sequences. [BSS] is used l(y, ŷ) = − yi log ŷi (4)
to separate byte stream and packet size, [STS] is used to i=1
separate packet size and packet inter-arrival time. In addition,
at the beginning of each sequence, a special classification IV. E XPERIMENTS
token [CLS] is prepended, and it is used as a sequence- In this section, three tasks (Section IV-B) are conducted
level representation for classification in the final hidden layer. on six sets of encrypted network traffic data (Section IV-A)
The token sequence is illustrated in equation (2). Unlike the to investigate the inefficacy problem of pretrained models on
4284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 NT-Transformer Algorithm TABLE II
 1: procedure NT-T RANSFORMER ALGORITHM DATASETS
 2: for all f ∈ F do . F: pcap/pcapng files
 3: cleaned traf f ic ← F . traffic cleaning
 4: sessions ← cleaned traf f ic . group traffic into
 sessions based on 5-tuple
 5: session bursts ← sessions . slice sessions
 into session bursts based on the number of packets
 threshold
 6: for all session burst ∈ session bursts do
 7: byte tokens ← session burst . extract
 byte tokens from session burst
 8: size tokens ← session burst . extract
 size tokens from session burst
 9: time tokens ← session burst . extract
 time tokens from session burst packets from 13 services generated by 16 applications. There
10: burst tokens ← [CLS] + byte tokens + are 6 NonVPN services and 7 VPN services, and its size is
 [BSS]+size tokens+[ST S]+time tokens+ 27.7 GB. For some of the services, we further divide the data
 label . generate labeled burst tokens based on applications, so that the number of labels = 20.
11: f inal embeddings ← token embeddings + 2) Dataset II: CSTNET-TLS1.3: The second dataset is
 position embeddings ← burst tokens the publicly available CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset [15] collected
 . generate token embeddings and posi- under CSTNET [51], which contains encrypted traffic using
 tion embeddings, and then final embeddings the new encryption protocol TLS 1.3. This dataset is 9.1 GB,
12: hidden state ← f inal embeddings . get the and has 120 applications, so the number of labels = 120.
 final hidden state after 12 transformer layers 3) Dataset III: USTC-TFC: The third publicly available
13: O ← f ully − connected layer(hidden state) dataset is USTC-TFC [44]. This dataset is 3.71 GB and
 . get the unnormalized output which is repre- consists of ten types of malware traffic and ten types of normal
 sented as a vector of q elements traffic, so the number of labels = 20.
14: ŷ ← sof tmax(O) . get the normalized 4) Dataset IV: Streaming(Application): Since the last
 probability distribution vector of size q decade, streaming applications have become more and more
15: ˆl ← argmax(ŷ) . get the predicted popular. Cisco estimated that live video usage accounts for
 classification label 82% of Internet traffic [52], posing a number of management
16: end for challenges for the Internet. To facilitate the stream traffic
17: end for analysis studies, we collected a set of Internet streaming traffic
18: end procedure between January and March 2024 as our fourth dataset, which
 contains flows from eight popular livestreaming applications
 in China, i.e., Bilibili, Douyin, WeChat, Taobao, JD, Meituan,
previously unseen datasets, and to prove the effectiveness of Weibo, and Zhihu. The size of this dataset is 4.5 GB, and the
our model by comparing it to the state-of-the-art deep learning number of labels = 8.
models. The results are presented in Section IV-D. The Time 5) Dataset V: File Transfer and Streaming: In the fifth
savings by avoiding pre-training are presented in Section IV-E. dataset, our goal is to investigate whether network traffic
Two ablation studies on byte representation using uni-gram content has patterns and rules that are analogous to phrases,
and bi-gram and three L2 payload byte choices are performed grammar, and idioms in natural languages, which stay relain Section IV-G and Section IV-F, respectively. A convergence tively invariable over time. We initiated three file transfers
speed analysis is provided in Section IV-H to demonstrate of the same file to three different cloud applications: Google
that there is negligible overhead for our model when being Cloud, Tencent Cloud, and Baidu Cloud, in the same hardware
applied directly to new datasets without the pre-training step. setting and network environment. The three sets of file transfer
We further evaluate the models’ performance in open-world traffic for the first ten minutes were captured. In this dataset,
traffic classification in Section IV-I. three sets of streaming traffic from YouTube, WeChat Live,
 and Baidu Live were included for comparison purposes, so
A. Datasets we have two services (file transfer and streaming) from three
 Table II illustrates the six datasets used in our experiments. companies: Google, Tencent, and Baidu, respectively. The size
The first three are publicly available, while the remaining three of the third dataset is: 5.3 GB, the number of labels = 6, and
are our collections. A subset of special protocols is listed in the this dataset was collected in March 2024.
fourth column, while the common protocols like TCP, UDP, 6) Dataset VI: Streaming(Content): The sixth dataset
and HTTP are not included. focuses on the analysis of streaming content, which is used
 1) Dataset I: ISCX: The first dataset is the publicly avail- to classify streaming traffic based on genres. There are very
able ISCX VPN-nonVPN traffic dataset [50], which contains few studies concerning this problem; most work related to
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4285

 TABLE III
 P REVIOUSLY S EEN DATASETS FOR T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ODELS

this topic is to identify whether a network flow is streaming from video comments can be challenging [22], [55]. Dataset
or not [53], [54], but not the streaming content type [22]. IV: Streaming(application) (Section IV-A.4) and Dataset VI:
So we collected our sixth dataset containing streaming flows Streaming(content) (Section IV-A.6) are used for this task.
from Bilibili with three genres, i.e., chat, game, and outdoor,
in April 2023. The size of this dataset is 6.7 GB, and the
number of labels = 3. C. Implementation and Evaluation Details
 Our experiments are implemented with PyTorch 2.0.1, UER
B. Tasks [56], and ET-BERT [15]. The jobs are run on NVIDIA
 Task 1: Reusability of Pretrained Models on Network GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. The AdamW optimizer is adopted
Traffic. The first task aims to investigate whether network in the training phase, and the learning rate is set to 2 × 10−5 ,
traffic classification tasks on previously seen and unseen the batch size is 32, and the dropout rate is 0.5.
datasets can benefit from pretrained models. Table III sum- Four evaluation metrics are used: accuracy, precision, recall,
marizes which datasets (out of the six datasets illustrated in and F1 score. Accuracy is calculated as the ratio of correct
Table II) are previously seen for six state-of-the-art traffic predictions to the total number of input samples, which tells
classification models. Dataset I (Section IV-A.1) was used us how well the model is performing in terms of correct
to build pretrained models for ET-BERT, TrafficFormer, and predictions. Precision is calculated as the number of true
YaTC, Dataset II (Section IV-A.2) was used by ET-BERT, positive predictions divided by the number of true positive
and Dataset III (Section IV-A.3) was used by YaTC in their and false positive predictions, which tells us the percentage
pretrained models, respectively. Dataset IV (Section IV-A.4), of positive predictions that are actually positive. Recall is
Dataset V (Section IV-A.5), and Dataset VI (Section IV-A.6) calculated as the number of true positive predictions divided
are previously unseen datasets for all models. Our goal is to by the actual positive samples, which tells us the percentage
verify whether the pretrained models can provide the “once of positive samples that are predicted positive. F1 score is
and for many” benefit as intended. defined as the harmonic mean of precision and recall, with a
 Task 2: Differences between Network Traffic and Natu- higher value indicating a better balance between precision and
ral Languages. The purpose of the second task is to answer recall. In our experimental results, micro accuracy is adopted
the question: “Why do pretrained models provide little benefit [57], while macro precision, macro recall, and macro F1 [41]
when being applied to previously unseen network traffic?” are calculated as follows: the value per label is computed first,
Differences between network traffic and natural languages and then the average value across all the labels is used as the
are studied to validate that there exist unique and intrinsic result presented in the following table. The four evaluation
characteristics in network traffic that differentiate it from metrics are illustrated in Equations (5) to (8).
natural languages and result in inefficacy of pretrained models. PN
 i=1 T Pi
Dataset V: File Transfer and Streaming (Section IV-A.5) is micro Accuracy = (5)
 All predictions
used for this task.
 T Pi
 Task 3: Network Traffic Classification Based on Appli- P recisioni =
cation and Content The third task aims to classify network T Pi + F Pi
 N
traffic from two levels of granularity: application and content, 1 X
 macro P recision = P recisioni (6)
to verify the transferability and generalizability of our model. N i=1
Traffic classification based on application has been widely T Pi
studied, while very little research has been performed con- Recalli =
 T Pi + F Ni
cerning the content classification, because classifying traffic N
purely based on content from the same service and application 1 X
 macro Recall = Recalli (7)
without any knowledge of the original videos or any help N i=1
4286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON ISCX, CSTNET-TLS1.3, AND USTC-TFC DATASETS

 2 × P recisioni × Recalli
 F 1i = bytes per token. All the NT-Transformer models do not include
 P recisioni + Recalli a pre-training phase, whereas PERT, ET-BERT, TrafficFormer,
 N
 1 X and YaTC models do.
 macro F 1 = F 1i (8) As shown in Table IV, our analysis reveals two key trends.
 N i=1
 First, Transformer-based models generally surpass other
 According to the recently published network traffic clas- approaches. Second, among input features, the byte-level
sification results [15], [17], [18], [40] Transformer-based feature proves more informative than packet-level features
pre-training models significantly outperform the state-of-the- like packet size or inter-arrival time. This is evidenced by
art fingerprint-based, feature engineering-based, and traditional the superior performance of NT-Transformer(Byte) over
deep learning methods on multiple public datasets. There- its variants using only size, time, or even their combined
fore, in our experiments, four Transformer-based pre-training features. Furthermore, a comparison between FlowPic [23] and
models: PERT, ET-BERT, TrafficFormer, and YaTC are NT-Transformer(Size and Time) highlights the advantage of
selected for comparisons, two deep learning models: FlowPic, preserving raw sequential data. Although both utilize packet
GraphDApp, and one deep learning + Transformer model: size and inter-arrival time, FlowPic transforms this information
ConViTML are also selected to extend the coverage of com- into images by summing packet counts within fixed time
parisons. If there is a pretrained model available on GitHub bins of fixed time block sizes (e.g., 60 seconds for FlowPic
for a Transformer-based model, it is added during the training [23] or 15 seconds for mini-FlowPic [25]). This process
phase of this model. If a pretrained model is not required, we discards the fine-grained, packet-by-packet sequence and
train the model directly. Each comparison model is trained for severs correlations at the imposed time boundary. In contrast,
different number of epochs to get its best performance, and NT-Transformer(Size and Time) processes the original,
the input data requirements for different models are met with unaltered sequences, allowing the self-attention mechanism to
our best effort, except that some studies only require the MAC capture the full context and temporal dependencies, leading
addresses to be wiped off from Ethernet headers [42], in our to its stronger performance.
comparisons, all the input data is cleaned and processed as On the ISCX dataset, ET-BERT achieves the best
discussed in Section III-A. performance, followed by YaTC and TrafficFormer, which
 rank second and third, respectively. Note that the full ISCX
D. Comparison Results dataset is included in the pre-training step of ET-BERT and
 1) Reusability of Pretrained Models on Network Traf- YaTC, while only the nonVPN part of this data is included
fic: The notations (Byte), (Size), (Time), and (Size and in TrafficFormer’s pre-training phase, and the downstream
Time) appended to NT-Transformer indicate the type of input classification task is also on the full ISCX dataset; this
sequence used: raw byte sequences, packet size sequences, can explain why TrafficFormer’s performance is slightly
packet inter-arrival time sequences, or a combination of size lower than the other two models. ET-BERT outperforms
and time sequences, respectively. NT-Transformer (All) takes NT-Transformer(Byte), the latter is ET-BERT without the
the combination of all byte, size and time sequences as pre-training model. So the pre-training model pushes the F1
potential input tokens and selects the combination with the best score up by 1.18% when fine-tuning a dataset that has already
performance. Uni-gram means the byte feature is represented been included in the pre-training step. NT-Transformer(All,
using one byte per token, while bi-gram means double adjacent bi-gram) increases the F1 score by 0.59% compared with
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4287

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON R ESULTS ON S TREAMING ( APPLICATION ), F ILE T RANSFER AND S TREAMING , AND S TREAMING ( CONTENT ) DATASETS

NT-Transformer(Byte) because the additional flow level fea- From the F1 scores presented in Table V, we can observe
tures are appended to the input tokens. A similar pattern is also that NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) outperforms all the modevident in the results on the USTC-TFC dataset. YaTC yields els that include the pre-training step, specifically, the F1 score
the best performance in terms of F1 score, ET-BERT, and Traf- of NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) is 0.25%, 0.57%, and 0.7%,
ficFormer rank second and third, since this dataset is included higher than other models, respectively, which indicates the
in the pre-training phase of YaTC, the F1 scores of ET-BERT, pretrained model is not as effective as intended when being
TrafficFormer, and NT-Transformer are slightly lower than applied to new datasets that are not included in the pre-training
YaTC, which indicates that for this dataset, pretrained step, although the service types of the new datasets’ traffic
models gives the performance some but limited boost as have been included in the pretrained model. This implies that
well. besides the service type, there are some particular patterns
 However, pretrained models lose their advantages on the or rules specific to the new dataset that are not learned by
CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset, NT-Transformer with uni-gram rep- the pretrained models, and the learned application-level or
resentation outperforms the other models with more than payload-level features may not add value to downstream tasks
2.24% increase on F1 score. Specifically, NT-Transformer(uni- with new datasets as input. The intention of the pretrained
gram) increases the F1 score by 7.64% compared to ET-BERT, model is to improve the performance and speed up the process
which has this dataset included in its pre-training phase. For of specific downstream tasks, since the pre-training process
this experiment, NT-Transformer(uni-gram) picks only the first is usually expensive and time-consuming, and based on the
40 bytes of each packet instead of 60 or 80 bytes, which means results discussed above, this intention is not met.
the application header and the first few bytes of payload fail to 2) Differences Between Network Traffic and Natural Lanprovide any useful information for traffic classification because guages: Based on the findings from the first task discussed
this dataset is fully encrypted. In models with the pre-training above, we further investigate the differences between network
phase, fixed bytes and byte representations are used to build traffic and natural languages in this second task. We transfer
the pretrained models, e.g., ET-BERT and TrafficFormer keep the same file to three different cloud applications, with three
the first 64 bytes of each packet, YaTC picks up to the first 320 streaming flows added for comparison purposes, as discussed
bytes, and both ET-BERT and TrafficFormer adopt the bi-gram in Section IV-A.5.
representation. These fixed patterns can affect the performance From the results shown in Table V. NT-Transformer(All,
of pretrained models when dealing with complicated traffic uni-gram) outperforms all the other models. Although
classification jobs, such as up to 120 labels and encrypted NT-Transformer(Size) and NT-Transformer(Time) individually
payload. underform NT-Transformer(Byte), they both can give NT-
 Pretrained models fail to provide any benefit when applied Transformer(Byte) a boost when size and time features are
to the three previously unseen datasets, which contain stream- appended to the byte tokens in this experiment. This particular
ing and file transfer traffic. These datasets themselves were file being transferred was not used in the pre-training step;
not included in the pre-training step of any models; however, however, extensive file transfer data of diverse services was
streaming and file transfer traffic from various applications included. This indicates there are differences between NLP and
were included, which means the patterns and rules of these network traffic analysis: for NLP, pretrained models learn from
traffic types have already been learned by the pretrained a big corpus of language, the phrases, grammar, slang, etc, of
models. which will be conformed or reused in future communications.
4288 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 In this experiment, transferring the same file to three
different cloud applications is analogous to reading the
same paragraph to three people individually. In the latter
case, the three people would interpret the same information
from the same paragraph. In network traffic analysis,
NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) is able to identify the
difference of these three transfers and classify the transfer
traffic into three different categories, which means different
applications and cloud environments add their unique
signatures to the data being transferred using them. Every
flow is unique, even though the actual user data is the same.
The accurate identification of added streaming traffic from
applications that are products of the same companies as the
file transfer applications shows that different services (e.g., file
transfer and streaming) have their own special characteristics. Fig. 3. Ablation study on sample size of L2 payload (40 bytes, 60 bytes and
These results prove our hypothesis in Section III is true. 80 bytes).
 3) Network Traffic Classification Based on Application
and Content: In the third task, besides classifying network
traffic based on application or service, we also focus on data, application, user, network, etc., that can influence the
the streaming content classification. As shown in Table V, network traffic we are interested in. The ability to successfully
NT-Transformer(uni-gram) achieves at least a 0.25% improve- classify network traffic based on traffic content demonstrates
ment compared to all the other pretrained models on Dataset the transferability and generalizability of NT-Transformer.
IV, and a 0.7% improvement on Dataset VI. For Dataset IV,
the first 80 bytes plus packet size sequences are used, and
 E. Analysis of the Time Savings Achieved by Avoiding
for Dataset VI, the first 40 bytes sequences yield the best
 Pre-Training
performance. These experiments prove that NT-Transformer
has strong generalization ability; it can learn task-specific It is well-known that the pre-training step is highly timenetwork traffic features during the training step for diverse consuming, with the required duration depending on the model
types of downstream tasks. The pretrained model will help architecture, GPU hardware, and the volume of input data.
when the input data to downstream tasks is a subset of the data A key advantage of NT-Transformer is the substantial time
used for pre-training; however, under the scenarios of newly- savings it achieves by eliminating this step. To quantify this,
collected datasets, even though with previously learned service we conducted an analysis using the implementation described
types, pretrained models provide little benefit, which may put in Section IV-C, comparing our approach against two prethe value of applying pretrained models to the network traffic training-based baselines: ET-BERT and TrafficFormer.
classification field into doubt. We followed their prescribed pre-training procedure using
 Unlike phrases, grammar, and idioms in natural languages the Masked Burst Model (MBM) task. In this task, each
that can be learned once and used many times for language- token in the input sequence is randomly masked with a 15%
related downstream tasks, network traffic features contain probability. The chosen token is then replaced with a [MASK]
data-specific patterns, user-specific behaviors, network-specific token 80% of the time, replaced with a random token 10% of
conditions, and application-specific signatures. These features the time, or left unchanged 10% of the time. Our experiments
are ever-changing and unpredictable, and the combination of showed that pre-training on 1 GB and 2 GB of input data
all these features and encryption techniques undermines the took 2.65 hours and 5.24 hours, respectively, indicating a nearreusability of pretrained models. linear relationship between pre-training time and data size.
 Therefore, we should not expect a pretrained network traffic Given that the full pre-training datasets for ET-BERT and
model that only needs to be trained once on a tremendous TrafficFormer are approximately 30 GB and 18.8 GB, the
amount of data, and then it can facilitate our related future estimated total pre-training time for the MBM task alone is
network traffic analysis tasks on any newly-collected dataset, about 79.5 hours and 49.82 hours, respectively. It is imporeven if the newly-collected dataset is of previously learned tant to note that both models require additional pre-training
service types. Also, learned traffic features like application tasks—ET-BERT uses the Same-origin BURST Prediction
headers and payload data may affect the performance of (SBP) task, and TrafficFormer uses the Same Origin-Directionpretrained models, since these fields are encrypted, which does Flow (SODF) task—which would further increase the total
not convey any useful information in future downstream tasks. pre-training time.
 Instead, a network classification model like NT-Transformer The time savings achieved by forgoing pre-training are
that does not require any pretrained model, and takes both tremendous, especially when contrasted with the much shorter
packet-level and flow-level features that can capture task- fine-tuning phase. Pre-training occurs on the order of days,
specific network traffic features based on the user’s specific while fine-tuning typically requires only minutes/hours. This
requirements, is recommended for network traffic analysis stark difference highlights a major efficiency gain offered by
tasks. Because NT-Transformer can capture the details of the NT-Transformer approach.
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4289

Fig. 4. Ablation study on byte token representation (uni-gram vs. bi-gram).

F. Ablation Study on Sample Size of L2 Payload (40 Bytes, representation may not be optimal; therefore, an ablation
60 Bytes, and 80 Bytes) study is conducted to compare the byte representation using
 As mentioned in Section III-A, NT-Transformer tries the uni-gram and bi-gram. For this study, we use the six datasets
first 40, 60, and 80 bytes of L2 payload for encoding and introduced in Section IV-A.
picks the one that yields the best performance. In this section, From the results shown in Figure 4, we can observe that
we discuss the performance difference of these three options. for all six datasets, the uni-gram representation outperforms
 As illustrated in Figure 3, the first 40 bytes achieves the the bi-gram representation, with 0.92%, 14.29%, 1%, 0.08%,
highest accuracy on four datasets: ISCX, CSTNET-TLS1.3, 0.77%, and 0.57% improvement of F1 score, respectively. This
USTC-TFC, and Streaming(content). This indicates that the may seem counterintuitive, since bi-gram has 65536 encoding
application header and application payload fail to provide possibilities, while uni-gram only has 256. However, a bi-gram
effective information on traffic classes due to the encryption is two uni-grams plus relative bit position information, and
techniques applied to them, especially for the CSTNET- in NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram), with position embeddings
TLS1.3 dataset, which is fully encrypted using TLS 1.3. added to token embeddings, the temporal relations among all
For the ISCX and USTC-TFC datasets, there exists a small the byte tokens are learned, so no byte or position information
percentage of flows that are unencrypted, e.g., TCP, UDP, is lost in the uni-gram representation, and what’s more, for the
HTTP, and FTP traffic; therefore, the application header and same amount of dataset, uni-gram representation can actually
actual data bytes can convey some information on traffic provide richer input features, i.e., the occurrences of the 256
classes for the unencrytped flows, so the performance dif- possibilities of byte tokens and their temporal positions, since
ference among the three byte choices is smaller. The other there is a higher probability for the same uni-gram token
two datasets, Streaming (application) and File Transfer and to reappear for the model to learn, while for bi-gram with
Streaming, contain a higher proportion of unencrypted traffic, 65536 possibilities, this reapperance probability is much lower.
which explains why 80 bytes slightly outperforms 40 bytes on Therefore, in order to learn the relations of byte tokens and
these two datasets. temporal positions, more input data is needed for the bi-gram
 This study proves our flexible choice of L2 bytes is advanta- representation.
geous compared to fixed input, because different datasets may
consist of different amounts of encrypted traffic for which only H. Convergence Study of the Training Step (With Pretrained
IP and transport headers are beneficial in traffic classification. Model Vs. Without Pretrained Model)
The application header and user data can be considered as
“garbled text” since they are encrypted. Since accuracy and speed are two benefits that pretrained
 models are supposed to bring to the downstream tasks, accuracy is discussed in the above sections. In this section, the
G. Ablation Study on Byte Token Representation (Uni-Gram convergence speed of the training phase is studied using the
Vs. Bi-Gram) CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset. Experiments on the other datasets
 The related works mainly adopt the bi-gram representation exhibit similar patterns.
to represent the network traffic byte token pool, analogous From Figure 5, we can tell that the pretrained model gives
to the common word pool of a natural language. Due to the downstream task a good start: after the first epoch, the
the unique characteristics of network traffic, the bi-gram highest accuracy is 0.4624, which is achieved by ET-BERT,
4290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE VI
 C LASS VS . A LL O PEN - WORLD C OMPARISONS

 Second, in a more challenging fine-grained setting, we
 trained models on ten specific service+application categories
 (e.g., Bilibili Live, Douyin, Google File Transfer) and replaced
 three with unseen counterparts from the same coarse service
 (e.g., testing WeChat Live for Bilibili Live, JD Live for
 Douyin, Tencent Cloud for Google Cloud file transfer). In
 this scenario, all models failed. For instance, NT-Transformer,
 having learned features of a specific service+application, could
 not generalize to a different one within the same service.
 These findings highlight the significant challenge of openworld classification, especially at finer granularities. The goal
 is a model that captures generalizable features common to
 different services across diverse applications, while avoiding
Fig. 5. Convergence study of the training step on the CSTNET-TLS1.3
Dataset. overfitting to the specifics of individual service-application
 flows. In other words, the model needs to learn features
 that are discriminative enough to distinguish between traffic
because the CSTNET-TLS1.3 dataset is included in the pre- categories, yet sufficiently abstract to generalize beyond any
training step of ET-BERT. However, the growing speed of single instance. Significant progress on this issue has yet to be
accuracy is faster of NT-Transformer, which gradually catches made by the research community, positioning it as a priority
up and overtakes ET-BERT within 6 epochs to reach the for our future work.
highest training accuracy of 0.7736. After this point, NT-
Transformer’s training accuracy keeps growing until around V. C ONCLUSION
0.88, and there is no advantage in terms of training accuracy
that can be observed for the tasks with pretrained models. In this paper, the reusability and transferability of pretrained
 models in the applications of the network traffic classification
 field are studied in detail. A Transformer-based encrypted
I. Open-World Comparisons of the Class Vs. All Problems traffic classification model called NT-Transformer is proposed.
and Future Work NT-Transformer(All, uni-gram) can learn traffic features from
 Moving beyond traditional closed-world evaluations, we both byte level and flow level, without the relatively expeninvestigate open-world network traffic classification in this sive pre-training procedure using unlabeled data. Experiment
section. Inspired by FlowPic’s class vs. all approach [24], we results show that the uni-gram representation of traffic bytes
conducted experiments at two levels of granularity. achieves the optimal performance, and NT-Transformer can
 First, in a coarse-grained class vs. all setting, models were push the F1 score up by at least 0.25% - 2.24% on one public
trained to distinguish a target service (e.g., streaming) from dataset and three newly collected datasets. Extending from this
all others. During testing, the target class was replaced with work, we will explore more advanced approaches to tackle the
an unseen application (e.g., training on YouTube, WeChat open-world traffic classification problem.
Live, etc., testing on Zhihu Live). Results in Table VI
show that while this is an easier task than fine-grained ser- R EFERENCES
vice+application classification (discussed in Section IV-D), [1] (2014). Google Transparancy Report. [Online]. Available: https://
model performance drops significantly when confronted with transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview?hl=en
unseen traffic. NT-Transformer excelled in streaming classifi- [2] (2024). Year in Review 2024. [Online]. Available: https://
 radar.cloudflare.com/year-in-review/2024
cation, potentially due to its lack of a pre-training phase, while [3] (2024). Visualizing 2023 Web Traffic Trends Through ATI’s Lens.
FlowPic’s strength in capturing flow burstiness made it best [Online]. Available: https://www.keysight.com/blogs/en/tech/nwvs/2024/
for file transfer classification. 01/24/ati-2023-traffic-analysis
YAN et al.: NT-TRANSFORMER: A NON-PRETRAINED ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION MODEL 4291

[4] (2024). Global Internet Usage Trends in 2024. [Online]. Available: [28] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 https://hypestat.com/blog/global-internet-usage-trends-in-2024 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
[5] Z. Zou, J. Ge, H. Zheng, Y. Wu, C. Han, and Z. Yao, “Encrypted Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 traffic classification with a convolutional long short-term memory neural [29] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
 network,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Com- Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute Markov probamun., IEEE 16th Int. Conf. Smart City, IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Data Sci. bility fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Quality Service
 Syst. (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS), Jun. 2018, pp. 329–334. (IWQoS), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[6] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classification: [30] M. Lopez-Martin, B. Carro, A. Sanchez-Esguevillas, and J. Lloret,
 An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, May “Network traffic classifier with convolutional and recurrent neural net-
 2019. works for Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 18042–18050,
[7] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end 2017.
 encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural [31] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul. encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM -
 2017, pp. 43–48. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Jul.
[8] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, 2020, pp. 424–429.
 pp. 6000–6010. [32] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
[9] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no.
 Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. 107974.
 Technol., vol. 1, Jun. 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [33] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and
[10] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soricut, A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 “ALBERT: A Lite BERT for Self-supervised Learning of Language improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2020. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[11] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16 × 16 words: Transformers [34] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., “MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” Tech.
 2021. Rep., 2019, doi: 10.21227/maj9-vh13.
[12] A. Gulati et al., “Conformer: Convolution-augmented transformer for [35] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
 speech recognition,” in Proc. Interspeech, Oct. 2020, pp. 5036–5040. Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
[13] A. Shin, M. Ishii, and T. Narihira, “Perspectives and prospects on trans- J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
 former architecture for cross-modal tasks with language and vision,” Int. [36] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico,
 J. Comput. Vis., vol. 130, no. 2, pp. 435–454, Feb. 2022. and A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasi-
[14] S. Islam et al., “A comprehensive survey on applications of transformers bility in multimodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,”
 for deep learning tasks,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 241, May 2024, Art. IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289,
 no. 122666. Jun. 2023.
[15] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [37] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning for
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., New York, activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps during
 NY, USA, Apr. 2022, pp. 633–642. COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022, Art. no.
[16] Q. Pan, Y. Yu, H. Yan, M. Wang, and B. Qi, “FlowBERT: An encrypted 109452.
 traffic classification model based on transformers using flow sequence,” [38] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decenin Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun. tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 (TrustCom), Nov. 2023, pp. 133–140. graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
[17] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. [39] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860. traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
[18] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
 based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. [40] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427. representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
[19] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
 Feb. 2020. [41] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
[20] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smart- deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
 phone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018. [42] L. Yang, S. Guo, D. Liu, Y. Zeng, X. Jiao, and Y. Zhou, “ConViTML:
[21] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi- A convolutional vision transformer-based meta-learning framework for
 directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur. real-time edge network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188. Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3344–3357, Jun. 2024.
[22] Y. Xie, H. Deng, L. Peng, and Z. Chen, “Accurate identification of [43] J. Dai, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “GLADS: A global–local attention data
 internet video traffic using byte code distribution features,” in Proc. Int. selection model for multimodal multitask encrypted traffic classification
 Conf. Algorithms Archit. Parallel Process., 2018, pp. 46–58. of IoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 225, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109652.
[23] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classi- [44] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware
 fication is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM - traffic classification using convolutional neural network for represen-
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. tation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017,
 2019, pp. 680–687. pp. 712–717.
[24] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for [45] A. W. Moore, D. Zuev, and M. Crogan, “Discriminators for use in flowencrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE based classification,” Queen Mary Univ. London, London, U.K., Tech.
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. Rep., Aug. 2005.
[25] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classifi- [46] W. Wang et al., “HAST-IDS: Learning hierarchical spatial–temporal
 cation with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet features using deep neural networks to improve intrusion detection,”
 Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654. IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 1792–1806, 2018.
[26] N. Malekghaini et al., “AutoML4ETC: Automated neural architecture [47] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph
 search for real-world encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. neural networks?,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
 Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2715–2730, Jun. 2024. 2019.
[27] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: [48] T. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Liu, and X. Qiu, “A survey of transformers,” AI
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in Open, vol. 3, pp. 111–132, Oct. 2022.
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto, [49] J. Kaplan et al., “Scaling laws for neural language models,” 2020,
 ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943. arXiv:2001.08361.
4292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[50] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghor- Peiqiang Liu received the Ph.D. degree from Shanbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related dong University, China, in 2013. He is currently
 features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, a Professor at the School of Computer Science
 pp. 407–414. and Technology, Shandong Technology and Business
[51] CSTNET. Accessed: May 18, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:// University, China. His research interests include
 www.cstnet.cn/ algorithms and complexity theory and computational
[52] Visual Network Index (VNI) Complete Predic- biology.
 tion. Accessed: Jul. 12, 2024. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.cisco.com/c/zh cn/solutions/service-provider/visualnetworking-index-vni/index.html
[53] Y.-N. Dong, J.-J. Zhao, and J. Jin, “Novel feature selection and classification of internet video traffic based on a hierarchical scheme,” Comput.
 Netw., vol. 119, pp. 102–111, Jun. 2017.
[54] X. Mu and W. Wu, “A parallelized network traffic classification based
 on hidden Markov model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber-Enabled Distrib.
 Comput. Knowl. Discovery, Oct. 2011, pp. 107–112.
[55] J. Choi and X. Zhang, “Classifications of restricted web streaming
 contents based on convolutional neural network and long short-term
 memory (CNN-LSTM),” J. Internet Services Inf. Secur., vol. 12, no. 3, Yingshuo Bao received the B.S. degree in
 pp. 49–62, 2022. computer science and technology from Minnan
[56] Z. Zhao et al., “UER: An open-source toolkit for pre-training models,” Normal University, Zhangzhou, China, in 2020,
 in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2019, and the M.S. degree in computer science and
 pp. 241–246. technology from the University of Jinan, Jinan,
[57] N. S. Suhaimi, Z. Othman, and M. R. Yaakub, “Comparative analysis China, in 2023. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 between macro and micro-accuracy in imbalance dataset for movie degree in systems analysis and integration with the
 review classification,” in Proc. 7th Int. Congr. Inf. Commun. Technol., Department of Systems Science, Faculty of Arts
 2022, pp. 83–93. and Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Zhuhai,
 China. His research interests include network traffic
 analysis, causal inference, graph neural networks,
 human physiological information monitoring.

 Zhenzhen Yan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree from the University of Virginia in 2013. She
 is currently an Assistant Professor at the School
 of Computer Science and Technology, Shandong
 Technology and Business University, China. Her
 research interests include computer networks, traffic
 engineering, and network security.

 Bo Yang (Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc. degree
 from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 1989,
 and the Ph.D. degree in computational materials science from Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan,
 China, in 2006. He is currently a Professor with
 Lizhi Peng (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. the University of Jinan, Jinan, China, where he is
 degree from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 1998, the the Director of Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
 M.Eng. degree from the University of Jinan, Jinan, of Network-Based Intelligent Computing. He is also
 China, in 2006, and the Ph.D. degree from Harbin the Deputy Director of the Quan Cheng Laboratory,
 Institute of Technology in 2015. He was a Visitor Jinan. His main research interests include intelligent
 Scholar with the Department of Computer Science, computing, computer networks, machine learning,
 University of Otago, New Zealand, in 2017. He is knowledge discovery, and intelligent control. He was a member of numerous
 currently a Professor with the School of Information program committees of international conferences in the area of intelligent
 Science and Engineering, University of Jinan. His computing. He is the Chair of Shandong Computer Federation and the Vicecurrent research interests include machine learning, Chair of the ACM SigCSE China. He is the Chief Editor for Information
 evolutionary computing, computer networks, and Technology and Informatization. He is on the Editorial Board of Journal of
 parallel computing. Communications.