2760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 One2: An Intrusion Detection System for Both
 Internal and External Vehicular Network
 From Weak Labeled Data
 He Lu , Yilong Ren , Yue Liu, Yanan Zhao , Kaiwen Guo , Yang Yang, and Haohua Du

 Abstract—Network attacks on the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) I. INTRODUCTION
can lead to catastrophic consequences such as traffic congestion,
 HE rapid development of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV)
incorrect routing, and even accidents. Existing rule-based countermeasures are effective only in specific scenarios, while machine
learning-based methods suffer from suboptimal performance due
 T enables vehicles to communicate with various entities,
 including network infrastructure and pedestrians [1]. While this
to data quality issues. Furthermore, the isolation between in-vehicle connectivity brings convenience, it also introduces significant
networks (IVN) and external vehicle networks (EVN) prevents
independent intrusion detection systems (IDS) from detecting consecurity risks [2]. For example, renowned white hat hackers
tinuous attack behaviors. To address these issues, we propose a Valasek and Miller exploited a vulnerability in the in-vehicle
mechanism that characterizes attack behaviors solely based on infotainment (IVI) system to gain remote control of a Jeep
network connection information. This mechanism downplays the Cherokee [3]. Similarly, Keen Security Lab of Tencent demonspecifics of the traffic itself, allowing for the integration of IVN strated a comprehensive attack chain that successfully infiland EVN through structure, thus breaking the internal-external
boundary and providing relatively stable logical structure infor- trated the in-vehicle network (IVN) system through the wireless
mation. This approach also offers opportunities to address the communication module of the external vehicle network (EVN),
scarcity of labeled data. Based on this characterization mecha- enabling remote control attacks on both Tesla Model series and
nism, we develop an intrusion detection system – One2 , utilizing BMW vehicles [4], [5]. If such incidents were to occur in a real
a multi-attribute heterogeneous graph transformer to achieve ac- traffic environment, they would significantly compromise the
curate multi-classification of various types of attacks. To assess the
compatibility of the proposed IDS for IVN and EVN, extensive vehicle’s communication safety and functional integrity, even
experiments were conducted using six real-world datasets that ac- leading to traffic accidents and casualties. Therefore, Intrusion
curately depict IVN and EVN. The results show that One2 improves Detection Systems (IDS) for IoV have become a critical research
average accuracy by 7.14% and F1 score by 6.97% compared to issue recently [6].
state-of-the-art methods. Currently, intrusion detection systems (IDS) for the Internet
 Index Terms—Internet of Vehicles (IoV), intrusion detection of Vehicles (IoV) can be categorized into two main types:
system (IDS), weak label. rule-based and machine learning-based. Rule-based IDS can
 only describe known and formalizable attack behaviors, making
 Received 9 April 2025; revised 22 September 2025; accepted 3 November
2025. Date of publication 6 November 2025; date of current version 12 March them effective only in specific scenarios [7], [8], [9]. In con-
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of trast, machine learning-based IDS automatically derive “rules”
China under Grant 2022YFB3104403 and in part by Shandong Provincial Natu- from data, allowing them to be applicable in more diverse
ral Science Foundation under Grant ZR2025QB43 and Grant ZR2025QC1536.
(Corresponding author: Haohua Du.) scenarios [10], [11], [12]. However, the performance of machine
 He Lu is with the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Nanyang learning algorithms is highly dependent on data quality, which
Technological University, Singapore 639798, and also with the School of Trans- limits the effectiveness of these systems [13], [14]. Recent
portation Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
(e-mail: herlu@buaa.edu.cn). efforts have utilized self-supervised learning to address the
 Yilong Ren is with the School of Transportation Science and Engineering, issue of scarce labeled data in IoV scenarios [15]. However,
Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, also with the Beihang Hangzhou these efforts typically focus only on either the IVN or the
Innovation Institute, Hangzhou 310023, China, also with Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing 100083, China, and also with the State Key Lab of Intelligent Trans- EVN. Given that attack chains typically progress from EVN
portation System, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: yilongren@buaa.edu.cn). to IVN, detecting intrusions at each network layer separately
 Yue Liu is with the School of Urban Construction, Beijing University of is crucial. Early detection of attacks at the EVN level enables
Technology, Beijing 100124, China (e-mail: yueliu@emails.bjut.edu.cn).
 Yanan Zhao and Yang Yang are with the School of Transportation Science preemptive warnings and protective measures, thereby preventand Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: zyn- ing attackers from progressing to the IVN and gaining control
byxz@gmail.com; yang_yang@buaa.edu.cn). of the vehicle. Therefore, it is evident that an IDS system for
 Kaiwen Guo is with the Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, China
(e-mail: kevinguo@ouc.edu.cn). IoV needs to have three key capabilities: recognizing attack
 Haohua Du is with the School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang types, being compatible with both IVN and EVN, and per-
University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: duhaohua@buaa.edu.cn). forming well with limited labeled data. However, achieving
 The source code of this work is available at: https://github.com/
LouHerGetUp/One2 these capabilities is highly challenging due to the following
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3629862 reasons:

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2761

 1) Attack behaviors are often multilayered and hidden within In [21], the authors also designed an IDS incorporating three
 normal behaviors, leading to similar features among dif- algorithms. Nevertheless, both IDS heavily rely on feature enferent attack types and diverse features within the same at- gineering. Additionally, they require extensive training using a
 tack type. This makes feature-based recognition extremely substantial volume of labeled data.
 difficult.
 2) IVN and EVN use different network protocols, resulting in B. Deep Learning-Based IDS
 distinct network data structures, complicating the design
 To avoid the dependence on feature engineering, researchers
 of an intrusion detection algorithm that works for both.
 employ Deep Learning [22] to build IDS. Seo et al. [23] proposed
 3) Machine learning-based methods heavily rely on data
 a Generative Adversarial Network-based IDS for IVN. Nguyen
 quality for performance. IoV data is difficult to obtain due
 et al. [24] proposed a novel approach for developing an IDS
 to its sensitive nature, and the few available datasets often
 specifically designed for CAN buses. However, these IDS fail
 lack high-quality type annotations.
 to consider the intricate attributes of the external network. As
 To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose a
 a result, their effectiveness is limited to IVN with relatively
behavior representation mechanism based on network structure,
 simple data structures. For EVN, Han et al. [25] introduced
modeling network data as a multi-attribute heterogeneous graph.
 the Spatial and Time-aware Intrusion Detection Model. Deng
In this graph, data flows, IP addresses, and ports are treated
 et al. [15] proposed an IDS based on Graph Convolutional
as nodes, and nodes belonging to the same traffic flow form a
 Network with stream topology. To achieve Bot detection in
fully connected subgraph. This approach weakens the specific
 external networks, Zhao et al. [26] transformed the bot detection
characteristics of the traffic data, allowing the logical integration
 problem into a classification task on a semi-supervised graph.
of IVN and EVN by breaking the boundaries between them.
 To detect Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, Cao
Additionally, the stability of the structure serves as implicit inet al. [27] designed an IDS based on a spatio-temporal graph
formation, enabling the clustering of behavior data with similar
 convolutional network. However, these IDS only apply to EVN
structures for self-supervised learning with weak labels [16].
 and mostly focus on the binary classification problem of network
Furthermore, to effectively learn the information from this multitraffic. To design IDS that can be used in IVN and EVN, Yang and
attribute heterogeneous graph, we introduce a corresponding
 Shami [28] proposed an IDS system based on transfer learning
Multi-attribute Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (MA-HGT).
 and ensemble learning. However, it is important to note that
This model employs multiple attention heads to learn different
 transforming network data into images for training requires
attention weight distributions within the graph and capture corresubstantial data. Ashraf et al. [13] developed an IDS utilizing the
lations at various positions [17], thereby enhancing the model’s
 LSTM autoencoder architecture. Nevertheless, these two IDS
representational capability.
 only address the binary classification problem of IoV traffic data.
 In summary, the major contributions of this work are as
follows:
 r We designed and implemented an IDS called One2 that is III. IOV AND THEIR VULNERABILITIES
 compatible with both IVN and EVN using limited weakly A. Preliminary
 labeled data. It can accurately identify attacks, including
 The IoV enables wireless communication between vehicles
 cross-network continuous attacks.
 r We proposed a network structure-based representation and network infrastructure setups, making it a critical foundation for intelligent transportation systems. According to the
 mechanism, modeling network data as a multi-attribute
 communication range, the IoV can be categorized into IVN and
 heterogeneous graph to extract deep implicit information.
 EVN [29]. The IVN consists of numerous Electronic Control
 Additionally, we designed a novel deep learning model
 Unit (ECU) interconnected via controller area network (CAN)
 structure, MA-HGT, to efficiently learn the information
 bus [30]. This facilitates the integration of various features in
 within this multi-attribute heterogeneous graph.
 r To validate the performance of One2 , we conducted exper- Connected Vehicles (CV) and Autonomous Vehicles (AV) [31].
 The EVN establishes a connection between CV, AV and external
 iments on multiple real-world datasets. The results show
 devices via Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X) technology, includthat One2 improves average accuracy by 7.14% and F1-
 ing Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I),
 Score by 6.97% compared to state-of-the-art methods.
 Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P) and Vehicle-to-Sensors (V2S) [2].
 II. RELATED WORKS
 B. Vulnerabilities of IVN
A. Machine Learning-Based IDS
 In IVN, ECU play a crucial role in facilitating the execution
 Machine learning [18] algorithms have been widely used in of diverse functionalities by CV and AV. Consequently, an
IDS. Alshammari et al. [19] developed an IDS for IVN using the increasing number of ECU are being integrated into contemtwo algorithms. Derhab et al. [20] proposed a Histogram-based porary vehicles, with many luxury vehicles boasting an excess
Intrusion Detection. However, these IDS exhibit high False of 100 ECU [30]. Typically, These ECU establish communi-
Alarm Rates (FAR) and are exclusively suitable for IVN. To cation through the CAN bus. Fig. 1 illustrates the structure
safeguard IVN and EVN and reduce the FAR, Yang et al. [14] of a CAN packet, which consists of seven distinct fields [32].
integrated four distinct ML methods to develop a novel IDS. Among these fields, the data field holds the information that
2762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 1. CAN packet structure [13].

governs the functioning of the node, making it the most crucial Fig. 2. Attack scenarios and proposed IDS – One2 deployment.
and susceptible component [14]. Message injection attack is a
prominent form of attack in IVN, which is realized by an attacker
intentionally inserting malicious messages into the data field of Bluetooth—which attackers leverage to subsequently compro-
CAN packets. This manipulation is aimed at gaining control over mise IVN systems, creating cross-network attacks as discussed
the vehicle. Message injection attacks can be classified into three in Section III-C. The objective of these attacks is to compromise
main categories: Denial of Service (DoS), fuzzy, and spoofing the telematics equipment and CAN bus of the vehicle [14].
attacks [33]. DoS attacks flood the CAN with a substantial Execution scenarios for this type of attack include V2V attacks
volume of messages, leading to the delay or unavailability of and V2I vulnerabilities. (1) V2V attacks: Malicious vehicles
valid messages. In a similar vein, fuzzy attacks induce the can broadcast falsified safety messages (e.g., fake emergency
vehicle to have malfunctions or display unanticipated behavior braking warnings) or spoofed position information, messages,
by the injection of random packets. Spoofing attacks involve the potentially causing traffic disruption or collisions. (2) V2I vuldeliberate injection of targeted packets with the aim of disguising nerability: Attackers can compromise existing roadside devices
them as legitimate signals, hence enabling unauthorized control or deploy malware on them. Through these compromised or
over the vehicle. spoofed infrastructure devices, an attacker can launch an attack
 directly at passing vehicles. This interconnected threat landscape
C. Vulnerabilities of EVN demonstrates why unified security approaches spanning both
 IVN and EVN domains are essential for comprehensive vehicle
 With the increasing number of entities accessing IoV, EVN are
 protection. Attackers can exploit the boundaries between these
becoming enormous networks containing diverse networks and
 networks, using compromised telematics equipment as a bridge
devices [34]. Due to the lack of encryption and authentication
 to access critical CAN bus functions, or leveraging captured
mechanisms, EVN are vulnerable to a variety of traditional cyber
 CAN data to orchestrate more sophisticated external attacks.
threats, wherein every entity within the network possesses the
 Additionally, The declining costs of memory and computing
potential to be targeted as an attack node. The major types of
 devices have recently facilitated the widespread adoption of
attacks in EVN are DoS, infiltration, sniffing, brute force, Web
 deep-learning-based IDS in CV and AV [13].
attacks, and botnet attacks [14], [35]. Among these, DoS attacks
 The proposed IDS deployment is shown in Fig. 2 To ensure
overwhelm the vehicle with a large number of messages, resultthe security of the IVN, the proposed IDS will be implemented
ing in the vehicle’s inability to handle legitimate requests. Infildirectly on the CAN bus. The network sniffer intercepts and
tration attacks [35] refer to aiding other assaults by traversing a
 scrutinizes all flow data transmitted on the CAN bus to monitor
compromised protective system. Sniffing attacks collect sensiand identify suspicious network activities. This capability is
tive information by capturing packets in the EVN. Brute force
 crucial for defending against physical access attacks [13], [36].
attacks are used to obtain malicious vehicle control by breaking
 The proposed IDS will also be deployed within the gateway to
passwords. Web attacks [35] are employed with the intention
 safeguard the vehicle against remote attacks initiated from the
of executing detrimental actions by targeting the web interfaces
 EVN. The IDS at the gateway will detect all flow data transmitted
of entities within the EVN. Botnets infect many vehicles and
 to and from the CAN bus originating from the EVN, thereby
equipment with Bot viruses to facilitate assaults such as DoS.
 establishing a defense against remote access attacks [14]. In
 the event that an attacker sending malicious traffic to the car is
D. Security Model of IVN and EVN detected, the proposed IDS will promptly raise the alarm and
 Fig. 2 illustrates the general attack scenarios against the CV or prevent the attacker from gaining access, thereby protecting the
AV, encompassing both physical and remote attacks. A physical vehicle from potential damage caused by cyber-attacks.
attack pertains to the act of an assailant utilizing computing
equipment, such as a laptop, to get unauthorized access to the IV. THE IDS: ONE2
CAN bus by establishing a connection with the OBD-II port in
 A. System Architecture
IVN. This unauthorized access enables direct control over critical vehicle functions, including steering, braking, and accelera- The One2 framework has three steps, as shown in Fig. 3. First,
tion systems. Remote attacks involve the exploitation of wireless network flow data is constructed into the graph construction.
interfaces in the EVN—such as WiFi, cellular networks, and Subsequently, the graph construction is employed as the input
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2763

 TABLE II
 SOME ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES OF EVN FLOW DATA

Fig. 3. Framework of the proposed IDS.

 TABLE I
 SOME ESSENTIAL ATTRIBUTES OF IVN FLOW DATA

 them. (2) Adaptability to weakly labeled data: The inherent stability of graph structures provides implicit information, enabling
 the clustering of behavioral data exhibiting similar structural
for MA-HGT to perform graph embedding. Ultimately, the patterns, as shown in the left half of Fig. 4. This supports
flow nodes are classified based on the graph embedding. self-supervised learning approaches with weakly labeled data,
Additionally, to enhance training efficiency when processing thereby reducing dependence on extensive labeled datasets. (3)
large-scale intrusion detection data, an effective heterogeneous Effective capture of complex relationships and positional inforgraph sampling algorithm is employed to sample the graph mation: Nodes within the same traffic flow form fully connected
structure during training. subgraphs, enabling comprehensive modeling of inter-node relationships. Through the multi-attention head mechanism of
 the MA-HGT model, it learns positional associations within
B. Graph Construction the graph structure. This enhances the model’s representational
 Definition 1. Heterogeneous Graph: A heterogeneous capabilities, enabling it to capture complex patterns that tradigraph is defined as a graph with multiple types of nodes and/or tional methods struggle to identify. (4) Preservation of structural
edges. We denote a heterogeneous graph as G = (V, E, A, R), features: In contrast to flattening or serialization approaches, the
where v ∈ V denotes nodes, e ∈ E denotes edges, A denotes the graph structure preserves the natural topological features of IoV
union of node type, and R denotes the union of edge type. network traffic. This structured representation maintains greater
 Definition 2. Mapping function: The mapping function of fidelity to the inherent characteristics of network data.
node type and edge type is τ (v) : V → A and φ(e) : E → R, Given a IVN flow data I, we construct a multi-network atrespectively. tributes heterogeneous graph GI with two types of nodes (F low
 In real life, network flow data contain many attributes that may and ID) and one type of edges (F low − ID edge). The identifier
indicate potentially malicious activity. Hence, these attributes of IVN flow data is represented as a ID node, and the rest of the
can be used to differentiate malicious attacks from benign attributes of flow are represented as a F low node. Moreover, we
behaviors. Tables I and II provide some essential attributes of build an undirected edge which is from the F low to the ID.
IVN and EVN flow data, respectively. Instead of traditional IDS Given a EVN flow data E, we construct a multi-network
that directly input attributes into the model, the proposed IDS attributes heterogeneous graph GE with five types of nodes
adopts a novel approach by constructing a graph representation (F low, Srcip, Dstip, Sport and Dport) and four types
of network data before the model learning process. In detail, we of edges (F low − Srcip edge, F low − Dstip edge, F low −
build the One2 of network flow data for the first time. This graph Sport edge, F low − Dport edge). As illustrated in Fig. 3, the
enables us to describe the network flow more fine-grained and source IP address, destination IP address, source port number
capture implicit topological features of flow which facilitates and destination port number of EVN flow data are denoted
accurate identification of malicious behavior in the network. as a Srcip node, Dstip node, Srcport node, Dstport node,
 The reasons for using graph structures to build an IDS for IoV respectively. Besides, the rest of the attributes of flow are denoted
are as follows: (1) Unified representation of heterogeneous data: as a F low node. After that, we build four undirected edges which
By modeling network data as a multi-attribute heterogeneous are from the F low to the Srcip, from the F low to the Dstip,
graph, data streams, IP addresses, and ports are uniformly repre- from the F low to the Srcport, from the F low to the Dstport.
sented as nodes. This allows IVN and EVN to be logically unified For the aforementioned graph construction methods, every
and processed together, breaking down the boundaries between F low node in the graph represents a single piece of network
2764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 4. Framework of MA-HGT.

flow data and encompasses all its statistical features. Thus, the distribution disparities effectively.
to acquire the network topological features of each flow data
while preserving its statistical features, we can employ message Qi (f ) = QLineariτ (f ) (X0 [f ]) (1)
passing and aggregation among F low nodes to obtain the graph
embedding for each F low node. Lastly, by classifying all F low Ki (s) = KLineariτ (s) (X0 [s]) (2)
nodes, we can determine the category of each corresponding Vi (s) = VLineariτ (s) (X0 [s]) (3)
network flow data.
 Subsequently, it is necessary to compute the attention heads
C. Heterogeneous Graph Embedding for a pair of nodes. In the process of computing the similarity
 To mine implicit meta relationships between flows and their between the Query vector Qi (f ) and Key vector Ki (s), a unique
 ATT
 ∈ R h × h is utilized for each specific edge type
 d d
attributes in the graph construction, we use HGT [17] to get matrix Wφ(e)
graph embeddings for all nodes, as shown in Fig. 4. The input φ(e). By doing so, the model has the ability to capture various
for HGT is the heterogeneous graph GI or GE . For the sake semantic relations, even when considering node-type pairs that
of simplicity in mathematical notation, we will use the symbol are identical. Additionally, it is important to note that not all
X0 to represent either of these graphs. Moreover, the outputs relationships have an equal impact on the target nodes. To
of HGT are the graph embeddings representing flows and their account for this, we introduce a prior tensor μ ∈ R|A|×|R|×|A|
attributes, indicated as H. which represents the overall significance of each meta relation
 Definition 3. Meta relation: We define τ (s), φ(e), τ (t) as triplet. This tensor serves as an adaptive scaling factor for the
the meta relation for an edge e = (s, t) linked from source node attention mechanism. Hence, the calculation of headiatt (s, e, f )
s to target node t. for edge e = (s, f ) is performed as follows:
 There exists a one-to-one link between the F Low node in
   μ
the constructed graph structure and the network flow statistics. τ (s),φ(e),τ (f )
 att
 headiatt (s, e, f ) = Ki (s)Wφ(e) Qi (f )T · √
Consequently, one can regard the graph embedding of the F low d
node as the graph embedding of the network flow data. As a (4)
result, the F Low node is chosen as the target node, denoted as Ultimately, the attention heads are concatenated, resulting in
f , to reduce the computational complexity. the generation of an attention vector for each pair of nodes. Next,
 1) Heterogeneous mutual attention: Initially, we use three we proceed to collect attention vectors from the neighboring
linear projection functions to transform node embeddings into nodes N (f ) for each target node f and apply the softmax
the ith vector. In detail, the function QLineariτ (f ) is used to map function. Thus, the computation of the h-head attention for edge
the F low node f into the ith query vector Qi (f ), which has e = (s, f ) is performed as follows:
  
 d
a dimension of Rd → R h . Here, d represents the dimension of
 Attention(s, e, f ) = Softmax i∈[1,h] headiatt (s, e, f )
X0 [f ], while h denotes the vector dimension per head. Similarly,
 d
 ∀s∈N (f )
the functions KLineariτ (s) and VLineariτ (s) are also used to map (5)
the source node s to the ith key vector Ki (s) and the ith value 2) Heterogeneous message passing: First, the meassge head
vector Vi (s). It is important to highlight that these functions are headimsg (s, e, f ) for edge e = (s, f ) is calculated by:
indexed based on the node’s type [37]. This implies that each
 msg
kind of node has a distinct linear projection that aims to capture headimsg (s, e, f ) = Vi (s)Wφ(e) (6)
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2765

 msg
 ∈ R h × h is utilized to incorporate the edge de- TABLE III
 d d
where Wφ(e) CLASS LABEL, AND SIZE OF THE CAR-HACKING DATASET
 ATT
pendence, analogous to the utilization of Wφ(e) . Then, we
concatenate all the message heads to get the Message(s, e, f )
for edge e = (s, f ):
 Message(s, e, f ) = i∈[1,h] headimsg (s, e, f ) (7)
 3) Flow node aggregation: The Attention(s, e, f ) is
regarded as the weight to average the corresponding
Message(s, e, f ). The aforementioned action aggregates information from various source nodes and transfers it to the
  ]
destination node f . As a result of this process, the vector H[f
is updated as: B[f ][s]. Subsequently, we calculate the sampling probabilities
  ]=
 H[f ⊕ (Attention(s, e, f ) · Message(s, e, f )) for these nodes:
 ∀s∈N (f )
 B[f ][s]2
 (8) P [f ][s] = , (11)
 Then, the ReLU activation function and linear projection B[f ]22
  ], and this is followed by a
ALinear are applied to the H[f where B[τ ][s] is updated by the normalization degree of the
residual connection as: candidate node concerning the F low node:
   
 H[f ] = ALinearτ (f ) ReLU H[f ] + X0 [f ] (9) 1
 B[f ][s] = B[f ][s] + , (12)
 len(Adj[f ])
 Employing this approach, we obtain the output of a highly
contextualized representation for the F low node f . Subse- where len(Adj[f ]) is the length of adjacency matrix for each
quently, this representation is utilized as input for a single-layer τ (s), φ(e), τ (f ) meta relation.
fully connected network to perform flow node classification. Subsequently, a specific number of nodes were sampled based
 on the probability P among all F low nodes and the budget was
D. Attack Classification allocated for each category of node. This iterative procedure is
 executed four times to generate a graph sample with a depth of
 In this step, the MA-HGT feeds the graph embedding of four. Finally, the adjacency matrix between the sampled nodes
flow nodes H[f ] into a single-layer fully connected network is reconstructed. The MA-HGSampling technique ensures that
to generate the system’s output. Specifically, the quantity of the subgraph generated has a comparable number of nodes for
neurons within the fully connected network is contingent upon each type as the original graph. Additionally, the subgraph is
the number of classification categories. We use the softmax sufficiently dense to facilitate MA-HGT training on large-scale
activation function, calculated as follows: heterogeneous networks representing network traffic.
 Yf = Softmax(W ∗ H[f ] + b) (10)
 V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
where Yf is the predicted label of network flow data, i.e.,
the result of the MA-HGT, W is a weighted matrix and b is A. Experimental Setup
bias vector. We chose a single-layer fully connected network The experiments utilize the PyTorch 2.0 library [38] and the
because it primarily serves as a dimensional transformation PyTorch Geometric library [39] for model development. Furcomponent in our framework, converting high-dimensional fea- thermore, the trials were conducted on a workstation equipped
ture representations from the HGT into a format suitable for with Ubuntu 18.04, an Intel Xeon Gold 6230R CPU, and an
final classification tasks (binary or multi-class). The proposed NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU.
MA-HGT’s representational power allows this simple structure to effectively map graph features to classification space B. Data Description
while minimizing overfitting risk from excessive parameters.
 This paper utilizes the following three IVN datasets to evalu-
For the output layer, we adopted the standard softmax activation
 ate the proposed IDS:
function as it provides sufficient probabilistic differentiation to r CAR-HACKING: The dataset was generated by capturing
distinguish between benign traffic and various attack types.
 CAN traffic through the OBD-II port of an actual car during
 the execution of CAN attacks [33], [40]. The various attack
E. Training on Subgraphs types present in the CAR-HACKING dataset are displayed
 To facilitate the training on giant heterogeneous graphs com- in Table III. The CAR-HACKING dataset encompasses
posed of network flows with hundreds of thousands of nodes several key attributes, namely the timestamp, CAN ID, data
and edges, we employ a method called MA-HGSampling. This length code (DLC), and the DATA[0]-[7]. These attributes
method allows for the generation of subgraphs from the orig- are derived from the arbitration field, control field, and
inal gigantic graph. To begin, we include all direct neighbors data field of the CAN packets which are illustrates in
s ∈ N (f ) of the F low nodes in the budget B[f ], resulting in Fig. 1 and Table I. Additionally, Table III displays the label
2766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 distributions of the original dataset, the training dataset, and TABLE IV
 CLASS LABEL, AND SIZE OF THE CIC-IDS2017 DATASET
 the validation dataset.
 r CAN-INTRUSION: This dataset mainly consists of impersonation attacks and injection attacks against the CAN
 bus [41]. In particular, impersonation attacks assume that
 the attacker is able to make physical modifications and can
 control the target node, stop the message transmission, and
 have the containing node send a message to replace the
 terminating node. On the other hand, there are two main
 different types of injection attacks in datasets: DOS and
 fuzzing attacks.
 r CICIoV2024: This dataset was used by researchers to
 conduct five attacks on the complete interior of a 2019
 Ford vehicle, including all ECU, over the CAN bus [42].
 This dataset focuses on two types of threats against the
 CAN bus: DOS attacks and spoofing attacks. For DOS
 attacks, a malicious CAN user can change the arbitration
 value to initiate an attack. On the other hand, spoofing
 attacks include steering wheel spoofing, RPM spoofing,
 speed spoofing, and gas control spoofing.
 In the process of developing the IDS for the IVN, we have
chosen to incorporate all of the aforementioned properties as
input features for the model. In order to address the memory r TON-IoT: The TON-IoT dataset consists of the origiconstraints of the computer utilized in the experiments and to nal dataset, the processed dataset, and the training test
assess the efficacy of the model under label-constrained cir- dataset [54]. In this paper, we select the training test dataset
cumstances, we employed random down-sampling techniques from the TON-IoT dataset. This dataset contains a total of
to preprocess the data. This enabled the successful implemen- nine attacks, namely Backdoor Attack, DoS Attack, DDoS
tation of the proposed model for both training and testing Attack, Injection Attack, Password Attack, Ransomware,
purposes. Scanning, xss Attack and Man-in-the-Middle Attack. The
 The scarcity of publicly available EVN benchmark datasets training test dataset contains 42 network traffic attributes
can be attributed to concerns about privacy and commercial- such as source and destination IPs, source and destination
isation [14], [43]. In contrast, Wireless Local Area Networks ports, and protocols.
(WLANs) and cellular networks are frequently employed com- r CIC-UNSW-NB15: The CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset uses
munication methods for IoV communication. Consequently, the the CICFlowMeter network traffic analysis tool to extract
attack on the conventional computer network can be regarded a new set of features from the captured network traffic data
as analogous to the intrusion on the EVN [13], [28], [44]. provided by UNSW-NB15, including a total of 83 features
Consequently, numerous research endeavors [13], [45], [46], such as source and destination IPs, source and destination
[47], [48], [49], [50] have been undertaken to construct external ports, and protocols [55]. This dataset contains a total of
IDS for vehicle networks. These projects utilize established nine types of attacks, Fuzzer, Analytics, Backdoor, DoS,
intrusion detection datasets, such as ISCXID2012 [51] and Vulnerability, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and
UNSW-NB15 [52], to facilitate their development. Therefore, Worms.
this paper utilizes the following three similar datasets to evaluate The aforementioned attributes are utilised as input features
the proposed IDS for the performance on the EVN: in the proposed model, allowing it to optimise the learning of
 r CIC-IDS2017: This dataset is considered to be highly characteristics that enhance the performance of the proposed
 advanced due to its comprehensive range of features and IDS. Furthermore, the analysis in Tables III and IV demonstrates
 inclusion of the up-to-date sorts of attacks [44], [53]. The that the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets compredatasets have a strong resemblance to authentic real-world hensively encompass the primary threat categories encountered
 data. The complete set of network traffic analysis results in IoV environments. These datasets are widely adopted within
 from the dataset was utilised by our IDS, encompassing the field of connected vehicle security research and possess
 over 80 network traffic attributes such as source and des- high representativeness [13], [14], [28], [35], [45]. Therefore,
 tination IPs, source and destination ports, and protocols. a two-tiered experimental approach was adopted: (1) Compre-
 Table II presents several significant attributes of the dataset. hensive evaluation employs all six datasets for foundational
 Furthermore, this study establishes a correlation between experiments to demonstrate the proposed model’s generalizaeach attack included in the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and the tion capability across diverse network environments and attack
 potential attacks discussed in Section III. The details per- scenarios. (2) Representative evaluation uses CAR-HACKING
 taining to the CIC-IDS2017 dataset and the results of the and CIC-IDS2017 as representative IVN and EVN datasets for
 correlation analysis are presented in Table IV. specialized analyses of specific scenarios or dimensions.
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2767

C. Comparative Methods D. Validation Metrics
 In this study, we conducted a comparative analysis of the To assess the effectiveness of the proposed model, we employ
proposed IDS against eight approaches. The selection of ma- several assessment measures to gauge its classification perforchine learning or deep learning-based IDS baselines follows the mance. These metrics include Accuracy (ACC), DR, FAR, and
following criteria: (1) Methods employing classical machine F1-Score. The ACC metric is used to evaluate the overall perlearning or deep learning algorithms that are widely cited in formance of the proposed model. The DR measures the ability
academia or serve as comparative benchmarks. (2) Whether of the given model to correctly identify instances belonging to
the method accounts for the characteristics of IVN or EVN, a specific category. The F1-Score is a metric that combines the
or is specifically designed for these environments. (3) Whether precision rate and recall rate into a single value using the harthe ACC and FAR meet the fundamental requirements for IoV monic mean. The metrics are defined in the following manner:
security applications.
 r Rule-based IDS: This rule-based IDS integrates multi- ACC =
 TP + TN
 ple rule types, including statistical threshold rules [56], TP + TN + FP + FN
 attack pattern rules [57], domain expert rules [32] and TP
 DR =
 state-related rules [58]. We integrated multiple rules to TP + FN
 balance method generality with detection capability. This FP
 design enables the IDS to adapt to diverse environments FAR =
 TN + FP
 such as IVN and EVN, while delivering robust detection
 performance without requiring machine learning models. 2 × TP
 F1 − Score =
 r AdaBoost-based IDS [59]: AdaBoost is an iterative ensem- 2 × TP + FP + FN
 ble learning technique that constructs a robust classifier where the variables TP, TN, FP, and FN represent the quantities
 by aggregating multiple weak classifiers to enhance the of true positive, true negative, false positive, and false negative,
 accuracy of network traffic classification. respectively.
 r Gradient Boosting Decision Trees (GBDT)-based IDS
 [60]: GBDT involves each iteration’s iterative training of
 decision trees to rectify the faults made in the preceding E. Performance Results
 iteration to classify network traffic effectively. 1) Performance of binary classification: To assess the effecr Random Forest(RF)-based IDS [35]: RF enhances the per- tiveness of the proposed IDS for intrusion detection, the MAformance and stability of intrusion detection models by ag- HGT algorithm and eight state-of-the-art baseline approaches
 gregating the predicted results through voting or averaging. are developed. These methods are trained and tested on three
 r Deep Neural Networks(DNN)-based IDS [44]: DNN is a IVN and EVN distinct data sets, which accurately represent
 common variant of feed-forward neural networks with six internal and external vehicle network traffic data, respectively.
 hidden layers. All comparative approaches have demonstrated favourable perr 1D Convolutional Neural Network(1DCNN)-based formance for intrusion detection in IVN or EVN. The results
 IDS [61]. The 1DCNN extracts network traffic features of the experiment for all methods are shown in Fig. 5. For
 through four 1D convolutional layers and 1D max pooling accuracy metric, MA-HGT achieves 99.99% , 99.95% and
 and classifies them through a single-layer neural network. 99.97% on the CAR-HACKING, CAN-INTRUSION and CIr Long Short-Term Memory(LSTM)-based IDS [62]. LSTM CIoV2024, respectively. The accuracy of MA-HGT on the IVN
 can efficiently capture long-term relationships in network datasets is at least 3.73% , 15.55% , 3.45% higher than the
 stream data, making it well-suited for intrusion detection other eight methods. On the other hand, MA-HGT achieves
 tasks. LSTM contains two LSTM layers, one 1D adaptive 99.98% , 99.95% and 99.99% accuracy on the CIC-IDS2017,
 average pooling layer, one dropout layer and two single- TON-IoT and CIC-UNSW-NB15, respectively. The accuracy
 layer neural networks. of MA-HGT on the EVN datasets is at least 3.51% , 13.96%
 r Gated Recurrent Unit(GRU)-based IDS [63]. GRU in- , 2.67% higher than the other eight methods. Meanwhile, as
 corporates a gating mechanism that allows the GRU to depicted in Fig. 5, the result demonstrates that MA-HGT atefficiently capture long-term dependencies in streaming tains F1-Scores of 99.99% , 99.97% and 99.70% on the CARdata and mitigate the issue of gradient vanishing. The ar- HACKING, CAN-INTRUSION and CICIoV2024, respectively.
 chitecture comprises two GRU layers followed by a simple The F1-Score of MA-HGT on the IVN datasets is at least
 one-layer neural network. 13.29% , 9.02% , 2.42% higher than those achieved by the other
 For all of the comparison methods used in the experiments, we eight methods. Additionally, MA-HGT achieves F1-Scores of
referenced the parameter settings recommended in the original 99.88% , 99.97% and 99.99% F1-Score on the CIC-IDS2017,
literature where these methods were proposed and optimally TON-IoT and CIC-UNSW-NB15, respectively. The MA-HGT
tuned these parameters to the characteristics of the datasets we approach demonstrates a minimum increase in F1-Score of
used. Specifically, we tuned the grid search parameters for each 9.00% , 3.71% and 4.40% compared to the other eight methods,
algorithm to ensure that they would perform optimally on the as observed in the EVN datasets. Besides, upon observing the
datasets. additional two indices shown in Tables V and VI, it becomes
2768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 5. Binary classification performance of all methods on IVN and EVN datasets.

 TABLE V
DETECTION RATE AND FALSE ALARM RATE OF ALL METHODS ON THREE IVN
 DATASETS

 Fig. 6. ROC curves of all methods on two dataset.

 TABLE VI
DETECTION RATE AND FALSE ALARM RATE OF ALL METHODS ON THREE EVN
 DATASETS

 Fig. 7. PR curves of all methods on two dataset.

 for all methods across the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017
 datasets. The MA-HGT method achieved superior AP scores
 compared to all baseline approaches, exceeding 0.9999 on both
 datasets. The findings of these experiments suggest that the
evident that MA-HGT exhibits a noticeable enhancement in proposed MA-HGT has superior classification performance for
detection performance compared to the baseline technique. This IVN and EVN flow data compared to alternative approaches.
demonstrates that the proposed IDS effectively acquires a unified The MA-HGT framework can transform traffic flows into a
representation encompassing topological and statistical char- topological structure of heterogeneous graph data, which can
acteristics of network flow data. Furthermore, the MA-HGT then be effectively utilised for intrusion detection through graph
model performs better than deep learning techniques such as embedding technology.
1DCNN and LSTM across all evaluation criteria, particularly 2) Performance of multi-classification: To evaluate the multiwhen evaluated on the EVN datasets. One possible explanation classification performance of MA-HGT, we generated confusion
for this phenomenon is the high feature dimensionality of the matrices for the test sets of the IVN and EVN datasets, as
EVN datasets; for example, the CIC-IDS2017 dataset contains depicted in Fig. 8, respectively.
more than 80 feature dimensions. Meanwhile, the absence of For the CAN-HACKING dataset, MA-HGT can accurately
a multi-attention mechanism in these approaches hinders their detect three types of attacks: DoS, RPM spoofing and gear
ability to effectively concentrate on important features, leading spoofing. The accuracy rate of MA-HGT was found to be
to suboptimal detection results. exceptionally high, reaching 99.98% . This high accuracy can
 Additionally, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) be attributed to the algorithm’s ability to effectively identify and
and Area Under the Curve (AUC) findings for all approaches classify instances of DoS, RPM spoofing, and gear spoofing
on CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets are presented attacks. Moreover, in the case of Fuzzy attacks, which exhibit
in Fig. 6. It is evident that the AUC scores obtained by the attack patterns that closely resemble those of other attacks, MA-
MA-HGT approach surpass those of the other methods, exceed- HGT demonstrated minimal misclassifications. Furthermore,
ing 0.9999 on both datasets. Furthermore, Fig. 7 presents the MA-HGT achieved high accuracy rates of 98.45% and 99.99%
Precision-Recall (PR) curves and Average Precision (AP) scores on the CAN-intrusion and CICIoV2024 datasets, respectively.
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2769

Fig. 8. Confusion matrix of proposed methods for the test set on IVN and EVN datasets.

 Despite the presence of different attack types and complicated
assault patterns within the CIC-IDS2017 dataset, the MA-HGT
model demonstrates a remarkable accuracy rate of 98.38% .
The MA-HGT model achieves an accuracy of 1 in identifying
and classifying four common attack patterns: Bot, Heartbleed,
FTP-Patator, and SSH-Patator attacks. However, the accuracy
for various DoS attacks is slightly lower. This might be attributed
to DoS attack patterns exhibiting a high degree of similarity.
 Fig. 9. Ablation study of the proposed IDS on IVN and EVN datasets.
Moreover, the performance of MA-HGT in the context of Infiltration and XSS attacks is suboptimal. One potential explanation
for this outcome is the limited number of samples available for
the two attacks, impeding correct attack identification. Addition- the MA-HG Sampling method, utilizing only the ordinary
ally, MA-HGT achieved high accuracy rates of 96.62% on the Dataloader; (2) HAN+HL: replaces the HGT module with
TON-IoT dataset and 93.92% on the CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset. the Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network (HAN) [64]; (3)
The relatively lower accuracy on the CIC-UNSW-NB15 dataset HGN+HL: substitutes the HGT module with a Heterogeneous
is attributed to the severe class imbalance in the data. Graph Convolutional Network (HGCN) [39]; (4) HAN+DL:
 The factor contributing to the high-performance multi- combines the HAN with the ordinary Dataloader, omitting
classification of MA-HGT is the ability of each head within the multi-attribute heterogeneous graph sampling method; (5)
the HGT to acquire distinct representations concurrently. This HGN+DL: employs the HGCN with the ordinary Dataloader,
enables the model to selectively attend to various locations or excluding the MA-HG Sampling method; (6) GAT: utilizes
features concurrently, thereby enhancing the model’s classifica- homographys instead of heterogeneous graphs, implementing
tion performance on intricate data. the Graph Attention Network (GAT) [65]; (7) GCN: employs
 3) Ablation study: To comprehensively evaluate the role of homographys rather than heterogeneous graphs, applying the
each MA-HGT module in intrusion detection, we conducted Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [66].
ablation experiments on the proposed system using both IVN and The results of the ablation experiments revealed performance
EVN datasets, with results presented in Fig. 9. The ablation study variations across different datasets. Overall, MA-HGT achieved
focuses on three key modules: the MA-HG construction method, the highest accuracy on each dataset compared to all ablation
the HGT module, and the MA-HGSampling method. We methods. These results demonstrate that MA-HGT provides efdesigned the following ablation experiments to systematically ficient detection Performance, confirming the rational design of
evaluate each module’s contribution: (1) w/o HL: excludes MA-HGT and the indispensable and significant contribution of
2770 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 During the training process using the aforementioned datasets,
 it was observed that the curves representing the three metrics
 of MA-HGT reached their highest values at the completion of
 one epoch. In contrast, compared to MA-HGT, the convergence
 speeds of the three metric curves in the remaining four deep
 learning methods are comparatively slower, and their convergence effects are less pronounced. It is worth mentioning that
 the three metric curves associated with the 1DCNN approach
 exhibit persistent oscillations in the 20 epochs. The observed
 phenomenon can be attributed to the high sensitivity of 1DCNN
 to unbalanced network data, which makes it unable to solve the
Fig. 10. Loss and accuracy of five methods on two datasets during training.
 classification problem with unbalanced sample categories effectively. Furthermore, experimental results show that MA-HGT
each module to its detection capability. Furthermore, the relative has high performance in classification on both IVN and EVN
importance of each module varies across different datasets. For flow data. The MA-HGT converges quickly and can effectively
example, the MA-HGSampling method plays a more crucial handle datasets with label-limited datasets.
role on CAR-HACKING, CICIoV2024, and TON-IoT datasets, 5) Effect of labeling rate: To assess the performance of
whereas the HGT module contributes more significantly to MA-HGT under varying labelling rates of the dataset, the acperformance on CIC-IDS2017 and CIC-UNSW-NB15. On the curacy of MA-HGT and seven learning-based methods was
CAR-INTRUSION dataset, the ablation results indicate that assessed at various labelling rates spanning from 1% to 100% on
each module contributes equally to the overall performance. the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets. Based on the
Notably, the model’s accuracy decreases significantly when the analysis of Fig. 13, it is evident that most approaches exhibit a
common homography construction method is used instead of declining pattern in accuracy as the labelling rate declines. This
our proposed heterogeneous graph construction approach. observation suggests that the proportion of labelled data in the
 4) Training efficiency of MA-HGT: In this experiment, we will training set plays a significant role in influencing the accuracy of
validate the training efficiency of MA-HGT at a limited labeling IDS. As depicted in Fig. 13, it is evident that the accuracy rate
rate. We conducted training on MA-HGT and four different of MA-HGT consistently surpasses that of the other baseline
deep-learning methods for a total of 20 epochs. The training data methods. Furthermore, there is minimal variation in the accuracy
utilised had a labelling rate of 80% . Based on the information rate of MA-HGT as the labelling rate declines from 100% to
shown in Fig. 10, it is evident that the loss and accuracy of 1% . The heterogeneous graph construction method’s efficacy
MA-HGT exhibit stabilisation after a single epoch across both and multi-head attention mechanisms in MA-HGT have been
datasets. This suggests that MA-HGT achieves convergence and demonstrated to enhance the model’s ability to concentrate
optimal performance after a single training epoch. Furthermore, on critical features, resulting in improved classification perforthe stability of loss and accuracy from epochs 2-20 further mance. Furthermore, the experimental findings also demonstrate
support this conclusion. Regarding the remaining four deep that integrating topological and statistical traffic flow characterlearning methods, it can be observed that even after 20 epochs istics in MA-HGT enhances its ability to capture the underlying
of training, the loss and accuracy exhibit a fluctuating pattern, representations of network traffic flow relationships. As a reindicating a lack of convergence. This observation suggests sult, it achieves outstanding classification performance across
that the training efficiency of the proposed MA-HGT model various label rates. In addition, the commendable performance
surpasses that of several existing deep learning methods. One exhibited by MA-HGT serves as evidence that the issue of inadepotential rationale is that the heterogeneous graph representa- quate learnable information inside the model may be effectively
tion in MA-HGT enables the effective depiction of both the addressed through the construction of a heterogeneous graph
topological relationships and statistical characteristics within the topology for network flow data, coupled with the utilisation of
network flow data. Simultaneously, incorporating a multi-head HGT for graph embedding, even when faced with limitations in
attention mechanism facilitates the rapid identification of crucial labelling rate.
features pertaining to normal and abnormal network activities 6) Real-time performance, model complexity, and compuwithin the heterogeneous graph constructed through this repre- tational efficiency: To assess the feasibility of deploying the
sentation. Consequently, MA-HGT exhibits swift convergence proposed IDS in real-world vehicular environments, we conand efficient detection capabilities, requiring only a minimal ducted five independent experiments to evaluate different asnumber of epochs. pects of real-time performance, model complexity, and compu-
 In order to provide additional evidence of the training efficacy tational efficiency. Each experiment was designed to measure
of MA-HGT, the alterations in detection rate and F1 score a specific performance metric: (1) average test time, (2) model
over the course of 20 training epochs for both MA-HGT and size, (3) total number of parameters, (4) Floating Point Operathe four deep learning techniques on the CAR-HACKING and tions Per Second (FLOPs) and (5) average power consumption.
CIC-IDS2017 datasets are depicted in Figs. 11 and 12. These All experiments were conducted using the hardware environfigures illustrate the changes in detection rate, false alarm rate, ment described in Section V-A and the results are presented
and F1-Score throughout the training process of the two datasets. in Fig. 14(a). The experimental results demonstrate that the
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2771

Fig. 11. Detection rate, false alarm rate, F1-Score of five methods on CAR-HACKING dataset during training.

Fig. 12. Detection rate, false alarm rate, F1-Score of five methods on CIC-IDS2017 dataset during training.

 to the baseline methods. To further demonstrate the feasibility
 of deploying One2 in automotive applications, we conducted
 an analysis mapping experimental results from workstation
 to real-vehicle environments. According to [67], the latency
 for safety services in vehicular environments should be below
 100ms. Concurrently, detection latency should be minimized to
 prevent interference with normal vehicle operation [68]. The
 proposed model achieved a GPU test time of 5.13ms. However,
 CPU inference times in practical tests were approximately 2.5x
Fig. 13. Accuracy of five methods on two datasets with different labeling rates.
 to 14.9x times longer than GPU times [69]. We employed a
 conservative 45x for estimation. Furthermore, the introduction
 of INT8 quantization [70] and model pruning techniques [71]
 can respectively enhance inference speed by 3.8x to 4.7x and
 6.67x (with only a 1% impact on model accuracy). Using a
 conservative estimate of 9.11ms for CPU inference time, this
 falls below the latency requirement for vehicular network safety
 services. Furthermore, our model remains sufficiently compact
 at 0.65MB, which is considerably less than the memory capacity
 of automotive computing systems, which typically possess over
 1GB of RAM [14]. Therefore, experimental results demonstrate
 that the proposed method exhibits superior feasibility for de-
Fig. 14. (a) Comparison of real-time performance, model complexity, and ployment in real vehicular systems.
computational efficiency and (b) Cross-dataset intrusion detection experiment 7) Cross-domain detection: To demonstrate the robustness
results. of the proposed method against unseen attack scenarios, we
 conducted cross-dataset intrusion detection experiments. We
 performed two sets of cross-dataset experiments: training on
proposed method achieves the shortest average test time, with CAR-HACKING and testing on CAN-intrusion datasets, and
its inference speed outperforming all baseline methods across training on CIC-IDS2017 and testing on CIC-UNSW-NB15
all six datasets. Additionally, the model size, total number of datasets. These dataset pairs were selected because they share
parameters, FLOPs and average power consumption of the pro- similar network traffic characteristics, making them appropriate
posed IDS remain at relatively low to moderate levels compared for cross-dataset validation. Fig. 14(b) demonstrates that the
2772 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 REFERENCES
 [1] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, I. Hamieh, and A. Shami, “Tree-based intelligent
 intrusion detection system in Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE
 Glob. Commun. Conf., 2019, pp. 1–6.
 [2] B. Ji et al., “Survey on the Internet of Vehicles: Network architectures and
 applications,” IEEE Commun. Standards Mag., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 34–41,
 Mar. 2020.
 [3] C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Remote exploitation of an unaltered passenger
 vehicle,” Black Hat USA, vol. 2015, no. S91, pp. 1–91, 2015.
 [4] S. Nie, L. Liu, Y. Du, and W. Zhang, “Over-the-air: How we remotely
 compromised the gateway, BCM, and autopilot ECUs of tesla cars,”
 Briefing, Black Hat USA, vol. 91, pp. 1–19, 2018.
 [5] K. Kim, J. S. Kim, S. Jeong, J.-H. Park, and H. K. Kim, “Cybersecurity
Fig. 15. Zero-day attack detection test results of proposed methods on two for autonomous vehicles: Review of attacks and defense,” Comput. Secur.,
datasets. vol. 103, 2021, Art. no. 102150.
 [6] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
 detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, 2023,
proposed method achieved consistently high performance across Art. no. 119771.
all four evaluation metrics in both cross-dataset experiments. [7] K. Ilgun, R. A. Kemmerer, and P. A. Porras, “State transition analysis: A
 rule-based intrusion detection approach,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 21,
These results confirm that the proposed method demonstrates no. 3, pp. 181–199, Mar. 1995.
strong adaptability to unseen scenarios. [8] V. Kumar, D. Sinha, A. K. Das, S. C. Pandey, and R. T. Goswami, “An
 8) Zero-day attack detection: To investigate the detection integrated rule based intrusion detection system: Analysis on UNSW-
 NB15 data set and the real time online dataset,” Cluster Comput., vol. 23,
performance of the proposed IDS against zero-day attacks, pp. 1397–1418, 2020.
we conducted zero-day attack evaluation experiments using [9] S. Al-Sarawi, M. Anbar, B. A. Alabsi, M. A. Aladaileh, and S. D. A.
the CAR-HACKING and CIC-IDS2017 datasets [53]. In each Rihan, “Passive rule-based approach to detect sinkhole attack in RPLbased Internet of Things networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 94081–
experiment, we designated one attack type from the dataset 94093, 2023.
as the zero-day attack, extracted all corresponding attack in- [10] P. Mishra, V. Varadharajan, U. Tupakula, and E. S. Pilli, “A detailed invesstances, and combined them with a proportionate amount of tigation and analysis of using machine learning techniques for intrusion
 detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 686–728, First
randomly sampled benign data to form the test set. The training Quarter 2019.
set consisted of all remaining data from the original dataset. [11] S. Sharma and A. Kaul, “A survey on intrusion detection systems and
This approach ensured the complete absence of zero-day attack honeypot based proactive security mechanisms in VANETs and VANET
 cloud,” Veh. Commun., vol. 12, pp. 138–164, 2018.
patterns in the training data. We conducted these experiments [12] R. Bitton and A. Shabtai, “A machine learning-based intrusion detection
for each attack type present in both the CAR-HACKING and system for securing remote desktop connections to electronic flight bag
CIC-IDS2017 datasets. The results are presented in Fig. 15. The servers,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 1164–
 1181, May/Jun. 2021.
experimental results indicate that the proposed IDS achieves [13] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, and A.
accuracy exceeding 90% for most zero-day attack types across Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder architecture
both datasets, confirming its effectiveness in detecting zero-day for discovering anomalous events from intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4507–4518,
attack patterns. Jul. 2021.
 [14] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
 VI. CONCLUSION J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 In this paper, we propose One2 IDS for label-limited IoV. [15] X. Deng, J. Zhu, X. Pei, L. Zhang, Z. Ling, and K. Xue, “Flow topologybased graph convolutional network for intrusion detection in label-
Initially, a graph construction is developed to represent the topol- limited IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 20, no. 1,
ogy of network traffic. Subsequently, the MA-HGT is employed pp. 684–696, Mar. 2023.
to obtain graph embeddings. Finally, the node classification is [16] N. Chaabouni, M. Mosbah, A. Zemmari, C. Sauvignac, and P. Faruki, “Network intrusion detection for IoT security based on learning techniques,”
performed on the graph for intrusion detection. The performance IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2671–2701, Third Quarter
of the MA-HGT is evaluated using three IVN and EVN datasets, 2019.
respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that MA- [17] Z. Hu, Y. Dong, K. Wang, and Y. Sun, “Heterogeneous graph transformer,”
 in Proc. Web Conf., 2020, pp. 2704–2710.
HGT exhibits superior classification performance in binary and [18] H. Yu, H. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and S. Yang, “State estimation of lithium-ion
multi-class classification. Moreover, MA-HGT demonstrates batteries via physics-machine learning combined methods: A methodnotable convergence speed. Furthermore, despite a limited la- ological review and future perspectives,” eTransportation, vol. 24, 2025,
 Art. no. 100420.
beling rate, the MA-HGT model achieves exceptional detec- [19] A. Alshammari, M. A. Zohdy, D. Debnath, and G. Corser, “Classification accuracy, surpassing other state-of-the-art methodologies. tion approach for intrusion detection in vehicle systems,” Wireless Eng.
A critical direction for future work involves conducting com- Technol., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 79–94, 2018.
 [20] A. Derhab, M. Belaoued, I. Mohiuddin, F. Kurniawan, and M. K. Khan,
prehensive on-target evaluations on representative automotive “Histogram-based intrusion detection and filtering framework for secure
hardware platforms (such as NVIDIA DRIVE, NXP S32) to and safe in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23,
validate real-time performance under authentic IVN and EVN no. 3, pp. 2366–2379, Mar. 2022.
 [21] L. Yang, A. Shami, G. Stevens, and S. De Rusett, “LCCDE: A
loads. We will thoroughly analyze the complete pipeline timing, decision-based ensemble framework for intrusion detection in the Inworst-case execution time bounds, batching/windowing effects ternet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022,
on detection latency, and system coexistence with other safety- pp. 3545–3550.
 [22] H. Yu et al., “State of charge estimation method by using a simplified eleccritical tasks following ASIL considerations—essential factors trochemical model in deep learning framework for lithium-ion batteries,”
for successful integration into production vehicle environments. Energy, vol. 278, 2023, Art. no. 127846.
LU et al.: ONE2 : AN INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR BOTH INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL VEHICULAR NETWORK 2773

[23] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection [48] Y. Javed, M. A. Khayat, A. A. Elghariani, and A. Ghafoor, “PRISM: A hisystem for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy Secur. erarchical intrusion detection architecture for large-scale cyber networks,”
 Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 5070–5086,
[24] T. P. Nguyen, H. Nam, and D. Kim, “Transformer-based attention network Nov./Dec. 2023.
 for in-vehicle intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 55389–55403, [49] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, H. Hawash, I. Razzak, K. M. Sallam, and
 2023. O. M. Elkomy, “Federated intrusion detection in blockchain-based smart
[25] X. Han et al., “STIDM: A spatial and temporal aware intrusion detection transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3,
 model,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Trust Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., pp. 2523–2537, Mar. 2022.
 2020, pp. 370–377. [50] A. Oseni et al., “An explainable deep learning framework for re-
[26] J. Zhao, X. Liu, Q. Yan, B. Li, M. Shao, and H. Peng, “Multi-attributed silient intrusion detection in IoT-enabled transportation networks,”
 heterogeneous graph convolutional network for bot detection,” Inf. Sci., IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1000–1014,
 vol. 537, pp. 380–393, 2020. Jan. 2023.
[27] Y. Cao, H. Jiang, Y. Deng, J. Wu, P. Zhou, and W. Luo, “Detecting and [51] A. Shiravi, H. Shiravi, M. Tavallaee, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward develmitigating DDoS attacks in SDN using spatial-temporal graph convolu- oping a systematic approach to generate benchmark datasets for intrusion
 tional network,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 6, detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 357–374, 2012.
 pp. 3855–3872, Nov./Dec. 2022. [52] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
[28] L. Yang and A. Shami, “A transfer learning and optimized CNN based network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),” in
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Proc. 2015 Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Conf. Commun., 2022, pp. 2774–2779. [53] H. Lu et al., “A transfer learning-based intrusion detection system for
[29] H. Liang et al., “Network and system level security in connected vehicle zero-day attack in communication-based train control system,” Cluster
 applications,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided Des., 2018, Comput., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 8477–8492, 2024.
 pp. 1–7. [54] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based
[30] W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,” security systems at the edge: Network ton_IoT datasets,” Sustain. Cities
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020. Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art. no. 102994.
[31] J. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Sun, and Y. Shi, “In-vehicle network attacks and [55] H. Mohammadian, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Poisoning and
 countermeasures: Challenges and future directions,” IEEE Netw., vol. 31, evasion: Deep learning-based NIDS under adversarial attacks,” in Proc.
 no. 5, pp. 50–58, 2017. 21st Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy Secur. Trust, 2024, pp. 1–9.
[32] S.-F. Lokman, A. T. Othman, and M.-H. Abu-Bakar, “Intrusion detection [56] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection
 system for automotive controller area network (CAN) bus system: A method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh. Commun.,
 review,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2019, pp. 1–17, 2019. vol. 14, pp. 52–63, 2018.
[33] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection [57] S. Tariq, S. Lee, H. K. Kim, and S. S. Woo, “CAN-ADF: The controller
 system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy Secur. area network attack detection framework,” Comput. Secur., vol. 94, 2020,
 Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6. Art. no. 101857.
[34] H. Jiang, Y. Ren, Y. Zhao, Z. Cui, and H. Yu, “Toward city-scale vehicular [58] Y. Chae, N. Katenka, and L. DiPippo, “An adaptive threshold method for
 crowd sensing: A decentralized framework for online participant recruit- anomaly-based intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Symp.
 ment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 17800–17813, Netw. Comput. Appl., 2019, pp. 1–4.
 Oct. 2025. [59] A. Yulianto, P. Sukarno, and N. A. Suwastika, “Improving AdaBoost-based
[35] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a intrusion detection system (IDS) performance on CIC IDS 2017 dataset,”
 new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.,” in J. Physics: Conf. Ser., vol. 1192, 2019, Art. no. 012018.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116. [60] M. H. L. Louk and B. A. Tama, “Dual-IDS: A bagging-based gradient
[36] B. Groza and P.-S. Murvay, “Efficient intrusion detection with bloom boosting decision tree model for network anomaly intrusion detection
 filtering in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, system,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 213, 2023, Art. no. 119030.
 vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1037–1051, Apr. 2019. [61] M. D. Hossain, H. Inoue, H. Ochiai, D. Fall, and Y. Kadobayashi, “An
[37] A. Ma et al., “Single-cell biological network inference using a heteroge- effective in-vehicle CAN bus intrusion detection system using CNN deep
 neous graph transformer,” Nat. Commun., vol. 14, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 964. learning approach,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2020, pp. 1–6.
[38] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep [62] F. Laghrissi, S. Douzi, K. Douzi, and B. Hssina, “Intrusion detection
 learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 8026– systems using long short-term memory (LSTM),” J. Big Data, vol. 8,
 8037. no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 65.
[39] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, “Fast graph representation learning with Py- [63] M. K. Putchala, “Deep learning approach for intrusion detection system
 Torch geometric,” in Proc. ICLR Workshop Representation Learn. Graphs (IDS) in the Internet of Things (IoT) network using gated recurrent neural
 Manifolds, 2019, pp. 1–9. networks (GRU),” Master’s thesis, Dept. Comput. Sci. Eng., Wright State
[40] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion de- Univ., Dayton, Ohio, 2017.
 tection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21, [64] X. Wang et al., “Heterogeneous graph attention network,” in Proc. World
 2020, Art. no. 100198. Wide Web Conf., 2019, pp. 2022–2032.
[41] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion detection [65] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Liò, and Y. Bengio,
 system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc. 15th Annu. “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 Conf. Privacy Secur. Trust, 2017, pp. 57–5709. 2018, pp. 1–12.
[42] E. C. P. Neto et al., “CICIoV2024: Advancing realistic IDS approaches [66] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 against dos and spoofing attack in IoV CAN bus,” Internet Things, vol. 26, convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2024, Art. no. 101209. 2017, pp. 1–14.
[43] O. Y. Al-Jarrah, C. Maple, M. Dianati, D. Oxtoby, and A. Mouzakitis, [67] K. Zheng, Q. Zheng, P. Chatzimisios, W. Xiang, and Y. Zhou, “Hetero-
 “Intrusion detection systems for intra-vehicle networks: A review,” IEEE geneous vehicular networking: A survey on architecture, challenges, and
 Access, vol. 7, pp. 21266–21289, 2019. solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2377–2396,
[44] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, and P. Leroux, “Feed-forward neural network for Fourth Quarter 2015.
 network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE 91st Veh. Technol. Conf., 2020, [68] H. Taslimasa, S. Dadkhah, E. C. P. Neto, P. Xiong, S. Ray, and A. A.
 pp. 1–6. Ghorbani, “Security issues in Internet of Vehicles (IoV): A comprehensive
[45] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage intrusion survey,” Internet Things, vol. 22, 2023, Art. no. 100809.
 detection system in intelligent transportation systems using rule extraction [69] V. W. Lee et al., “Debunking the 100x GPU vs. CPU myth: An evaluation
 methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., of throughput computing on CPU and GPU,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Int.
 vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023. Symp. Comput. Archit., 2010, pp. 451–460.
[46] F. Jin, M. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and S. Wang, “Intrusion detection [70] S. A. Tailor, J. Fernandez-Marques, and N. D. Lane, “Degree-quant:
 on Internet of Vehicles via combining log-ratio oversampling, outlier Quantization-aware training for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 detection and metric learning,” Inf. Sci., vol. 579, pp. 814–831, 2021. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–22.
[47] X. Li et al., “Sustainable ensemble learning driving intrusion detection [71] H. Zhou, A. Srivastava, H. Zeng, R. Kannan, and V. Prasanna, “Accelermodel,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1591– ating large scale real-time GNN inference using channel pruning,” Proc.
 1604, Jul./Aug. 2021. VLDB Endowment, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1597–1605, May 2021.