IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026 1461

 PowerDiffuser: Collaborative
 Contrastive-Reconstruction Self-Supervised
 Learning for Robust Power Load
 Signal Representation
 Honggang Yang , Student Member, IEEE, Cheng Lian , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Bingrong Xu , Member, IEEE, Ruijin Ding , and Zhigang Zeng , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—The widespread deployment of smart meters of transforming 1-D load signals into 2-D periodicity-based
has created significant opportunities for applying artificial representations as a preprocessing step.
intelligence technologies to power system tasks. However,
the high cost of data annotation limits the effectiveness of Index Terms —Involution, power signal, self-supervised
traditional supervised learning in this domain, making self- learning, spatiotemporal feature extractors.
supervised learning an attractive alternative. In this article,
we propose PowerDiffuser, a novel self-supervised learning
strategy tailored for power load signals. By leveraging a
 I. INTRODUCTION
diffusion model framework, PowerDiffuser integrates two HE advent of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies has
mainstream self-supervised paradigms, namely contrastive
learning and reconstruction-based learning, which enables
the model to effectively capture both periodic patterns and
 T provided novel approaches for power companies to address
 operational challenges, with extensive research conducted on
 applications including power load forecasting [1], [2], power
local features. To address the overfitting issues commonly
observed in generic time-series feature extractors when
 generation forecasting [3], subscriber portrait [4], and electricity
applied to power load tasks, we design two modular spa- theft detection [5]. The proliferation of smart meters, intelligent
tiotemporal feature extractors specifically engineered to distribution networks, and cloud platforms has enabled power
handle samples with varying complexity levels. In addition, companies to accumulate vast amounts of data, creating favorwe adapt the involution operator to better align with the able conditions for developing effective AI-based power models.
unique characteristics of power load signals. Extensive ex- Nevertheless, manual annotation remains indispensable for
periments on the ISMCBT, ETTh and REDD datasets demon- specific downstream tasks to facilitate supervised learning prostrate that PowerDiffuser consistently outperforms both cesses. As demonstrated in [6], electricity theft detection based
time-series general models and existing self-supervised on power and gas load analysis requires technical experts to
learning strategies across diverse downstream power load explicitly label fraudulent cases. In a similar vein, the study
tasks. Ablation studies further validate the contributions
of the proposed modules and highlight the effectiveness
 in [4] on household attribute inference from smart meter signals
 necessitates extensive surveys to obtain accurate labels. These
 annotation processes often incur substantial costs and face chal-
 Received 25 February 2025; revised 15 July 2025 and 25 August lenges due to privacy concerns and other practical constraints.
2025; accepted 21 October 2025. Date of publication 24 November Power load signals inherently manifest as sequential data
2025; date of current version 5 February 2026. This work was sup- streams characterized by temporal dependencies and dynamic
ported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant 62176193 and Grant 62206204, and in part by the Fundamen- fluctuation patterns. This time-series nature makes them partictal Research Funds for the Central Universities, China, under Grant ularly amenable to self-supervised learning (SSL). In the field of
104972025YJS0118. Paper no. TII-25-1156. (Corresponding author: AI, SSL significantly reduces the dependency on manually an-
Cheng Lian.) notated data by exploiting the intrinsic structure and information
 Honggang Yang, Cheng Lian, and Bingrong Xu are with the School within the data itself to generate supervisory signals. The two
of Automation, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan 430074,
China (e-mail: hgyang@whut.edu.cn; chenglian@whut.edu.cn; bin- predominant SSL paradigms can be categorized into contrastive
grongxu@whut.edu.cn). learning and reconstruction-based methods. As schematically
 Ruijin Ding is with the State Key Laboratory of Breeding Biotech- depicted in Fig. 1, contrastive learning establishes positive and
nology and Sustainable Aquaculture, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chi- negative sample pairs through carefully designed strategies and
nese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: dingrj@ihb.ac.cn). learns discriminative feature representations by minimizing the
 Zhigang Zeng is with the School of Artificial Intelligence and Automa- feature space distance between positive sample pairs while
tion, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, maximizing the separation of negative pairs. Fig. 2 illustrates
China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Image Processing and the fundamental framework of reconstruction-based methods,
Intelligent Control of Education Ministry of China, Wuhan 430074, China where model is trained to reconstruct complete data from partial
(e-mail: zgzeng@hust.edu.cn).
 The code is publicly available at https://github.com/HGYang97/ or perturbed inputs, thereby capturing the intrinsic structure
PowerDiffuser. and essential features of the data. Through optimization of the
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3627498 reconstruction error, the model extracts semantically meaningful
1941-0050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
1462 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 trained in this manner can combine the advantages of both
 paradigms.
 In addition, we develop a specialized deep learning architecture tailored to the unique characteristics of power load
 signals, incorporating two key optimizations. First, building
 upon previous studies [3], [7] that demonstrate the superior
 contextual information provided by 2-D representations during
 reconstruction, and considering recent studies [8], [9] in power
 applications that show performance improvements through 1-D
 to 2-D signal transformations, we reformulate the data into a 2-D
 format, defining it as a multichannel time-series self-supervised
 task. Second, addressing the overfitting issues observed in
 general-purpose temporal models [10], [11], [12] when applied
Fig. 1. Generic framework of contrastive learning, where positive and to low-complexity power tasks or datasets with limited sampling
negative sample pairs are defined through augmentation strategies to density, we design two deep learning models based on consistent
learn discriminative feature representations by optimizing similarity met- spatio-temporal interaction principles to accommodate diverse
rics. downstream tasks.
 Our experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
 methodology achieves significant performance improvements
 across various power-related downstream tasks. The specific
 contributions are as follows.
 1) We redefine the representation learning process for power
 load signals as a multichannel time-series self-supervised
 task and propose an innovative self-supervised learning framework that effectively integrates contrastive
 learning and reconstruction within the diffusion model
Fig. 2. General paradigm of perturbation-based reconstruction, which
 paradigm.
trains models to recover clean data from partially masked or noise- 2) To mitigate overfitting risks, we develop two deep learncorrupted inputs, thereby learning robust feature representations via ing architectures based on spatio-temporal interaction
joint optimization of reconstruction and denoising objectives.
 principles, specifically designed to handle multiscale task
 complexity levels and recordings with different but fixed
feature representations. Despite these advancements, several sampling rates, while maintaining compatibility with
critical challenges persist as follows. both self-supervised learning and downstream task fine-
 1) While contrastive learning primarily emphasizes global tuning.
 feature distributions, reconstruction-based methods 3) Comprehensive experimental evaluations demonstrate
 demonstrate superior capability in extracting local that our proposed methodology achieves state-of-the-art
 sample characteristics. This inherent limitation poses performance across evaluation metrics in diverse powersignificant challenges for any single SSL methodology to related downstream tasks.
 holistically capture essential data features across diverse
 downstream tasks in the power domain.
 2) The effectiveness of both contrastive learning and II. RELATED WORK
 reconstruction-based approaches exhibits substantial de- Power load signals represent a canonical form of time-series
 pendence on task formulation. Excessively complex tasks data where self-supervised learning effectively enhances repremay impede model convergence, whereas overly simplis- sentation capability. This paradigm provides an efficient frametic formulations often yield inadequate self-supervisory work for extracting meaningful temporal patterns while reducsignals. ing label dependency, primarily through two approaches: 1)
 Due to the significant structural differences between these contrastive learning-based methods leveraging discrimination
two methods, few researchers have explored combining them. between positive/negative sample pairs; and 2) reconstruction-
The emergence of diffusion models has inspired us to design based methods targeting future state reconstruction or missing
a novel SSL strategy that requires the model to simultane- segment imputation. While both demonstrate proven efficacy in
ously perform two tasks: Distinguishing positive and negative temporal representation learning, they differ fundamentally in
sample pairs and interactively generating reconstructions. We implementation architectures.
believe this design can enhance the model’s representational
capacity and improve its training robustness. Specifically, when
 A. Time Series Self-Supervised Methods Based on
a batch of samples is fed into the model, they undergo two
 Contrastive Learning
different data augmentation functions, generating two distinct
signals. These signals serve as mutual conditions during the In the contrastive learning paradigm, CPC [13] constructed
diffusion process, cross-reconstructing the augmented repre- positive and negative sample pairs by predicting future time
sentations of each other. After the diffusion process, we also steps, leading to significant advancements in speech classifirequire the classifier to distinguish between positive and neg- cation tasks. InfoTS [14] addressed the challenge of selecting
ative sample pairs within the batch. We argue that models meaningful augmentations for time-series data by leveraging
YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1463

information theory to adaptively choose optimal augmentations. TCN [15] improved upon this approach by employing
a Gaussian distribution-based strategy to constrain the sampling
range for context-positive samples. TNC [16] proposed a selfsupervised framework for learning generalizable representations
of nonstationary time series by leveraging the local smoothness Fig. 3. In diffusion models, the forward process adds noise to timeof signals. Using a debiased contrastive objective, TNC ensured series data, while the reverse process trains a neural network to remove
 the noise and recover the original data. During denoising, the model
that neighboring signals were distinguishable from nonneigh- gradually refines the data, using learned knowledge to match real-world
boring ones in the encoding space. TS2Vec [17] introduced patterns.
feature augmentation techniques within hierarchical sample
pairs to achieve multigranularity self-supervised representation
learning. TS-TCC [18] examined the effects of various feature X ∈ RL represents a power load signal of length L and M
augmentation methods on contrastive learning performance for denotes the number of samples in the dataset. We reshape the 1-D
time-series signals and proposed a spatiotemporal interaction load signals into 2-D representations during preprocessing. This
prediction approach to further enhance model generalization. transformation ensures each channel strictly preserves temporal
Although contrastive learning provided effective guidance for periodicity, specifically by ensuring that each channel corremodel training, performance improvements relied heavily on sponds to weekly or monthly sampling points, thereby maincarefully designed positive and negative sample pairs as well as taining physical meaning and temporal structure consistency.
large batch sizes. This inevitably imposed higher demands on The input data format for our model can thus be expressed as
 L
hardware, particularly GPU memory. To address this challenge, X̂ ∈ RC× C , where C denotes channels.
we proposed a self-supervised strategy that combined recon- Our objective is to train model F using a self-supervised
struction methods. learning strategy to obtain feature representations F = F(X̂) of
 power load signals. This representation enables effective transfer
 learning through fine-tuning on downstream tasks, enhancing
B. Time Series Self-Supervised Methods Based on
 both generalization capability and robustness.
Reconstruction
 The conceptual foundation of reconstruction-based methods A. Diffusion Model
originates from Masked Autoencoders (MAE) [19] in computer
vision. This approach employs an asymmetric encoder-decoder As illustrated in Fig. 3, the diffusion model functions through
architecture, where the model’s capability to accurately recon- two key processes: a forward noise-adding process and a condistruct randomly masked images serves as an indicator of the tional reverse denoising process. The forward process systematencoder’s ability to extract deep semantic features. Building ically transforms a clean input x0 ∼ q(x0 ) into Gaussian noise
upon this foundation, Tarnet [20] introduced a task-guided mask- xT ∼ N (0, I) by employing a Markov chain transition. This
 transition is defined as follows:
ing strategy that leverages attention mechanisms to identify and   
reconstruct critical timestamps, thereby enhancing the percep- q(xt |xt−1 ) = N xt ; 1 − βt xt−1 , βt I (1)
tual relevance of the reconstruction task. Ti-MAE [21] advanced
this paradigm by implementing random masking on embedded where βt ∈ (0, 1) controls the noise schedule at step t. For the
time-series data and training an autoencoder for point-level reverse process, we extend the standard diffusion to a conditional
reconstruction, effectively bridging the gap between representa- formulation, where the denoising network predicts the noise
tion learning and reconstruction methodologies, particularly in component φ (xt , c, t), conditioned on task-specific informaforecasting applications. Further innovations were introduced by tion c
  βt 
TimeMAE [22], which shifted the reconstruction target from raw xt − √1−α φ (xt , c, t)
point-level data to latent features while concurrently performing pθ (xt−1 |xt , c) = N xt−1 ; √ t
 , βt I
regression tasks. CRT [23] expanded the reconstruction scope αt
by incorporating frequency-domain analysis through fast fourier  (2)
transform, enabling cross-domain masking and reconstruction where αt = ts=1 (1 − βs ). Following DDPM [24], the loss
of both temporal and spectral signals. function optimizes a reweighted objective
 Despite these methodological advancements, reconstruction- T
 
based self-supervised strategies inherently present greater L(x0 , c) = E∼N (0,I)  − θ (xt , t, c)2 (3)
challenges compared to contrastive learning approaches. This is t=1
particularly evident in time-series analysis, where models strug- where T is temporal steps. This conditional mechanism enables
gle to implicitly learn masked region features from 1-D contex- targeted refinement of noisy samples toward task-specific distual information, as reflected in their reconstruction loss metrics. tributions.
To address these limitations, we propose a novel approach that
directly learns the underlying distribution of time series through
a diffusion process, complemented by contrastive interaction B. PowerDiffuser
constraints, yielding substantial performance improvements. The diffusion model inherently serves as a flexible framework capable of performing reconstruction tasks. By integrating contrastive learning principles, we design a cross-
 III. FRAMEWORK
 reconstruction process to regularize power signal feature
 To formally describe the task pipeline, we make the following extraction. As illustrated in Fig. 4, PowerDiffuser comprises
definitions. Given a dataset D = {X1 , X2 , . . . , XM }, where two branches: the Weak-to-Strong (W2S) and Strong-to-Weak
1464 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 4. Framework of the proposed PowerDiffuser, where signals with strong and weak augmentations are cross-reconstructed from each other
through the reverse process.

(S2W) augmentation-reconstruction branches. Both W2S and
S2W are implemented through conditional DDPMs, where two
augmented tensors derived from the original input signal act as
mutual conditions for cross-reconstruction. Below, we elaborate on PowerDiffuser from both forward and reverse process
perspectives.
 Data Augmentation: Contrastive learning, a dominant
paradigm in SSL, aligns representations of similar samples
(positive pairs) while pushing apart dissimilar ones (negative
pairs). In smart meter data analysis, this facilitates distinguishing
distinct consumption patterns (e.g., residential vs. industrial) Fig. 5. Detailed computation process of ST-Large. Temporal and spaand enhances robustness to noise and temporal shifts. Data tial network are implemented as one-layer Transformer.
augmentation is crucial in constructing meaningful positive and
negative pairs: it generates diverse yet semantically consistent
variants from the same time-series instance, forming positive Similarly, the noise predictor in the S2W branch estimates the
pairs, while using sequences from different instances as nega- noise component as
tives. Meanwhile, the noise introduced by data augmentation en-   2
 W (t)
courages the model to learn invariant representations, enhancing min  − φ X̂t , c = X̂ S , t, . (5)
 2
its resilience to perturbations and reducing overfitting, thereby
improving reliability in real-world applications. C. Spatiotemporal Neural Network
 Forward Diffusion Process: In both branches, the forward diffusion processes operate independently, each resembling stan- The purpose of self-supervised training is to obtain a powerful
dard DDPM. Starting from two augmented tensors X̂ W and X̂ S , feature extractor that transforms raw power load signals into
Gaussian noise is progressively added to generate a sequence of high-quality representations. During the diffusion process, the
2-D matrices. Following the findings in [24], [25], we set the denoising network naturally extracts data representations by
diffusion steps T to 1000. This sufficiently large T ensures that learning the recovery process at different noise levels. Inspired
both branches converge to identical noise distributions after cor- by previous works [26], we demonstrate that designing feature
ruption, a critical prerequisite for initiating cross-reconstruction. extractors for two-dimensional power load signals from both
 Cross-reconstruct Reverse Process: The reverse process per- spatial and temporal perspectives is crucial. To address the
forms a cross-reconstruction task, where both branches start overfitting issue in complex networks, we design two different
from Gaussian noise and iteratively refine the signals via a feature extractors, named ST-Tiny and ST-Large.
shared-parameter neural network for noise prediction and recon- ST-Large: As shown in Fig. 5, ST-Large involves two feature
struction. Taking W2S as an example, analogous to conditional extraction processes. Taking W2S as an example, in the encoder
 L
DDPM, the neural network incorporates the weakly augmented part, the temporal network separates input ∈ RC× C into a tensor
original signal by concatenating it with the input from the of RC×1×K for extracting intraperiod features. Meanwhile, the
 L
previous diffusion step along the channel dimension. At the spatial network separates it into R1×K× C to extract inter-period
tth diffusion step, the noise predictor φ (·) in the W2S branch features at the same timestamp. In the fusion module, we use
 S(t) a basic concat operation to combine the spatial and temporal
takes the reconstructed signal X̂t from the previous step,
 features and further integrate condition information. During the
the timestep embedding t, and the condition X̂ W as inputs to
 time embedding process, we adopt the same encoding rules as
estimate the noise component
 described in [26]. In the decoder part, we use a Transformer layer
   2 to decode the features and generate inputs for the next stage. It
 S(t)
 min  − φ X̂t , c = X̂ W , t, . (4) is worth noting that in this structure, the number of encoder and
 2
YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1465

 Reconstruction: We use the MSE loss to compare the reconstructed outputs with their corresponding augmented tar-
 S(r)
 gets. Specifically, X̂T denotes the final denoised output in
 the W2S branch, which is reconstructed from Gaussian noise
 conditioned on the weakly augmented signal X̂ W . Similarly,
 W (r)
 X̂T is reconstructed in the S2W branch conditioned on X̂ S .
 The reconstruction loss is defined as

 1   S(r) 2 1   W (r) 2
 LR = X̂T,u − X̂uS + X̂T,u − X̂uW
 |Ω| |Ω|
 u∈Ω u∈Ω
 (6)
 where Ω denotes the set of element indices of the signal tensors.
 The reconstruction loss constrains the model to retain sufficient
 information to faithfully reconstruct the input, preventing purely
 discriminative training from discarding excessive information.
Fig. 6. Detailed computational flow diagram of the 1-D involution operator in ST-Tiny. Contrastive Learning: Given a batch of H input samples, we
 apply strong and weak augmentations and perform denoising at
 T /2 and T steps, resulting in a total of 6H potential samples.
 Algorithm 1: Feature Transformation.
 Among them, the 6 samples derived from the same original
 Require: Input: x̂iq ∈ R1×C sample are considered positive pairs, while samples from dif-
 Ensure: Output: x̂i+1
 q ∈ R1×C ferent original inputs are treated as negative pairs. We employ
 1: procedure FEATURETRANSFORMATION (x̂it ) the Normalized Temperature-scaled Cross-Entropy Loss to op-
 2: Initialize learnable convolution kernel θ ∈ RK×C timize the model, ensuring that the representations of the same
 3: Given window size K, compute windowed features: sample variations are closer while keeping them distinct from
 4: x̂iq:K ∈ RK×C other samples. This design extends the loss formulation and the
 5: Extract intermediate feature vector: construction of positive and negative sample pairs as proposed in
 6: Giq ∈ R1×C TS-TCC [18] (https://github.com/emadeldeen24/TS-TCC). The
 loss function is formulated as
 7: Project Git via fully-connected layer W ∈ RC×K :
 8: Ĝiq = (Giq W ) ∈ RK×1 H 
  6 
 6
 9: Perform broadcasted multiplication and reduction: exp(sim(hi,a , hi,b )/τ )
 LC = − log H
 10: x̂i+1 = (Ĝiq  x̂iq:K ) Element-wise 6
 q i=1 a=1 b=1,b=a exp(sim(hi,a , hj,k )/τ )
 multiplication followed by summation j=1 k=1
 11: end procedure (7)
 where
 1) hi,a and hi,b are feature representations obtained from a
decoder layers can be flexibly stacked to meet the requirements neural network encoder and are 2 -normalized.
of extracting power load signals of varying complexity. 2) sim(hi,a , hi,b ) = h
 i,a hi,b represents the cosine similar-
 ST-Tiny: The involution operator [27] is a computation pro- ity.
cess in the computer vision domain that can replace convolu- 3) τ is a temperature hyperparameter that controls the scale
tion, commonly considered to have spatial specific and channel of contrastive loss, and it is typically set to 0.1 in our
agnostic. We modified its computation process to generalize it experiments.
to temporal data and believe that it can simultaneously handle The contrastive loss provides a mutual-information lowerspatiotemporal features in temporal data, as shown in Fig. 6. bound objective, encouraging embeddings of positive signals
Similar to ResNet-1D [28], the computation traverses multi- to align while pushing apart negative signals.
channel temporal signals along the time dimension. Taking W2S Overall, within the diffusion-model framework, the three
as an example, the original input to the computation at the ith loss terms cooperate to form a complementary objective that
involution layer for timestamp q is represented by x̂qi ∈ R1×C . enhances discriminability, preserves fidelity, and captures the
The specific forward computation is shown in Algorithm 1. data manifold.

D. Loss Functions
 E. Theoretical Principles
 The loss construction in the pre-training process is divided
into three components: diffusion process, reconstruction, and We discussed the advantages of the PowerDiffuser framework
contrastive learning. The final loss function is the sum of these from the perspectives of mutual information maximization and
three parts. information bottleneck theory, and explained why the combina-
 Diffusion Process: We train the feature extractors of the W2S tion of reconstruction and contrastive learning is effective.
and S2W branches using the noise prediction loss defined in 1) Mutual Information Maximization: The essence of self-
(4) and (5). The diffusion objective is equivalent to denoising supervised learning is to maximize the mutual information bescore matching; it shapes representations under multilevel noise, tween the input X and its latent representation Z, i.e., I(X; Z),
captures the local geometry of the data manifold, and improves so that Z contains sufficient information to reconstruct X or
robustness. predict its attributes.
1466 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 a) Reconstruction Learning directly optimizes I(X; Z) by TABLE I
 ISMCBT DATASET PARTITIONING AND BRIEF INTRODUCTION
 minimizing the reconstruction loss LR , which enhances
 the encoding ability of Z with respect to X.
 b) Contrastive Learning implicitly improves I(Z; Y ) by
 encouraging the alignment of positive sample pairs,
 where Y denotes the target variable of the downstream
 task. Specifically:
 i) The contrastive objective enforces the similarity between the clean and augmented views (e.g., different
 noisy versions) of the same input, Zclean and Zaug ,
 which approximates the maximization of the mutual
 information I(Zclean ; Zaug ).
 ii) Based on the information inequality I(Z; Y ) ≥
 I(Zclean ; Zaug ), contrastive loss can be seen as a lower
 bound of task-relevant mutual information.
 From an information-theoretic perspective, the total loss of reconstruction learning ensures that the underlying periodic
PowerDiffuser can be approximated as trends are maintained.
 Ltotal ≈ −I(X; Z) − λ · I(Zclean ; Zaug ). (8)
 By jointly optimizing these two objectives, PowerDiffuser IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
effectively balances signal reconstruction and representation
 A. Datasets
invariance, leading to improved generalization in downstream
tasks. The combination of both terms provides a decoupled yet The Irish Smart Meter Customer Behavior Trial (ISMCBT)
complementary view of the information flow: reconstruction dataset, curated by Ireland’s energy regulatory authority, compromotes informativeness, while contrastive learning enhances prises smart meter recordings from 4,232 residential households
consistency under local perturbations or noise. over 536 days at 30-min resolution, alongside responses to over
 Due to the long-term dependencies in power load signals, 200 survey questions per subscriber. We select classification
representations are required to capture cross-temporal depen- tasks numbered 300, 310, 450, and 4704 as detailed in Table I.
dencies. Contrastive learning achieves this by enforcing tem- The ETTh dataset contains hourly-sampled power load
poral invariance constraints, while reconstruction ensures the records from Chinese substations, serving as an established
temporal continuity of the time series. benchmark for multivariate time-series forecasting. We extend
 2) Information Bottleneck Theory: The information bottle- its application to evaluate imputation and short-term forecasting
neck theory aims to learn a compact representation Z from task performance in this study.
the input X, such that the retained information is maximally The REDD dataset comprises electricity consumption records
relevant to the target task Y , while minimizing the irrelevant from six U.S. households, capturing both whole-home and
or nuisance information. This leads to an optimization tradeoff appliance-level power usage across over ten types of devices.
between I(Z; Y ) and I(Z; X). Initially designed for energy disaggregation research, it is repura) LR enforces the preservation of complete information posed in this study to evaluate anomaly detection performance
 about X in Z (high I(X; Z)), but it may include a large under realistic residential load conditions.
 amount of task-irrelevant noise or redundant features
 (e.g., background, disturbances). B. Data Processing
 b) LC enhances task-relevant features by encouraging invari-
 We conducted temporal segmentation on all datasets to simance under augmentation (e.g., noise injection, temporal ulate power load signals with varying observation durations.
 cropping), thus increasing I(Z; Y ) and filtering out nui- For the ISMCBT dataset, we established two temporal scales:
 sance variables unrelated to the downstream task. weekly segmentation (ISMCBT-Tiny, 336 sampling points re-
 Joint optimization of reconstruction loss LR and contrastive structured into 7 × 48 matrices) and monthly segmentation
loss LC aligns with the IB principle (ISMCBT-Large, 1440 points structured as 30 × 48 matrimin [I(Z; X) − βI(Z; Y )] ces), where the monthly partitioning adopted 30-day cycles
 Z for standardization. The ETTS dataset underwent dedicated
where LR constrains the lower bound of I(Z; X) to avoid infor- preprocessing for imputation and short-term time-series foremation loss of critical features; LC increases I(Z; Y ) to enhance casting task training, implementing two granularities: ETThdiscriminability; β balances the trade-off and can be interpreted Tiny with 7 × 24 configuration (168 points) and ETTh-Large
as a compression coefficient larger β, stronger compression. with 30 × 24 structure (720 points). All datasets were nor-
 The nonstationarity of power load signals, such as periodic malized and sample interpolation was used to account for
fluctuations and sudden noise, requires that the learned repre- sparse missing values. The matrix transformation explicitly
sentations preserve both global pattern completeness (ensured preserves temporal topology, where row dimensions represent
by reconstruction-based objectives) and local perturbation in- consecutive days and column dimensions correspond to fixed
variance (guaranteed by contrastive objectives). For instance, measurement intervals (48 daily readings for ISMCBT, 24 for
augmentation strategies in contrastive learning simulate tran- ETTh), maintaining the intrinsic cyclicity of power consumption
sient disturbances that occur in real-world power grids, while patterns.
YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1467

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT-TINY DATASET

 Since the REDD dataset lacks ground-truth anomaly labels, two-layer MLP to extract feature representations for hi,a and
we follow common practice by injecting synthetic anomalies hi,b .
to facilitate the evaluation of unsupervised anomaly detection
methods. Specifically, we introduce four types of anomalies into V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
the aggregated power consumption data: 1) spike anomalies,
where sudden surges are simulated by amplifying values by A. Downstream Task Experiments
a factor of 2.5–4.0; 2) dropout anomalies, created by scaling 1) Classification Task: Table II and Table III present the pervalues down to 1% –10% of their original magnitude; 3) noise formance of PowerDiffuser on classification tasks, comparing it
bursts, in which localized Gaussian noise is added over short with both time-series general models and self-supervised stratewindows; 4) flat segments, where values are held constant to gies under linear probing and fine-tuning settings. PowerDifmimic sensor faults or frozen readings. The above noise injection fuser demonstrates superior classification performance across
method adopts equal-weight random sampling. Anomalies are most tasks, owing to its integration of contrastive learning and
randomly injected into 5% and 10% of the total time steps to reconstruction, which effectively captures intricate local signal
ensure sparsity and realism. patterns and periodic distributions, necessitating robust feature
 extraction capabilities.
 Under fine-tuning, the Tiny version remains competitive
C. Implementation Details across all tasks on the ISMCBT-Tiny dataset, outperforming the
 In the experiments, pretraining was conducted for 120 epochs, second-best model by an average AUC margin of 0.016 across
and downstream tasks were trained for 80 epochs. A batch task300, task310, and task4704. The Large version dominates
size of 64 was used. The weights of all learnable parameters ISMCBT-Large, surpassing the second-best model by an average
in the models were initialized using Kaiming initialization and AUC margin of 0.004 across task300, task450, and task4704.
optimized with the Adam optimizer. The initial learning rate Under linear probing, the Tiny version also performs competiwas set to 3 × 10−4 , with a weight decay of 1 × 10−5 . All tively on ISMCBT-Tiny, achieving leading or comparable results
experiments were implemented using PyTorch and trained on in most tasks, with particularly strong performance on task4704.
an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 Ti GPU. On ISMCBT-Large, the Large version consistently ranks first
 In terms of model implementation, considering the time cost, or second across all four tasks. These results demonstrate the
ST-Large adopts a structure with one encoder layer and one model’s strong transferability and representational capacity,
decoder layer. ST-Tiny utilizes four involution blocks with even under limited supervision.
K = 3 as the feature extraction units. For downstream tasks, we In addition, two key observations emerge: 1) the experiment
selected the model at diffusion step T = 5 for both linear probing highlights the universality of overfitting in the representation
and fine-tuning, and demonstrated its superiority in ablation learning process of power load signals. For instance, general
experiments. In the contrastive learning loss, we designed a time-series models and ST-Large models, which have larger
1468 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF CLASSIFICATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT-LARGE DATASET

 TABLE IV
 COMPARISON OF IMPUTATION TASKS ON THE ISMCBT AND ETTH DATASET
YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1469

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF SHORT-TERM TIME-SERIES FORECASTING TASK ON THE
 ETTH DATASET

 Fig. 7. Impact of modifying or removing certain settings on the performance of the PowerDiffuser model. The numbers in the figure represent
 the accuracy of the classification task.

 the method, we conducted experiments on both the ISMCBT
 and ETTh datasets. The overall findings align with those of the
 classification task. Models with large parameters still exhibit
 overfitting on the tiny dataset but perform well on the large
 dataset. Our proposed model consistently achieves optimal or
 suboptimal results across all settings, with PowerDiffuser-Large
 achieving the lowest MSE on ISMCBT-Large and ETTh-Large,
 while PowerDiffuser-Tiny performs best on ISMCBT-Tiny. Although performance on ETTh-Tiny is competitive, TimeMAE
 achieves the best overall result in this setting.
 3) Short-Term Time Series Forecasting Task: Table V compares the forecasting performance of all models on the ETTh-
 Tiny dataset under two short-term horizons (48 and 96). The
 results demonstrate that PowerDiffuser-Tiny exhibits superior
 performance in this task. Compared with other self-supervised
 baselines, TS-TCC and TimeMAE also perform well, especially
 TABLE VI in the fine-tuning setting. Overall, short-term forecasting is a
 COMPARISON OF ANOMALY DETECTION TASK ON THE REDD DATASET relatively simple downstream task, and as model size increases,
 current methods tend to achieve comparable performance.
 4) Anomaly Detection Task: We evaluated the performance
 of various models under different anomaly injection rates. As
 shown in Table VI, PowerDiffuser demonstrates significant advantages in the anomaly detection task. Notably, under a low
 injection rate of 5%, the PowerDiffuser-Tiny model achieves
 the best performance with an accuracy of 0.971 and an F1 score
 of 0.881. When the anomaly injection rate increases to 10%, the
 ModernTCN model excels, reaching an accuracy of 0.969 and
 an F1 score of 0.896. This suggests that its short-range feature
 extraction structure is particularly effective for capturing highfrequency anomalies. The results also indicate that although traditional time-series models yield relatively high accuracy, their
parameter sizes, exhibit notable overfitting on the ISMCBT-Tiny F1 scores are comparatively lower, reflecting limited capability
dataset but perform better on ISMCBT-Large. This pattern is in detecting minority-class samples. Since anomaly detection is
similarly observed in time-series self-supervised models. Since an unsupervised process, its performance heavily relies on the
these models typically employ simpler and modular architec- modeling capacity of the feature extractor. Therefore, we argue
tures, their performance shows smaller variations between tiny that ST is more suitable for capturing patterns in power load
and large datasets, underscoring the necessity of designing signals.
power load models tailored to the specific characteristics of the
sampled data; 2) we observed that in self-supervised strategies
based on power load signals, reconstruction-based approaches B. Ablation Experiments
generally outperform those based on contrastive learning. This 1) Deconstructing PowerDiffuser: To demonstrate the consuggests that power load signals prioritize extracting informa- tribution of different components in PowerDiffuser to accuracy
tion from the same time step across local or different cycles, improvement, we systematically deconstructed its design and
particularly in scenarios with missing data or disturbances. evaluated it on two classification tasks, as shown in Fig. 7. To
 2) Imputation Task: Table IV presents the results of the im- better highlight the capabilities of the self-supervised process,
putation task. To demonstrate the generalization capability of we adopted the linear probing approach for downstream tasks.
1470 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 8. Impact of models pretrained with different diffusion steps on downstream task performance. (a) Classification task. (b) Imputation task. (c)
Short-term time-series forecasting task. (d) Anomaly detection task.

 TABLE VII data characteristics is a critical factor in the success of contrastive
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON BETWEEN POWERDIFFUSER AND learning. We systematically explored various feature augmen-
 NONDIFFUSION HYBRID MODEL
 tation combinations to identify the optimal strategy for power
 load signals, with the results illustrated in Fig. 9. Under the linear
 probing setting, we observed that overly aggressive augmentations, such as random noise, rendered the reconstruction process
 excessively challenging, as demonstrated in Fig. 9(a).
 From a loss perspective, combinations incorporating random
 mask methods achieved the lowest loss values. From a downstream task performance perspective (ISMCBT-Tiny, Task310),
 a) Contrastive Learning Loss Removal: Removing the con- the combination of permutation and random mask emerged as
 trastive learning loss and relying solely on reconstruction the most effective. Consequently, we adopted this combination
 demonstrated the importance of contrastive constraints. as the default feature augmentation strategy for PowerDiffuser.
 b) Prediction Target Modification: Changing the diffusion This exploration underscores the importance of aligning the
 process target from predicting noise to predicting the orig- difficulty of self-supervised strategy design with both model
 inal signal surprisingly resulted in worse performance, size and sample complexity.
 4) Effect of Diffusion Framework: To isolate the contribution
 aligning with findings in [25].
 of the diffusion mechanism in our contrastive-reconstruction fuc) 2-D Signal Conversion: Converting power load signals sion framework, we construct an alternative hybrid baseline that
 into 2-D representations proved crucial, as it provided does not rely on a diffusion model. Specifically, we implement
 both spatial and temporal features, enabling the model to a dual-branch encoder structure inspired by MAE [19] and Simbetter capture underlying sample information. CLR [30], where one branch performs masked autoencoding for
 d) Normalization Removal: Eliminating normalization sig- reconstruction, and the other branch applies contrastive learning
 nificantly degraded performance, confirming its necessity with augmentations. Both branches share the same backbone
 as a preprocessing step for power load signals. (ST-Tiny) but are trained jointly without any denoising diffusion
 2) Ablation on Pretrained Models With Different Diffusion process.
Steps T: We evaluate the impact of pretraining with different Table VII reports the performance comparison between Powdiffusion steps on downstream performance across four tasks, erDiffuser and this nondiffusion hybrid baseline in ISMCBTusing PowerDiffuser-Tiny in all experiments. As shown in Fig. 8, Tiny (Task310). PowerDiffuser consistently outperforms it
the model achieves the best performance on most tasks when across all evaluation metrics. This confirms that the integration
the diffusion step is set to T = 5. We believe that allowing a of contrastive and reconstruction learning within the diffusion
moderate level of noise during pretraining enables more flexible framework provides synergistic benefits beyond simply combinfine-tuning in downstream tasks, which is consistent with the ing the two objectives.
findings in [25]. In PowerDiffuser, the contrastive loss and reconstruction
 3) Ablation on Different Feature Augmentation Combina- loss share a common diffusion-based representation pathway,
tions: Designing data augmentation methods tailored to specific whereas in the dual-branch MAE + SimCLR baseline, the two
YANG et al.: POWERDIFFUSER: COLLABORATIVE CONTRASTIVE-RECONSTRUCTION SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING 1471

 TABLE VIII
 COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY BETWEEN POWERDIFFUSER AND BASELINES IN ETTH

 5) Computational Efficiency Analysis: We quantify the computational cost of PowerDiffuser and other self-supervised algorithms in Table VIII. Specifically, we perform pretraining on
 the ETTh dataset with a batch size of 64.
 PowerDiffuser exhibits a relatively large training time, which
 is primarily attributed to the iterative nature of the diffusion process and the integration of both contrastive and reconstruction
 objectives at each step. In addition, our current implementation
 prioritizes modularity and clarity, which results in less runtime
 optimization compared to some mature baseline frameworks.
 Despite the high training cost, the inference time of PowerDiffuser is 29.7 milliseconds per batch and the peak GPU memory
 usage is 4.6 GB. These values remain moderate and are even
 lower than those of single-objective self-supervised strategies.
 This efficiency is mainly due to the lightweight design of the
 ST feature extractor based on involution operations. Therefore,
 we consider the offline training time to be acceptable, and
 the inference efficiency indicates that PowerDiffuser has the
 potential for practical deployment.

 VI. CONCLUSION
 This article introduces PowerDiffuser, a self-supervised strategy specifically designed for power load signals. Built on the
 diffusion model framework, PowerDiffuser combines two mainstream self-supervised strategies, namely contrastive learning
 and reconstruction, effectively balancing global distribution and
 local information. We show that general time-series models
 often overfit in power load signal tasks and address this by
 developing two adaptable feature extractors, ST-Large and ST-
 Tiny, designed to process raw data of varying complexities.
 Furthermore, we offer insights into the generalization of the
 involution operator for 1-D data and the preprocessing of power
Fig. 9. Visualization of the impact of different feature enhancement load signals. Experimental results on real-world datasets concombinations on performance. Combinations within the same method
use different random seeds. It is worth noting that in both plots, lighter firm the effectiveness of our approach, while ablation studies
colors indicate better performance. (a) Comparison of pretraining loss emphasize the influence of different design choices on the overvalues for different feature augmentation combinations on the ISMCBT all architecture’s performance. We argue that a well-designed
dataset. (b) Comparison of different feature augmentation combinations self-supervised strategy is essential for applying artificial intelon the downstream ISMCBT-tiny classification task (Task300).
 ligence technologies in the power load domain. Future work will
 focus on exploring more lightweight self-supervised strategies
 to mitigate the substantial computational costs associated with
 the diffusion process.

objectives are executed in parallel and optimized independently. REFERENCES
This may lead to conflicts in the representation space or mutual [1] B. Jiang et al., “Dynamic temporal dependency model for multiple steps
interference between objectives, making joint convergence more ahead short-term load forecasting of power system,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
difficult. In contrast, the diffusion framework naturally provides Appl., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 5244–5254, Jul./Aug. 2024.
a progressive learning mechanism, which we believe contributes [2] P. Zhao et al., “Probabilistic multienergy load forecasting based on hybrid
to more stable and generalizable representation learning. Over- attention-enabled transformer network and gaussian process-aided residual learning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 8379–8393,
all, we argue that PowerDiffuser’s joint objective design exhibits Jun. 2024.
coupled consistency, rather than a structurally fragmented com- [3] W. Liao et al., “Can we trust explainable artificial intelligence in wind
bination. power forecasting?,” Appl. Energy, vol. 376, Dec. 2024, Art. no. 124273.
1472 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2026

 [4] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, D. Gan, J. Yang, D. S. Kirschen, and C. Kang, “Deep [30] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
 learning-based socio-demographic information identification from smart for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 meter data,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2593–2602, Learn. 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
 May 2018.
 [5] Y. Zhu et al., “Hybrid-order representation learning for electricity theft
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1248–1259, Honggang Yang (Student Member, IEEE) re-
 Feb. 2022. ceived the M.S. Eng. degree from Hubei Nomal
 [6] W. Liao, R. Zhu, T. Ishizaki, Y. Li, Y. Jia, and Z. Yang, “Can gas University, Huangshi, China, in 2023.
 consumption data improve the performance of electricity theft detection?,” He is currently working toward the Ph.D de-
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 8453–8465, Jun. 2024. gree in traffic information engineering and con-
 [7] M. Noroozi et al., “Unsupervised learning of visual representations by trol with the School of Automation, Wuhan Unisolving jigsaw puzzles,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2016, pp. 69–84. versity of Technology, Wuhan, China. His cur-
 [8] A. Gao, F. Mei, J. Zheng, H. Sha, M. Guo, and Y. Xie, “Electricity rent research interests include deeping learning
 theft detection based on contrastive learning and non-intrusive load mon- and optimization algorithm.
 itoring,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 4565–4580, Nov.
 2023.
 [9] X. Xia et al., “ETD-ConvLSTM: A deep learning approach for electricity Cheng Lian (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 theft detection in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and aupp. 2553–2568, 2023. tomation and the M.S. degree in control science
[10] H. Ye et al., “ATFNet: Adaptive time-frequency ensembled network for and engineering from the School of Automation,
 long-term time series forecasting,” 2024, ariXv:2404.05192. Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China,
[11] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence in 2008 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, degree in control science and engineering from
 no. 12, pp. 11106–11115. the School of Automation, Huazhong University
[12] H. Wu et al., “AutoFormer: Decomposition transformers with auto- of Science and Technology, Wuhan, in 2014.
 correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. He is currently a Professor with the School
 Process. Syst., 2021, vol. 34, pp. 22419–22430. of Automation, Wuhan University of Technology.
[13] A. Oord et al., “Representation learning with contrastive predictive cod- His research interests include machine learning, data mining, and pating,” 2018, arXiv:1807.03748. tern recognition.
[14] D. Luo et al., “Time series contrastive learning with information-aware
 augmentations,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, Bingrong Xu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 pp. 4534–4542. degree in control science and engineering from
[15] S. Tonekaboni et al., “Unsupervised representation learning for time the School of Automation, Wuhan University of
 series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2015, and the
 Representation, 2020. Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering
[16] S. Tonekaboni et al., “Unsupervised representation learning for time from the School of Artificial Intelligence and Auseries with temporal neighborhood coding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. tomation, Huazhong University of Science and
 Representation, 2021, pp. 1–17. Technology, Wuhan, in 2021.
[17] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time She is currently an Associate Professor with
 series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, vol. 36, no. 8, the School of Automation, Wuhan University of
 pp. 8980–8987. Technology, Wuhan. Her research interests in-
[18] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and clude zero-shot learning, transfer learning, sparse representation, and
 contextual contrasting,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, low-rank representation.
 pp. 2352–2359.
[19] K. He et al., “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16000–16009. Ruijin Ding received the Ph.D. degree in hydro-
[20] R. R. Chowdhury et al., “TARNet: Task-aware reconstruction for time- biology from the University of Chinese Academy
 series transformer,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data of Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2025.
 Min, 2022, pp. 212–220. She has authored several papers in interna-
[21] Z. Li et al., “Ti-MAE: Self-supervised masked time series autoencoders,” tional and national journals at the intersection
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, 2023, pp. 1–20. of artificial intelligence and biotechnology. Her
[22] M. Cheng et al., “TimeMAE: Self-supervised representations of time series research interests include bioelectrical signal
 with decoupled masked autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2303.00320. analysis and gene prediction.
[23] W. Zhang, L. Yang, S. Geng, and S. Hong, “Self-supervised time series representation learning via cross reconstruction transformer,” IEEE
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 11, pp. 16129–16138,
 Nov. 2024.
[24] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic Zhigang Zeng (Fellow, IEEE) received the
 models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, vol. 33, Ph.D. degree in systems analysis and integrapp. 6840–6851. tion from the Huazhong University of Science
[25] Y. Xing, L. Qu, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and L. Bruzzone, and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2003.
 “CrossDiff: Exploring self-supervised representation of pansharpening via He is currently a Professor with the School of
 cross-predictive diffusion model,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 33, Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong
 pp. 5496–5509, 2024. University of Science and Technology, Wuhan,
[26] Z. Senane et al., “Self-supervised learning of time series represen- and also with the Key Laboratory of Image Protation via diffusion process and imputation-interpolation-forecasting cessing and Intelligent Control of the Education
 mask,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Min. 2024, Ministry of China, Wuhan. He has authored or
 pp. 2560–2571. coauthored more than 200 international journal
[27] D. Li et al., “Involution: Inverting the inherence of convolution for visual papers. His research interests include theory of functional differential
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., equations and differential equations with discontinuous right-hand sides,
 2021, pp. 12321–12330. and their applications to dynamics of neural networks, memristive sys-
[28] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image tems, and control systems.
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016, Dr. Zeng has been an Associate Editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
 pp. 770–778. NEURAL NETWORKS (2010–2011), IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CYBERNETICS
[29] D. Luo et al., “ModernTCN: A modern pure convolution structure for (since 2014), IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS (since 2016),
 general time series analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representation, and a Member of the Editorial Board of Neural Networks (since 2012),
 2024, pp. 1–43. Cognitive Computation (since 2010), and Applied Soft Computing (since
 2013).