This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 1

 Principled Uncertainty Decomposition with
 Bayesian Ensemble Transformers for Trustworthy
 Intrusion Detection
 Zhengye Li, Jianheng Tong, Xiufeng Liu, Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (IDS) are maintaining high detection accuracy, minimizing false posicritical for cybersecurity, yet existing approaches often pro- tives, and providing reliable confidence estimates for real-time
vide overconfident predictions without reliable uncertainty es- security decisions [2].
timates, hindering critical decision-making. We introduce a
novel Bayesian ensemble transformer framework for uncertainty- Applying artificial intelligence and machine learning to
aware intrusion detection that delivers both strong detection intrusion detection introduces significant complexities beyond
performance and well-calibrated confidence. Our framework conventional pattern recognition. Traditional machine learning
uniquely combines transformer architectures with ensemble often produces overconfident predictions that do not reflect
methods to achieve a principled decomposition of prediction true uncertainty, poorly calibrated confidence estimates, and
uncertainty into epistemic (model uncertainty) and aleatoric
(data uncertainty) components, offering actionable insights for fails to distinguish between different sources of prediction
security analysts. We establish theoretical convergence guarantees uncertainty [3], [4]. These deficiencies are critical in securityfor this approach under local convexity assumptions, supported critical applications where decision confidence directly imby empirical validation. Comprehensive experiments across four pacts operational effectiveness and resource allocation. For
benchmark datasets (NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, and example, when a model predicts an attack with high confidence
SWaT) demonstrate F1-scores ranging from 77.55% to 97.00%,
with particularly strong performance on UNSW-NB15 (97.00%), but the prediction is actually uncertain, security analysts may
alongside excellent calibration with Expected Calibration Error waste resources investigating false alarms or, worse, miss
(ECE) ranging from 0.0248 to 0.2278. Adversarial robustness genuine threats.
analysis shows minimal performance degradation under sophis- Adapting transformer architectures to cybersecurity faces
ticated C&W (3.6% drop) and PGD attacks (8.0% drop), high- unique challenges: modeling temporal sequences with heterolighting the framework’s resilience. This work advances intrusion
detection by providing interpretable uncertainty and robust geneous network features [5], meeting real-time processing
performance, addressing a critical gap in current cybersecurity latency constraints, and requiring principled uncertainty quansystems to enable more informed and reliable security decisions. tification to guide human analysts [6]. Dynamic network environments introduce distribution shifts and concept drift [7],
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection, uncertainty quantification, while adversarial perturbations [8] designed to evade detection
Bayesian neural networks, transformer networks, in-context further complicate maintaining reliable performance.
learning, cybersecurity, ensemble methods Current state-of-the-art approaches in uncertainty-aware intrusion detection frequently rely on ad-hoc uncertainty esti-
 I. I NTRODUCTION mation, lacking rigorous theoretical foundations. This results
 in poorly calibrated confidence estimates that provide unre-
 Network intrusion detection systems (IDS) are fundamental liable indicators of prediction quality [4], [9]. Transformer
components of modern cybersecurity infrastructure, acting as architectures, while powerful for sequence modeling, have
primary defense mechanisms against an increasingly com- not been systematically adapted for cybersecurity applications
plex array of cyber threats targeting critical network assets with principled uncertainty quantification. This gap limits
globally [1]. As cyber attacks become more sophisticated both the theoretical understanding and practical reliability
and diverse, security analysts face a critical challenge: how of transformer-based intrusion detection systems, particularly
to make reliable decisions when machine learning models when encountering novel attack patterns, adversarial inputs,
provide predictions without clear indicators of confidence or or operational environments that differ from training condiuncertainty. This dynamic landscape necessitates intelligent tions [10].
security solutions capable of adapting to novel attack patterns, This work addresses these fundamental challenges by introducing a novel uncertainty-aware intrusion detection frame-
 Zhengye Li is with the Department of Mathematics, College of Arts and
Sciences, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign, IL 61820, work that successfully adapts architectural and analytical
USA (email: Zhengye Li@outlook.com). insights from transformer networks to cybersecurity. Our
 Jianheng Tong is with the College of Information Engineering, Shang- approach establishes rigorous theoretical foundations and
hai Maritime University, Shanghai 201306, China (email: tongjianheng0006@stu.shmtu.edu.cn). demonstrates superior practical performance. Our framework
 Xiufeng Liu is with the Department of Technology, Management and is designed to handle both binary classification (normal vs.
Economics, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark attack) and multiclass classification (normal vs. multiple at-
(email: xiuli@dtu.dk).
 Corresponding authors: Jianheng Tong (tongjian- tack types), with the classification type determined by the
heng0006@stu.shmtu.edu.cn) and Xiufeng Liu (xiuli@dtu.dk). dataset and application requirements. We employ Bayesian

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 2

ensemble transformers within a carefully designed single-layer Machine learning approaches have gained prominence in
architecture. This design balances representational capacity IDS research, with support vector machines [14], random
with computational efficiency, enabling theoretical tractability forests [15], and neural networks [16] showing promising
for convergence analysis and principled decomposition of results. Deep learning methods, including convolutional neuprediction uncertainty into epistemic (model uncertainty) and ral networks [17] and recurrent neural networks [18], have
aleatoric (data uncertainty) components [11]. The framework achieved state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.
integrates advanced calibration techniques and adversarial Recent advances include attention-based models [1] and graph
training [4], enhancing robustness against evasion attempts neural networks for network traffic analysis [19]. Recent comand ensuring uncertainty estimates accurately reflect prediction prehensive reviews [20], [21] highlight the growing adoption
confidence across diverse operational conditions. of deep learning in IDS, with transformer-based approaches
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows: emerging as a promising direction for handling sequential
 1) Principled Uncertainty Decomposition. We intro- network traffic patterns and adapting to evolving attack strateduce a formal framework for separating epistemic and gies. Ensemble learning methods have also shown promise
 aleatoric uncertainty in transformer-based IDS, and de- for intrusion detection, with recent work demonstrating imrive convergence guarantees for our meta-training pro- proved robustness through subspace clustering and ensemble
 cedure under local convexity. techniques [22].
 2) Bayesian Ensemble Transformer Architecture. We However, existing approaches share common limitations:
 design a computationally efficient, single-layer trans- lack of principled uncertainty quantification, absence of rigorformer ensemble optimized for real-time intrusion de- ous theoretical guarantees, and limited adaptability to evolvtection, achieving sub-10 ms inference latency without ing threats. The contemporary threat landscape, charactersacrificing expressivity. ized by advanced persistent threats, zero-day exploits, and
 3) Rigorous Empirical Validation. We evaluate our ap- machine learning-powered evasion techniques, systematically
 proach on four standard benchmarks (NSL-KDD, CI- circumvents traditional detection methods [23]. This dynamic
 CIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, SWaT), demonstrating com- environment demands intelligent security solutions capable
 petitive F1-scores (77.55%–97.00%), superior calibra- of adapting to novel attack patterns while maintaining high
 tion (ECE: 0.0248–0.2278), and strong adversarial ro- detection accuracy and providing reliable confidence estimates
 bustness (≤ 8.0% drop under PGD/C&W attacks). for real-time security decisions.
 Given these limitations in traditional IDS approaches, we
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Secnow examine how uncertainty quantification techniques have
tion II reviews related work in intrusion detection, uncertainty
 evolved to address the challenge of reliable confidence estiquantification, and transformer architectures, establishing the
 mation in neural networks.
context for our contributions. Section III details our proposed Bayesian ensemble transformer framework, including B. Uncertainty Quantification in Neural Networks
system overview, problem formulation, theoretical guaran-
 Uncertainty quantification in neural networks has evolved
tees, architecture design, and training procedures. Section IV
 from early Bayesian neural network approaches [24] to modpresents comprehensive empirical results across four benchern ensemble methods [25] and variational inference techmark datasets, including comparative analysis, adversarial
 niques [26]. The decomposition of uncertainty into epistemic
robustness evaluation, and ablation studies. Finally, Section V
 (model uncertainty) and aleatoric (data uncertainty) composummarizes our contributions and discusses future research
 nents provides valuable insights for decision making [3].
directions.
 Recent comprehensive surveys [27] provide extensive coverage of uncertainty quantification methods, highlighting the
 II. R ELATED W ORK importance of both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty de-
 To situate our work within the broader research landscape, composition for reliable machine learning systems. Monte
this section provides a comprehensive overview of advance- Carlo Dropout (MCD) [28] provides a practical approximation
ments in intrusion detection systems, uncertainty quantification to Bayesian inference by treating dropout as a Bayesian
in neural networks, and transformer architectures. We highlight approximation. Deep Ensembles [25] achieve strong empirical
existing limitations that motivate our approach and identify performance by training multiple models with different initialgaps that our framework addresses. izations. Variational inference methods [26] place distributions
 over network weights, enabling principled uncertainty estimation but with increased computational overhead. Recent work
A. Intrusion Detection Systems on Bayesian neural network architectures [29] has advanced
 Traditional intrusion detection approaches can be catego- the theoretical understanding and practical implementation of
rized into signature-based, anomaly-based, and hybrid meth- uncertainty-aware deep learning systems. Ensemble methods
ods [12]. Signature-based systems rely on predefined patterns have been successfully applied to anomaly detection tasks,
of known attacks, achieving high precision but failing to detect demonstrating their effectiveness in handling partially obnovel threats. Anomaly-based systems model normal behavior served anomalies and improving detection robustness [30].
and flag deviations, providing better coverage of unknown Calibration of neural network predictions has received signifiattacks but suffering from high false positive rates [13]. cant attention, with temperature scaling [4], Platt scaling [31],

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 3

and isotonic regression [32] providing post-hoc calibration theory to cybersecurity, providing both theoretical foundations
methods. Recent work has focused on improving calibra- and practical implementation for few-shot attack detection.
tion during training through specialized loss functions and We adapt insights from ICL theory to cybersecurity appliregularization techniques [33]. Evidential Neural Networks cations, though we acknowledge that full ICL implementation
(ENN) have emerged as a distinct paradigm for quantifying for cybersecurity data remains challenging. Our contributions
uncertainty by treating network outputs as evidential distri- include: (1) theoretical analysis of transformer architectures
butions over classes [34]. This approach allows for explicit for cybersecurity with convergence guarantees under idealized
modeling of both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty without assumptions, (2) development of uncertainty quantification
requiring multiple forward passes or ensembles, providing methods specifically for intrusion detection, and (3) empirical
computational efficiency while maintaining theoretical rigor. In evaluation of few-shot learning capabilities. While we draw
cybersecurity applications, uncertainty quantification has been inspiration from ICL theory, we recognize that demonstrating
explored for malware detection [35] and network anomaly genuine in-context learning for cybersecurity applications redetection [36]. Recent work has extended uncertainty-aware quires further research and more rigorous evaluation protocols.
approaches to time series anomaly detection [37], demonstrat- Building on the foundations established in related work, we
ing the value of uncertainty estimates for identifying anoma- now present our proposed framework that integrates uncerlous network behaviors. However, these works often lack tainty quantification, transformer architectures, and ensemble
comprehensive theoretical foundations and rigorous evaluation methods into a unified intrusion detection system.
of uncertainty quality across diverse threat landscapes.
 While uncertainty quantification provides a foundation for III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
reliable predictions, transformer architectures offer powerful This section details our uncertainty-aware intrusion demechanisms for sequence modeling and few-shot adaptation. tection framework, encompassing its overall system design,
We now review how transformer-based approaches, partic- theoretical underpinnings, architectural components, training
ularly in-context learning, can be adapted to cybersecurity procedures, and methods for uncertainty quantification and
applications. calibration.

C. Transformer Networks and In-Context Learning A. System Overview
 Transformer architectures have revolutionized natural lan- Our uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework integuage processing and demonstrated remarkable few-shot learn- grates multiple complementary components to achieve robust
ing capabilities through their attention mechanisms [5]. The performance with reliable uncertainty quantification. Figure 1
theoretical understanding of transformer in-context learning presents the complete system architecture, illustrating the data
(ICL) has advanced significantly, with groundbreaking work flow from raw network traffic through feature processing,
proving that single-layer transformers can implicitly imple- Bayesian ensemble prediction, and uncertainty calibration to
ment gradient descent-like optimization within their attention final decision making.
mechanism [38], [39]. The work by [39] demonstrates that The framework addresses fundamental challenges in cyattention weights can approximate gradient descent steps: bersecurity by providing principled uncertainty quantification
Attention(xq , C) ≈ xq − η∇xq L(C), where C represents through rigorous decomposition of prediction uncertainty into
context examples and L is the loss function. This theoretical interpretable epistemic and aleatoric components, enabling
foundation provides insights into how transformers can adapt security analysts to understand the sources and implications
to new tasks without explicit parameter updates. of model uncertainty. The framework supports adaptive deci-
 While ICL theory was originally developed for natural sion making through dynamic threshold adjustment based on
language tasks, recent work has begun exploring its application uncertainty estimates, allowing the system to become more
to structured domains. [40] shows that transformers can learn conservative when uncertainty is high and more aggressive
linear functions in-context, while [41] extends this to more when confidence is high. Human-AI collaboration is enhanced
complex function classes. However, the adaptation of ICL the- through uncertainty-aware alerts that prioritize analyst attenory to cybersecurity applications presents unique challenges: tion on cases where the model is most uncertain, optimizing
(1) Heterogeneous Features: Network flows contain mixed human expertise allocation. The framework achieves realcontinuous and categorical features unlike homogeneous text time processing with computational efficiency suitable for
tokens. (2) Temporal Dependencies: Cybersecurity data has production deployment with inference times under 10ms per
complex temporal patterns that differ from sequential language sample.
structure. (3) Adversarial Robustness: Security applications The process begins with raw network flows undergoing
require robustness against adversarial perturbations, which is preprocessing and normalization to handle the heterogeneous
not addressed in standard ICL theory. nature of cybersecurity data. A specialized feature embedding
 Traditional meta-learning approaches like MAML [42] and module transforms continuous and categorical features into
Prototypical Networks [43] have been applied to cybersecu- a unified sequence embedding that preserves cybersecurityrity with limited success due to computational overhead and relevant similarities. These contextualized sequence embedpoor adaptation to the dynamic threat landscape. Our work dings are then processed by the core Bayesian ensemble
represents the first systematic adaptation of transformer ICL transformers, which comprise multiple individual models that

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 4

collectively make predictions while capturing model uncer- capabilities to identify similar threats across the network
tainty through disagreement. The uncertainty quantification infrastructure.
module computes total prediction uncertainty and decomposes The ICL objective is to learn a meta-function fθ : Ci ×xq →
it into epistemic (model-related) and aleatoric (data-inherent) [0, 1] that can adapt to new attack families using only context
components using the law of total variance. This decomposi- examples, without parameter updates:
tion provides actionable insights: high epistemic uncertainty 
 fθ (xq | Ci ) = Transformer Embed(x1 , y1 ); . . . ; Embed(xk , yk );
suggests the need for more training data or model refinement, 
while high aleatoric uncertainty indicates inherent noise or Embed(xq , ∅)
ambiguity in the data that cannot be reduced through model- (1)
ing improvements. The calibration module employs post-hoc The meta-training objective optimizes over episodes sampled
 from training families Ftrain :
techniques like temperature scaling to ensure that confidence  
scores accurately reflect the true likelihood of correctness. This 1 X
 min EFi ∼Ftrain ECi ,Qi ∼Fi  ℓ(fθ (xq | Ci ), yq ) (2)
is crucial for cybersecurity applications where miscalibrated θ |Qi |
 (xq ,yq )∈Qi
confidence can lead to either excessive false alarms or missed
threats. Finally, the decision making module uses calibrated This formulation enables few-shot adaptation to new attack
predictions and uncertainty estimates for adaptive thresholding types from Ftest unseen during training.
and human-in-the-loop support, enabling security analysts to Inspired by the theoretical framework of [39] which demonprioritize and investigate alerts based on model confidence strates the ability of single-layer transformers to implement
levels. forms of in-context learning, we employ a single-layer transformer block architecture for our system. This design choice is
 motivated by the desire to balance representational power with
B. Problem Formulation and ICL Implementation theoretical tractability and computational efficiency, drawing
 insights from the analytical tractability of single-layer trans-
 We formulate intrusion detection as a meta-learning problem formers in the context of ICL theory.
where the system must adapt to new attack types using in- Let E ∈ R(T +1)×dmodel denote the embedded input secontext learning, addressing the core cybersecurity challenge quence, where the first T rows correspond to the context flows
of rapidly responding to emerging threats. This formulation {x1 , . . . , xT } and the last row represents the query flow xq .
is motivated by the dynamic nature of the threat landscape, The embedding function ϕ : Rd → Rdmodel maps raw network
where new attack variants continuously emerge and traditional features to a higher-dimensional representation suitable for
static models quickly become obsolete. Our framework sup- transformer processing.
ports both binary classification (distinguishing normal traffic A single transformer block, as used in our implementation,
from attacks) and multiclass classification (identifying specific consists of a multi-head self-attention mechanism, followed
attack types). The architecture remains the same for both by layer normalization, a position-wise feed-forward network
scenarios, with the output layer configured appropriately: a (FFN), and another layer normalization, with residual consingle output neuron with sigmoid activation for binary clas- nections around each sub-layer. The multi-head self-attention
sification, or multiple output neurons with softmax activation mechanism is crucial for aggregating information from the
for multiclass classification. This design flexibility allows our context. For a query vector qi interacting with key vectors
method to adapt to different application requirements and kj and value vectors vj , the attention output is:
dataset characteristics.
 QK T
  
 Let F = {F1 , F2 , . . . , FK } denote a collection of attack Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax √ V (3)
families, where each family Fi represents a distinct attack type dk
(e.g., DoS variants, malware families, APTs). This hierarchical where Q, K, V are derived from E via linear projections
organization reflects the natural clustering of attacks based on (WQ , WK , WV ). The parameters WQ , WK , WV and the FFN
their behavioral patterns and technical characteristics. weights are explicitly trained via gradient descent on our
 For each attack family Fi , an ICL episode consists of: intrusion detection task.
 We implement genuine in-context learning for intrusion
 • Context Set: Ci = {(xj , yj )}kj=1 where xj ∈ Rd are
 detection through a rigorous adaptation of transformer ICL
 network flows and yj ∈ {0, 1} are labels, all sampled
 theory to cybersecurity contexts. Our single-layer transformer
 from family Fi . The context set provides representative
 implements approximate gradient descent through the attention
 examples of the attack pattern that the model must learn
 mechanism. For a query flow xq and context examples C =
 to recognize.
 (l) (l) nq {(xi , yi )}ki=1 , the attention output approximates a gradient
 • Query Set: Qi = {(xq , yq )}l=1 where query flows
 descent step on the context loss. Following [39], for a linear
 are from the same family Fi but disjoint from Ci . This
 model f (x) = W x, one Pkstep of gradient2 descent on context
 separation ensures that the model must generalize from
 C with loss L(C) = i=1 ∥W xi − yi ∥ yields an updated
 context examples to new instances of the same attack
 weight matrix W ′ . The attention mechanism produces:
 type.
 k
 This episodic structure mirrors real-world cybersecurity
 X
 Attention(xq , C) ≈ W ′ xq = xq −ηef f αi ∇f (xi ) ℓ(f (xi ), yi )·ϕ(xi )T
scenarios where security analysts encounter a few examples i=1
of a new attack type and must quickly adapt their detection (4)

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 5

 Pre- Embedding Module Bayesian Uncertainty Calibration Decision Making
 processing Ensemble Quantification
 Continuous Transformers
 Features Epistemic Temperature
 Uncertainty Scaling
 𝑝𝑝1 𝑥𝑥

 …
 𝑝𝑝𝑚𝑚 𝑥𝑥
 Uncertainty Calibration Adaptive
 Quantification Techniques Thresholding
 Feature Embedding

 …
 Network Categorical
 Flows Aleatoric
 Feature
 Sequence Uncertainty
 embedding Human-in-the-
 Loop Support

Fig. 1: System overview of the uncertainty-aware intrusion detection framework. The pipeline processes network flows through
preprocessing, feature embedding, Bayesian ensemble transformers, uncertainty quantification (decomposed into epistemic and
aleatoric components), calibration, and adaptive decision making with human-in-the-loop integration.

where αi represents the attention weights, and the gradient a challenge. The performance gains we observe could be
is taken with respect to the model’s prediction on context attributed to better statistical estimation with more context expoints. This formulation ensures that the attention mechanism amples rather than true in-context adaptation. This distinction
effectively ”learns” from the provided context examples by is important because genuine ICL would enable adaptation to
minimizing the context loss, adapting the prediction for xq fundamentally novel attack patterns, while improved statistical
without explicit parameter updates. estimation primarily benefits from having more representative
 We design the embedding function ϕ : Rd → Rdmodel examples of known attack types.
to preserve cybersecurity-relevant similarities. Network flows Second, meta-learned models can still overfit their metawith similar attack patterns produce similar embeddings, en- training tasks and fail to generalize to genuinely novel attacks
abling effective attention-based retrieval. The key insight is that differ markedly from training episodes. Robust adaptation
that attention weights αi become large when the query xq is requires a broad, diverse task distribution; if meta-training
similar to context examples xi that have high loss, naturally does not span enough attack behaviors, in-context predictions
implementing gradient descent where the ”gradient” direction may be fragile. Our experimental setup addresses this by
is determined by context similarity. using 7 diverse attack families for meta-training (DoS, DDoS,
 During meta-training (Algorithm 1), we train the trans- Brute Force, Web Attacks, Botnet, Port Scan, SQL Injection),
former to perform effective ICL by exposing it to diverse covering a wide range of attack behaviors from network-level
attack families in episodic fashion. Each episode contains (DoS, DDoS) to application-level (Web Attacks, SQL Injeccontext-query pairs from the same attack family, teaching tion) attacks. However, real-world deployment may encounter
the model to leverage contextual information for adaptation. attack patterns not well-represented in training, such as zero-
The meta-learning objective ensures that the learned attention day exploits or novel attack vectors that differ substantially
patterns generalize to new attack types. from known attack families. To mitigate overfitting, we employ
 Our analysis (Theorem 2) proves that this attention-based early stopping based on meta-validation performance (using
adaptation achieves convergence rates comparable to ex- Infiltration and XSS families), regularization in the metaplicit gradient descent, with additional terms accounting for learning objective, and ensemble diversity mechanisms that
 √ noisy data and adversarcybersecurity-specific challenges like encourage different ensemble members to capture complemenial perturbations. The bound O(1/ k) + ϵapprox shows that tary attack patterns. Despite these measures, the risk of overperformance improves with more context examples while the fitting to meta-training tasks remains a limitation, particularly
approximation error ϵapprox captures the quality of attention- for attacks that are fundamentally different from those seen
based gradient descent. during meta-training.
 Third, ICL performance strongly depends on how repre-
C. Limitations and Generalization Bounds sentative and correct the few provided examples are. Weak
 While our framework draws inspiration from ICL theory examples can misdirect the model or skew its predictions,
and demonstrates promising few-shot results, we acknowledge and the resulting outputs (particularly from complex models
important limitations. First, definitively proving ”genuine” in- with uncertainty decomposition) can be difficult for analysts to
context learning for cybersecurity, as seen in NLP, remains interpret or trust in real time, especially under time pressure.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 6

We address this through careful example selection in our fθ with attention weights WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rd×d and a
experiments, using diverse, high-quality examples from each new attack type characterized by context examples C =
attack family that represent the family’s characteristic patterns. {(xi , yi )}ki=1 . Let ℓ(·, ·) be the cross-entropy loss and (xq , yq )
However, practical deployment would require robust example be a query example. Under assumptions that attention approxselection strategies, such as automated quality assessment, imates gradient descent, cybersecurity feature space satisfies
diversity sampling, and validation of example representative- local smoothness, and context examples are representative with
ness. To assess the impact of example quality on model bounded noise, the in-context adaptation error satisfies:
trustworthiness, we conduct a fairness analysis (Section IV-G)
that evaluates prediction consistency and uncertainty reliability E[ℓ(fθ (xq | C), yq )] ≤ E[ℓ(f ∗ (xq ), yq )]
across different example quality levels, providing insights into C1 C3 σ
 + √ + C2 ϵapprox + (6)
the model’s robustness to imperfect examples. k | {z } k}
 | {z
 These limitations motivate future work on: (1) developing |{z} approx. error
 sample complexity noise effect
rigorous evaluation protocols to distinguish genuine ICL from
statistical estimation, (2) expanding meta-training to cover where C1 , C2 , C3 are problem-dependent constants, and f ∗
broader attack behavior distributions, and (3) creating auto- denotes the optimal predictor for the attack type.
mated example selection methods for reliable ICL deployment. Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-B
 of the Supplementary Material. □
D. Theoretical Guarantees The assumptions in Theorem 2 are reasonable for cy-
 We establish theoretical guarantees for meta-training con- bersecurity applications under the following conditions: (1)
vergence and in-context adaptation. Attention approximates gradient descent: This holds when
 Deep neural networks have inherently non-convex loss the attention mechanism can effectively aggregate information
landscapes. The following theorem provides convergence guar- from context examples, which is enabled by our cybersecurityantees under local convexity assumptions, an idealization val- specific embedding function that preserves attack pattern simidated by our empirical analysis (Section IV-D1) which shows ilarities. The single-layer architecture reduces the complexity
practical training exhibits consistent convergence patterns. of this assumption compared to deeper networks. (2) Local
 Theorem 1 (Convergence Rate): Consider the single-layer smoothness: Network traffic features typically exhibit smooth
transformer trained with gradient descent on the cross-entropy temporal dependencies and gradual transitions between norloss L(θ). Under local µ-strong convexity and L-smoothness mal and attack behaviors, making local smoothness a reain a region around a minimizer θ∗ , and learning rate η ≤ 1/L, sonable assumption. The preprocessing steps (normalization,
the parameter error satisfies: embedding) further ensure smooth feature representations. (3)
 Representative context examples: This assumption requires
 ∥θt − θ∗ ∥ ≤ C0 · ρt where ρ = (1 − ηµ)1/2 < 1 (5) careful example selection, which we address through diverse
 attack family sampling and validation on held-out families.
This gives a linear convergence rate O(exp(−t/(2κ))) when
 These conditions are generally satisfied in our experimental
ηp= 1/L, where κ = L/µ is the condition number and C0 =
 setup, as evidenced by the empirical ICL performance results
 2(L(θ0 ) − L(θ∗ ))/µ.
 (Section IV-F).
Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-A We establish PAC-Bayesian generalization bounds for our
of the Supplementary Material. □ ensemble approach, providing theoretical guarantees on the
 true risk of the ensemble predictor.
 While neural networks exhibit non-convex loss landscapes Theorem 3 (PAC-Bayesian Bound for Ensemble Averaging):
globally, empirical evidence and recent theoretical work sug- For an ensemble of M models, fens (x) = M 1
 PM
 m=1 fm (x),
gest locally convex behavior near converged solutions, making used for classification with a convex loss function, and assumthis analysis useful for understanding training dynamics. Once ing each fm yields a learned posterior Qm , with probability
training has progressed sufficiently and the model parameters at least 1 − δ, the true risk of the ensemble can be bounded
are in a basin of attraction around a local minimum, the loss as:
landscape in that region can be well-approximated as locally M
convex. This assumption is validated empirically by our con- 1 X
 R(fens ) ≤ R(fm )
vergent training dynamics shown in Figure 3 (Section IV-D1), M m=1
which demonstrates exponential decay consistent with the the- M
 r !
 1 X KL(Qm ∥ Pm ) + ln(2M/δ)
oretical predictions. The local convexity framework provides ≤ R̂(fm ) +
valuable insights into convergence rates and training stability, M m=1 2n
even if the global landscape is non-convex. (7)
 The meta-training process, whose convergence is guaranteed This bound highlights that the ensemble’s generalization error
by Theorem 1, aims to learn parameters θ∗ that enable effec- is related to the average generalization error of its members,
tive ICL. The quality of these converged parameters directly implying benefits from model diversity.
impacts the ICL adaptation capability analyzed in Theorem 2.
 Proof: The proof for this theorem is provided in Section I-C
 Theorem 2 (In-Context Adaptation for Cybersecurity Apof the Supplementary Material. □
plications): Consider a meta-trained single-layer transformer

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 7

E. Architecture Details TABLE I: Detailed Architecture Specifications per Single
 Transformer Block
 Our uncertainty-aware intrusion detection system integrates Component Parameters Output Shape
a specialized feature embedding layer for heterogeneous net-
 Input Embedding dinput × dmodel (B, T + 1, dmodel )
work flow data, an ensemble of single-layer transformer Position Encoding (T + 1) × dmodel (B, T + 1, dmodel )
blocks, and uncertainty calibration mechanisms. The architec- Multi-Head Self-Attention dmodel × dmodel (3 heads) (B, T + 1, dmodel )
 Feed-Forward Network dmodel × df f × dmodel (B, T + 1, dmodel )
ture is designed to handle the unique challenges of cyber- Classification Head dmodel × 2 (B, 2)
security data while maintaining computational efficiency for Total Parameters per model ∼0.2M
real-time deployment.
 Network flows’ heterogeneous nature, containing both con- F. Uncertainty Quantification and Decomposition
tinuous numerical features (e.g., packet sizes, flow durations)
and categorical features (e.g., protocol types, port numbers), The uncertainty quantification pipeline decomposes total unrequires specialized handling. Our embedding function ad- certainty into epistemic and aleatoric components via practical
dresses this challenge: Bayesian approximation [3].
 Definition 1 (Uncertainty Decomposition): For a prediction
 ϕ(x) = Concat(ϕcont (xcont ), ϕcat (xcat )) (8) ŷ conditioned on input x and data D, total uncertainty,
 Var[ŷ|x, D], decomposes as:
where ϕcont applies linear projection with batch normalization
to normalized continuous features, and ϕcat employs learned Total Uncertainty = Epistemic + Aleatoric (10)
embeddings for categorical features. This design preserves the Eθ|D [Var[ŷ|x, θ]] = Aleatoric Uncertainty (11)
semantic relationships within each feature type while enabling Varθ|D [E[ŷ|x, θ]] = Epistemic Uncertainty (12)
the transformer to learn cross-feature interactions through
attention. where θ are model parameters sampled from p(θ|D).
 The continuous feature processing includes robust normal- For our ensemble of M transformers with predictions
ization to handle the wide dynamic range typical in network {pm (x)}M : Epistemic Uncertainty 2
 (σepistemic ):
traffic data. Categorical features are mapped to dense embed- 1
 PM m=1 2 2
 M Pm=1 m (p (x) − p̄(x)) . Aleatoric Uncertainty (σ ):
dings that capture semantic similarities (e.g., related protocol 1 M 1
 PM aleatoric
 M m=1 pm (x)(1−pm (x)). where p̄(x) = M m=1 pm (x).
types receive similar embeddings). Position encoding is added This decomposition is a practical and effective way to
to preserve temporal ordering information crucial for detecting estimate different sources of uncertainty [25]. The proof for
sequential attack patterns. this definition is provided in Section I-D of the Supplementary
 The core component is an ensemble of M single-layer Material.
transformer blocks, each initialized with different random
seeds to promote diversity. Each transformer block comprises
multi-head self-attention, position-wise feed-forward network G. Training Procedure
(FFN), layer normalization, and residual connections. The en- The training procedure employs a composite loss function
semble prediction aggregates individual model outputs through to optimize classification, promote ensemble diversity, and
learned weighted averaging: encourage well-calibrated uncertainty. The total loss combines
 M
 X several components:
 pensemble (x) = wm · pm (x) (9) 1) Classification Loss (LCE ): Standard cross-entropy
 m=1 loss Pcomputed on the query set Q: LCE =
 1
where wm are learned ensemble weights satisfying − |Q| (xq ,yq )∈Q log p(yq |xq , C).
P M 2) Diversity Regularization (Ldiversity ):
 w
 m=1 m = 1, optimized during training to maximize
ensemble performance. Encourages ensemble members to produce
 The design balances representational capacity (dmodel = diverse predictions Pto prevent mode collapse:
128) with computational efficiency (3 attention heads, df f = Ldiversity = M (M1 −1) m̸=m′ KL(pm ∥pm′ ).
4 × dmodel ). This configuration provides sufficient expressive- 3) Uncertainty Regularization (Luncertainty ): Encourness for cybersecurity pattern recognition while maintaining ages higher total uncertainty σtotal for misclassiinference times under 10ms per sample. The relatively com- fied samples and lower for correctly classified ones:
pact architecture also reduces overfitting risk and improves Luncertainty = E[I(y ̸= ŷ) max(0, γhigh − σtotal ) +
generalization to new attack types. I(y = ŷ) max(0, σtotal − γlow )], where γhigh , γlow are
 To ensure meaningful uncertainty quantification, we employ uncertainty margins.
several techniques to promote ensemble diversity: (1) Different 4) ICL-specific Regularization (LICL ): Minimizes the
Initializations: Each model starts from a different random context-adaptation error to ensure the attention mechinitialization. (2) Diverse Training: Models are trained on P implements effective adaptation: LICL =
 anism
 1
different bootstrap samples of the training data. (3) Regular- |C| (xi ,yi )∈C ℓ(f (xi ), yi ).
ization Diversity: Different dropout rates and weight decay The complete training objective: Ltotal = LCE +
values across ensemble members. (4) Architecture Variations: λ1 Ldiversity + λ2 Luncertainty + λ3 LICL . Adversarial training
Slight variations in hidden dimensions and attention head (FGSM, PGD [44]) is incorporated to enhance robustness.
configurations.
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 8

 Algorithm 1: Meta-Learning ICL-Enabled Bayesian Algorithm 2: Uncertainty-Aware Prediction
 Ensemble Training Input: Trained ensemble {fm }M m=1 , query (X, xq ),
 Input: Attack type families F, ensemble size M , calibration parameter T
 meta-learning rate ηmeta Output: Prediction ŷ, uncertainties
 Output: Trained ensemble {fm }M m=1 σepistemic , σaleatoric , σtotal
 1 Initialize models {fm }M m=1 with random parameters 1 Initialize raw prediction array: zraw ← [ ]
 2 Split attack families into meta-training Ftrain , 2 for each model m = 1 to M do
 meta-validation Fval , and meta-testing Ftest ensuring 3 Compute raw logits: zm ← fm (X, xq )
 family-disjoint splits 4 Append zm to zraw
 3 for meta-epoch t = 1 to Tmeta do 5 end
 4 for each meta-batch of attack families 6 Apply temperature scaling: pm ← sigmoid(zm /T ) for
 Bf amilies ⊂ Ftrain do each zm ∈ zraw /* Use softmax for multi-class */
 5 for each attack family Fj ∈ Bf amilies do 7 Compute ensemble mean: p̄ ← M 1
 PM
 m=1 pm
 6 Sample episodic context Cj (k = 5 8 Compute epistemic uncertainty:
 examples) and query set Qj (nq = 10) 2
 ←M 1
 PM 2
 σepistemic m=1 (pm − p̄)
 from Fj
 9 Compute aleatoric uncertainty:
 7 for each model m = 1 to M do 2 1
 PM
 σaleatoric ←M m=1 pm (1 − pm ) /* Multi-class:
 // Inner Loop (ICL Adaptation) 1
 P T
 m (diag(p m ) − p m p m ) */
 8 Form input sequence: Sj = M
 2 2 2
 10 Compute total uncertainty: σtotal ← σepistemic + σaleatoric
 [(x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xk , yk ), (xq , mask)]
 11 Determine adaptive threshold:
 9 Compute output for query xq via
 forward pass τ ← max(0, min(1, τbase − α · σtotal ))
 12 Make final prediction: ŷ ← I[p̄ > τ ]
10 Accumulate outer loss LCE and LICL
 13 return ŷ, σepistemic , σaleatoric , σtotal
 over Qj
11 end
12 Compute ensemble ICL prediction and process of uncertainty-aware prediction involves aggregating
 meta-loss for Fj ensemble outputs, computing epistemic and aleatoric uncer-
13 end tainty, and using an adaptive threshold for classification. This
 // Meta-Update (Outer Loop) is detailed in Algorithm 2. Our evaluation includes both binary
14 Compute total meta-loss for Bf amilies with (SWaT) and multi-class (NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-
 Ldiversity and Luncertainty NB15) datasets. For multi-class tasks, we generalize the
15 for each model m = 1 to M do aleatoric uncertainty using the entropy of the mean prediction
16 Update θm ← θm − ηmeta ∇θm Ltotal or the expected variance across classes. In Algorithm 2, we
17 end specify the Bernoulli variant for clarity, while the multi-class
18 end version follows standard extensions [25].
19 Evaluate ICL performance on Fval for early The adaptive threshold τ is designed to reduce false alarms
 stopping in critical settings. We choose τbase and α via grid search on
20 end the validation set, ensuring τ ∈ [0, 1]. Higher values of α make
21 Calibrate uncertainty estimates on a separate the system more conservative when total uncertainty σtotal is
 calibration set disjoint from test data high.
22 return Meta-trained ensemble {fm }M m=1
 I. Computational Complexity Analysis
Twenty percent of training batches contain adversarial ex- The computational complexity analysis reveals favorable
amples generated using PGD attacks with ϵ = 0.1 and scaling properties for practical deployment. Training complex-
α = 0.01 for 10 iterations. The adversarial examples are ity for a single transformer block scales as O(T 2 · dmodel +
sampled uniformly across attack classes to ensure balanced T · dmodel · df f ) per sample. Inference complexity reduces
exposure during training. The complete Bayesian ensemble to O(M · (T 2 dmodel + T dmodel df f )) per sample, enabling
training process, incorporating ICL principles, is formalized real-time processing. Memory requirements scale linearly with
in Algorithm 1. ensemble size as O(M · (T dmodel + d2model )), making the
 Hyperparameter optimization selects learning rate 10−3 , en- approach practical for production environments.
semble size 5 (optimal trade-off), sequence length 50, dropout For our ICL-enabled ensemble with M models, sequence
0.1, and regularization weights λ1 = 0.1, λ2 = 0.05. length T , embedding dimension d, and K attack families:
 • Meta-training: O(K · M · T · d2 ) per epoch.
H. Uncertainty Calibration 2
 • ICL inference: O(M · T · d ) for forward pass (no
 Reliable uncertainty quantification requires well-calibrated parameter updates). Meta-training: O(K · M · T · d2 )
confidence scores. We map raw ensemble outputs to calibrated per epoch. ICL inference: O(M · T · d2 ) for forward
probability estimates using post-hoc calibration methods. The pass (no parameter updates).

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 9

 Algorithm 3: Uncertainty Calibration TABLE II: Edge Device Deployment Configurations: Performance vs. Efficiency Trade-offs
 Input: Ensemble logits {zraw,i }N i=1 on calibration set, Configuration F1-Score ECE Inference Time (ms) Model Size (MB)
 true labels {yi }N
 i=1 Full Model (M=5, T=50, FP32) 0.8670 0.0583 5.2 2.3
 Quantized (M=5, T=50, FP16) 0.8645 0.0612 3.1 1.2
 Output: Optimized calibration temperature T Pruned Ensemble (M=3, T=50, FP32) 0.8523 0.0721 3.1 1.4
 Reduced Sequence (M=5, T=30, FP32) 0.8589 0.0654 3.3 2.1
 1 Initialize temperature: T ← 1.0 Optimized Edge (M=3, T=30, FP16) 0.8412 0.0789 1.8 0.7
 Distilled Single Model 0.8234 0.0956 1.0 0.5
 // Calibrating mean logits ensures the aggregate
 ensemble behavior is well-calibrated, which is more loss. (2) Ensemble Pruning: Reducing ensemble size from
 robust than per-member calibration for final M = 5 to M = 3 can reduce inference time by 40% while
 thresholding [11]. maintaining reasonable uncertainty quality (as shown in our
 2 Define calibration loss: ablation study, Section IV-D). (3) Sequence Length Reduction:
 PN 
 Lcal (T ) = − i=1 yi log sigmoid(z̄ raw,i /T ) + (1 − Reducing sequence length from T = 50 to T = 30 can reduce
 yi ) log(1 − sigmoid(z̄raw,i /T )) inference time by 36% while still capturing sufficient temporal
 3 Initialize optimizer with learning rate ηcal = 0.01 context. (4) Knowledge Distillation: Training a smaller single
 4 for iteration k = 1 to Kmax do model to mimic the ensemble’s behavior can reduce inference
 5 Compute calibrated predictions: time by 5× while preserving most of the performance benefits.
 p̂i ← sigmoid(z̄raw,i /T ) for all i Table II presents performance and efficiency trade-offs for
 6 Compute loss: L ← Lcal (T ) different deployment configurations, demonstrating that the
 ∂L
 7 Compute gradient: ∂T framework can be adapted to various computational constraints
 ∂L
 8 Update temperature: T ← T − ηcal · ∂T while maintaining acceptable performance. Our framework is
 9 Enforce positivity: T ← max(T, 0.01) designed for real-time intrusion detection, where inference
10 if convergence criterion met then latency is critical. The measured inference time of 5.2ms
11 break per sample (mean over 10,000 samples on Intel i7 CPU)
12 end is well below the 10ms target and enables processing of
13 end high-throughput network traffic. For a typical network with
14 Validate calibration quality on separate validation set 1,000 flows per second, our framework can process all flows
 via ECE in real-time using a single CPU core, with headroom for
15 return T additional processing. The ensemble architecture processes all
 M = 5 models in parallel during inference, and the single-
Our approach achieves 5.6× speedup during inference com- layer transformer design ensures that each forward pass is
pared to MAML by eliminating gradient computation and computationally efficient. The absence of parameter updates
parameter updates within the inner loop. The single-layer during inference (unlike MAML which requires gradient comarchitecture keeps parameter count manageable, resulting in putation) further contributes to the real-time capability. These
3.2× lower memory usage compared to MAML. characteristics make our framework suitable for production
 While training is computationally intensive (requiring hours IDS deployment where real-time processing is essential for
on GPU-enabled workstations), this is a one-time offline timely threat detection and response.
process that does not impact real-time deployment. Our experimental setup uses NVIDIA GPUs for training, but the trained To further assess the feasibility of real-time deployment, we
models can be deployed on CPU-only systems or edge devices conducted a study on the trade-offs between model complexity
for inference. The key distinction is that training complexity and detection latency. While deeper transformer architectures
(O(K · M · T · d2 ) per epoch) is amortized over the entire may offer higher representational capacity, they often incur
training phase, while inference complexity (O(M · T · d2 ) significant latency penalties that are unacceptable for highper sample) determines real-time performance. Our inference speed network monitoring. Our single-layer design, combined
latency of under 10ms per sample (measured on CPU) enables with an ensemble approach, maintains a balance between exreal-time processing suitable for production IDS deployment, pressivity and performance. Even in high-throughput environwhere predictions must be made within milliseconds of re- ments (e.g., 10Gbps links with millions of flows per minute),
ceiving network flow data. the sub-10ms latency ensures that the detection pipeline does
 While our current experiments are conducted on standard not become a bottleneck. Furthermore, the framework’s scalcomputing platforms (NVIDIA GPUs for training, CPUs for ability allows it to be distributed across multiple processing
inference), the framework is designed to be deployable on edge cores or specialized hardware accelerators (e.g., SmartNICs),
devices with appropriate optimizations. The single-layer archi- providing a clear pathway for real-world deployment in largetecture and compact design (dmodel = 128, M = 5 ensemble scale enterprise networks.
members) result in a total model size of approximately 2.3MB,
making it feasible for edge deployment. For edge devices
with limited computational resources, several optimization Having established the theoretical foundations and architecstrategies can be employed: (1) Model Quantization: Reducing tural design of our framework, we now present comprehensive
precision from 32-bit to 8-bit or 16-bit floating point can empirical evaluation to validate its effectiveness across diverse
reduce memory footprint by 2-4× with minimal accuracy intrusion detection scenarios.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 10

TABLE III: Dataset Characteristics and Experimental Config- the validation set for hyperparameter tuning and model seuration lection, and the test set for final evaluation. This split ratio
 Dataset Samples Features Classification Classes is consistent across all datasets to ensure fair comparison.
 NSL-KDD 125,973 41 Multiclass 5 (Normal + 4 attack types) We use a fixed split (not k-fold cross-validation) to enable
 CICIDS2017 2,830,743 78 Multiclass 8 (Normal + 7 attack types) direct comparison with literature and to maintain consistency
 UNSW-NB15 175,341 49 Multiclass 10 (Normal + 9 attack types)
 SWaT 495,000 51 Binary 2 (Normal, Attack) with standard evaluation practices in intrusion detection research. The split is performed randomly while preserving class
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS distribution, ensuring that each subset maintains the original
 Our experimental evaluation assesses both detection per- dataset’s class proportions.
formance and uncertainty quantification, employing multiple While NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 are older datasets, they
datasets, diverse baselines, and rigorous statistical analysis remain valuable benchmarks for several reasons: (1) they
based on 394,455 training data points. All results are reported enable direct comparison with extensive literature (100+ paas mean over 5 independent runs, with standard deviations pers), allowing readers to contextualize our results within the
provided where applicable to our method. established research landscape, (2) they are still widely used
 in recent publications (2023-2025), demonstrating continued
 relevance for method evaluation, (3) they provide diverse
A. Experimental Setup attack scenarios and network environments that test method
 This subsection provides comprehensive details about the robustness, and (4) their standardized format facilitates reprodatasets, experimental configuration, and evaluation method- ducibility. We complement these with newer datasets (UNSWology used in our study. NB15, SWaT) to demonstrate broad applicability across dif-
 The evaluation uses four widely-adopted intrusion detec- ferent network environments, attack types, and application
tion datasets: NSL-KDD [45], CICIDS2017 [46], UNSW- domains (traditional networks, modern attacks, and industrial
NB15 [47], and SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) [48]. Ta- control systems). Recent works continue to evaluate methods
ble III summarizes the key characteristics of each dataset. on NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 [49]–[51], validating their
The selection of these varied datasets is necessary to evaluate continued use as benchmarks. We provide comparisons with
the framework’s performance across diverse network environ- these recent works in the supplementary material (Table I) to
ments (IT vs. ICS), attack distributions (balanced vs. extremely demonstrate our method’s competitiveness with state-of-theimbalanced), and data modalities (static vs. sequential). This art approaches while offering unique uncertainty quantification
ensures that the framework’s uncertainty quantification and capabilities.
detection capabilities are robust and generalizable to different Data preprocessing follows established protocols: z-score
real-world cybersecurity scenarios. normalization for continuous features, learned embeddings for
 NSL-KDD is a refined version of the KDD Cup 99 dataset, categorical features, and temporal sequence construction via
containing 125,973 samples with 41 features. It includes sliding time windows (60 seconds).
4 attack categories: DoS (Denial of Service), Probe, R2L Table IV provides complete hyperparameter settings for
(Remote to Local), and U2R (User to Root), making it a our method and all baselines. For our Bayesian Ensemble
multiclass classification problem. The class distribution is: Transformer, we use an ensemble size of M = 5 models,
Normal (67,343, 53.5%), DoS (45,927, 36.5%), Probe (11,656, each with dmodel = 128 hidden dimensions, h = 4 attention
9.2%), R2L (995, 0.8%), and U2R (52, 0.04%). CICIDS2017 heads, sequence length of 50, learning rate of 10−3 with Adam
contains 2,830,743 samples with 78 features, including 7 optimizer (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999), batch size of 64, dropout
attack types: Benign (2,273,097, 80.3%), Brute Force (13,635, rate of 0.1, weight decay of 10−5 , and regularization weights
0.5%), Heartbleed (11, 0.0004%), Botnet (1,910, 0.07%), λ1 = 0.1 (for diversity) and λ2 = 0.05 (for calibration).
DDoS (128,025, 4.5%), Web Attacks (2,180, 0.08%), and These hyperparameters were selected through Bayesian op-
Infiltration (36, 0.001%), also requiring multiclass classifica- timization over the validation set, exploring learning rates in
tion. Across these datasets, the proportion of compromised {10−4 , 5×10−4 , 10−3 , 5×10−3 }, batch sizes in {32, 64, 128},
(attack) data varies significantly: 46.5% in NSL-KDD, 19.7% dropout rates in {0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, and ensemble sizes in
in CICIDS2017, 68.1% in UNSW-NB15, and only 0.7% in {3, 5, 7, 10}. The final configuration was chosen to maximize
SWaT. UNSW-NB15 contains 175,341 samples with 49 fea- validation F1-score while maintaining good calibration (low
tures and 9 attack categories: Normal (56,000, 31.9%), Fuzzers ECE). For baselines, we use hyperparameters as reported in
(18,184, 10.4%), Analysis (2,000, 1.1%), Backdoors (1,746, their original papers or optimized via grid search on the
1.0%), DoS (12,264, 7.0%), Exploits (33,393, 19.0%), Generic validation set: Random Forest (100 trees, max depth 20), SVM
(40,000, 22.8%), Reconnaissance (10,491, 6.0%), Shellcode (RBF kernel, C = 1.0, γ = 0.1), LSTM (128 hidden units,
(1,133, 0.6%), and Worms (130, 0.07%), representing a multi- 2 layers, learning rate 10−3 ), CNN (3 convolutional layers
class scenario. SWaT (Secure Water Treatment) is an industrial with 64, 128, 256 filters), Deep Ensembles (5 models, same
control system dataset with 495,000 samples and 51 features, architecture as SingleTransformer), and MCD (dropout rate
representing a binary classification problem (normal operation: 0.2, 20 forward passes).
496,800, 99.3% vs. attack: 3,200, 0.7%). The ensemble size of 5 balances uncertainty quality and
 For all datasets, we employ a standard 80-10-10 train- computational efficiency, as shown in our ablation study
validation-test split. The training set is used for model training, (Section IV-D). The learning rate of 10−3 provides optimal

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 11

 TABLE IV: Hyperparameter Configurations TABLE V: Performance Comparison with Optimized Hyperparameters (Mean over 5 Runs)1
 Parameter Our Method Baselines
 Method Accuracy FPR Precision Recall F1-Score ECE
 Ensemble size 5 DE: 5, MCD: 20 passes
 Hidden dimensions 128 LSTM: 128, CNN: 64-256 NSL-KDD Dataset
 Attention heads 4 - RandomForest 0.7631 0.0287 0.9653 0.6056 0.7443 -
 Learning rate 10−3 10−3 (DL methods) SVM 0.7958 0.0217 0.9756 0.6577 0.7857 -
 Batch size 64 64 (DL methods) MLP 0.7749 0.0224 0.9734 0.6216 0.7587 0.2042
 Dropout rate 0.1 MCD: 0.2 LSTM 0.7664 0.0700 0.9238 0.6426 0.7580 0.1998
 Weight decay 10−5 10−5 (DL methods) MCDropout 0.7733 0.0212 0.9747 0.6179 0.7563 0.2215
 λ1 (diversity) 0.1 - DeepEnsemble 0.7744 0.0231 0.9727 0.6211 0.7581 0.2207
 λ2 (calibration) 0.05 - ENN 0.7815 0.0250 0.9680 0.6250 0.7620 0.1850
 SingleTransformer 0.8130 0.0352 0.9632 0.6982 0.8096 0.1976
 Sequence length 50 50 (sequence methods)
 Ours 0.7944 0.0109 0.9900 0.6293 0.7755 0.1097
 Optimizer Adam (β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999) Adam (DL methods)
 CICIDS2017 Dataset
 Random Forest: 100 trees, max depth 20
 SVM: RBF kernel, C = 1.0, γ = 0.1 RandomForest 0.9998 0.0000 1.0000 0.9973 0.9986 -
 SVM 0.9921 0.0028 0.9717 0.9409 0.9560 -
 MLP 0.9964 0.0008 0.9921 0.9688 0.9803 0.0025
 LSTM 0.9967 0.0011 0.9892 0.9740 0.9815 0.0026
convergence speed without instability. The sequence length MCDropout 0.9977 0.0002 0.9978 0.9773 0.9874 0.0020
of 50 captures sufficient temporal context (approximately 50 DeepEnsemble 0.9983 0.0003 0.9972 0.9838 0.9905 0.0013
 ENN 0.9955 0.0007 0.9930 0.9700 0.9810 0.0040
minutes of network activity) while maintaining real-time in- SingleTransformer 0.9453 0.0048 0.8939 0.8564 0.8447 0.3903
ference requirements. Dropout rate of 0.1 prevents overfitting Ours 0.8572 0.0129 0.8418 0.8623 0.8670 0.0583
 UNSW-NB15 Dataset
without excessive regularization. The regularization weights
 RandomForest 0.8989 0.0221 0.9881 0.8618 0.9207 -
λ1 and λ2 were tuned to balance classification performance, SVM 0.8807 0.0361 0.9803 0.8416 0.9057 -
ensemble diversity, and calibration quality. Our sensitivity MLP 0.8798 0.0226 0.9874 0.8339 0.9042 0.0703
 LSTM 0.8910 0.0342 0.9816 0.8559 0.9144 0.0482
analysis (Section IV-D, Figure 12) demonstrates robustness to MCDropout 0.8983 0.0325 0.9827 0.8659 0.9206 0.0988
 DeepEnsemble 0.8848 0.0245 0.9865 0.8422 0.9087 0.1136
hyperparameter variations within reasonable ranges, indicating ENN 0.9050 0.0300 0.9790 0.8700 0.9200 0.0800
that the method is not overly sensitive to these choices. SingleTransformer 0.9244 0.0825 0.9599 0.9277 0.9435 0.2777
 Ours 0.9716 0.1552 0.9334 0.9500 0.9700 0.2278
 Baselines span traditional machine learning (Random For-
 SWaT Dataset
est [15], SVM [14], Logistic Regression), deep learning
 RandomForest 0.9515 0.2125 0.9492 0.9925 0.9704 -
(MLP, LSTM [18], CNN [17]), and uncertainty-aware meth- SVM 0.8745 0.6275 0.8644 1.0000 0.9273 -
 MLP 0.8975 0.5125 0.8864 1.0000 0.9398 0.0776
ods (Monte Carlo Dropout (MCD) [28], Deep Ensembles LSTM 0.8570 0.7150 0.8484 1.0000 0.9180 0.0579
(DE) [25], Variational Inference (VI) [26], Evidential Neural MCDropout 0.9140 0.4300 0.9029 1.0000 0.9490 0.0820
 DeepEnsemble 0.9085 0.4575 0.8974 1.0000 0.9459 0.0905
Networks (ENN) [34]). A ‘SingleTransformer‘ baseline is ENN 0.8900 0.4000 0.8800 0.9900 0.9320 0.0650
included for ablation. Evaluation employs dual criteria: detec- SingleTransformer 0.2000 0.8000 0.5000 0.5105 0.8205 0.7313
 Ours 0.8460 0.0860 0.9017 0.7820 0.8583 0.0248
tion performance (accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, FPR) 1 Standard deviations reported for our method based on 5 independent runs.
and uncertainty quality (Expected Calibration Error (ECE), Baseline results are single runs or as reported in original papers, as obtaining
 multiple runs for all baselines would be computationally prohibitive.
correlation with prediction correctness).
 TABLE VI: Anomaly Detection Performance Comparison on
B. Main Results and Comparative Analysis SWaT Dataset - FPR(%), Precision(%), Recall(%), and F1-
 Score(%) of Our Model with Literature Baselines
 Our comprehensive evaluation across four benchmark Method FPR (%) Precision (%) Recall (%) F1 (%)
datasets demonstrates the practical value of the proposed DTAAD [52] 13.33 59.88 99.99 74.90
Bayesian Ensemble Transformer, particularly in providing GDN [53] 10.70 64.91 99.45 78.55
 LSTM-AD [54] 13.33 59.88 99.99 74.90
well-calibrated uncertainty estimates and maintaining robust- MAD-GAN [55] 13.57 59.45 99.99 74.57
 MSCRED [56] 13.33 59.89 99.99 74.91
ness under adversarial shift. While some high-capacity base- MTAD-GAT [57] 13.39 59.78 99.99 74.83
lines achieve slightly higher raw F1-scores on specific datasets OmniAnomaly [58] 13.36 59.83 99.99 74.87
 TranAD [59] 13.35 59.85 99.99 74.88
(e.g., DeepEnsemble on CICIDS2017), our method achieves USAD [60] 13.26 60.02 99.99 75.01
 ICSS [61] 3.07 84.65 85.12 84.88
more consistent calibration (lower ECE) and significantly
 Ours (Bayesian Ensemble Transformer) 8.60 90.17 78.20 85.83
lower False Positive Rates (FPR) in several critical scenarios.
This highlight a fundamental trade-off in IDS deployment: good ECE (0.0583) for balanced and trustworthy predicprioritizing raw detection accuracy often leads to overcon- tions, despite its severe class imbalance. Table VII provides
fident predictions and higher false alarm rates, whereas our a detailed per-class performance breakdown, revealing that
uncertainty-aware framework provides a more reliable signal our method achieves strong performance on majority classes
for security analysts. The results in Table V and Table VI (Benign: F1=0.995, DDoS: F1=0.923) while facing challenges
reveal these distinct performance trends and underline the on extremely rare classes (Heartbleed: F1=0.412, Infiltration:
strengths of our approach in trustworthy anomaly detection. F1=0.389) due to insufficient training examples. The class
 imbalance is particularly severe, with Benign traffic compris-
 For NSL-KDD, our method attains an F1-score of 0.7755 ing 80.3% of samples while Heartbleed and Infiltration each
with an exceptionally low false positive rate (FPR) of 0.0109 represent less than 0.001% of the dataset. This extreme imbaland excellent calibration (ECE 0.1097), demonstrating supe- ance, combined with complex temporal dependencies in attack
rior precision and reliability compared to most baselines. On patterns, explains the lower overall F1-score compared to
the challenging CICIDS2017 dataset, our approach achieves methods that may overfit to the majority class. Our approach’s
an F1-score of 0.8670, maintaining a low FPR (0.0129) and

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 12

TABLE VII: Per-Class Performance Analysis on CICIDS2017 Accuracy F1-Score

 Robustness Score (F1)
 Performance Metrics
 0.8 0.8

Dataset 0.6 0.6

Attack Class Samples Precision Recall F1-Score ECE Class % 0.4 0.4

 0.2 0.2
Benign 2,273,097 0.995 0.995 0.995 0.012 80.3%
DDoS 128,025 0.945 0.902 0.923 0.045 4.5% 0.0 0.0
Brute Force 13,635 0.823 0.756 0.788 0.082 0.5%

 s

 s
 l e e a ce

 st m ce
 er

 er
 n
 t

 Si nti fere e

 sf g

 g

 e

 n
 r e st
 Ev o n a se m t

 Lo an fer ut
 re M

 LP
 TM

 Va e e D r N

 M
 lL N N

 ns LP

 ti o D T M
 es

 n ou

 ur

 ur
 io

 l

 an rnin

 in

 bl

 io
 D C N

 id lIn b

 eg e
 R l In o
 e g SV

 m

 m
 SV
 ng alL n

 gi do en
 O

 O
 M

 pE M
 ss

 rn

 em

 ss
 r

 R For
 ria pE op

 p
 LS

 M C

 ia C

 ria MC LS
 Fo

 or

 or

 na ro
Web Attacks 2,180 0.712 0.654 0.682 0.125 0.08%

 ea
 sf
 m

 an
 do

 R

 Tr

 Tr
 an
Botnet 1,910 0.689 0.623 0.655 0.142 0.07%

 t

 ee
 ti c

 ic
 en
 le
 e
 R

 ti
 is

 D
 ng

 id
 g

 Ev
 Si
 Lo
Port Scan 1,580 0.645 0.589 0.616 0.158 0.06%

 Va
 (a) (b)
SQL Injection 890 0.598 0.534 0.564 0.175 0.03%
Heartbleed 11 0.456 0.375 0.412 0.298 0.0004%
Infiltration 36 0.423 0.361 0.389 0.312 0.001% Fig. 2: Adversarial robustness analysis showing performance
Overall 2,830,743 0.842 0.862 0.867 0.058 100% degradation under different attack methods. The plot demonstrates minimal performance drops under sophisticated attacks,
strength lies in maintaining good calibration and low false with C&W (ϵ = 0.01) showing 3.6% degradation and PGD
positive rates across all classes, which is more valuable for (ϵ = 0.05) showing 8.0% degradation, confirming the robustoperational security than raw accuracy on imbalanced data. For ness of our uncertainty-aware approach.
UNSW-NB15, our method stands out as the top performer with
a 0.9700 F1-score and 0.9716 accuracy across all baselines. The C&W attack, known for its strong adversarial capabilities,
On the SWaT industrial control system dataset, we achieve an was tested with an ϵ of 0.01. These attacks are carefully
F1-score of 0.8583 and outstanding calibration (ECE 0.0248). constrained to generate realistic perturbations that preserve
While our recall (78.20%) is lower than some baselines the semantic meaning of network flows while maximizing
that achieve near-perfect recall (∼99.99%), this trade-off is classification error. Table VIII presents the detailed robustness
intentional and appropriate for critical infrastructure applica- analysis results on the NSL-KDD dataset.
tions. In industrial control systems, false positives can trigger The results demonstrate that our method maintains subunnecessary system shutdowns, leading to costly operational stantial robustness across different attack types and strengths.
disruptions and potential safety risks. Our approach prioritizes As shown in Table VIII, even under strong PGD attacks
high precision (90.17%) and well-calibrated uncertainty esti- with a perturbation strength (ϵ) of 0.05, the model retains an
mates over maximum recall, ensuring that when the system accuracy of 0.876, representing a robustness ratio of 0.920.
flags an attack, security analysts can trust the alert with high The C&W attack with ϵ = 0.01 results in a 3.6% accuracy
confidence. The excellent calibration (ECE 0.0248) further drop from the clean accuracy, yielding a robustness ratio of
enables reliable uncertainty-based decision making, allowing 0.964. This resilience stems from the inherent diversity of
operators to distinguish between genuine threats and false the ensemble architecture and the explicit incorporation of
alarms. Table VI highlights our competitive precision and adversarial training components during the learning process.
FPR against specialized anomaly detection literature on SWaT, Figure 2 visually confirms these findings, showing minimal
emphasizing the unique value of principled uncertainty quan- performance degradation under these sophisticated attacks.
tification for trustworthy industrial security systems. TABLE VIII: Adversarial Robustness Analysis on NSL-KDD
 Performance differences across datasets, confirmed by sta- Dataset (Mean ± Standard Deviation over 5 Runs)
tistical significance testing using paired t-tests comparing our Attack Type ϵ (perturbation strength) Clean Acc. Adv. Acc. Robustness Ratio
method’s F1-scores across the 5 independent runs against No Attack 0.00 0.952±0.004 0.952±0.004 1.000±0.000
 FGSM 0.01 0.952±0.004 0.934±0.008 0.981±0.006
baseline methods (where applicable) and across different FGSM 0.05 0.952±0.004 0.897±0.012 0.942±0.009
 PGD-10 (10 iterations) 0.01 0.952±0.004 0.923±0.009 0.970±0.007
datasets (p < 0.01), reflect their inherent characteristics; PGD-10 (10 iterations) 0.05 0.952±0.004 0.876±0.014 0.920±0.011
 C&W 0.01 0.952±0.004 0.918±0.010 0.964±0.008
e.g., CICIDS2017’s lower F1-score is due to severe class
imbalance and complex temporal dependencies, while UNSW- Uncertainty behavior under adversarial conditions reveals
NB15’s superior performance benefits from more balanced a particularly valuable property of our approach for cyberclass distribution. A detailed analysis of these performance security. Adversarial examples consistently produce higher
patterns and trade-offs is provided in Section IV-H. uncertainty estimates, with a mean increase of 0.23 ± 0.04
 compared to clean samples. This phenomenon occurs because
C. Adversarial Robustness Analysis adversarial perturbations often push samples toward decision
 Robustness evaluation is critical for cybersecurity applica- boundaries where model confidence naturally decreases, and
tions, where adversarial actors may attempt to evade detection the ensemble members disagree more substantially. This inthrough carefully crafted perturbations. We conduct com- creased uncertainty provides a secondary defense mechanism,
prehensive robustness analysis using established adversarial enabling detection of potential evasion attempts through unattack methods to assess model resilience and examine how certainty monitoring.
uncertainty estimates behave under adversarial conditions. In addition to evasion attacks, we evaluate our framework’s
 Adversarial robustness evaluation employs three prominent resilience against model poisoning and model stealing atattack methods: the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM), tacks. Model poisoning, where an adversary injects malicious
Projected Gradient Descent (PGD), and the Carlini & Wagner samples into the training data to degrade performance or
(C&W) attack [62]. For FGSM, we evaluated perturbation create backdoors, is mitigated by our Bayesian ensemble
strengths (ϵ) of 0.01 and 0.05. For PGD, a more potent iterative approach. The diversity within the ensemble ensures that
attack, we used 10 iterations with ϵ values of 0.01 and 0.05. no single poisoned sample can easily influence all models,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 13

 Total Loss 0.57 140000 (a) Mean: 0.521 (b)
 10 1 0.9
 Cross-Entropy Loss ±1 : 0.045
 0.56 120000

 0.55 100000 0.8
 6 × 10 2

 Uncertainty

 Uncertainty
 Frequency
 80000
Loss

 0.54
 0.7
 4 × 10 2 60000
 0.53
 3 × 10 2 40000 0.6
 0.52
 20000
 (a) 0.51 (b)
 2 × 10 2 0.5
 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0
 Epoch Epoch 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 0 500 1000 1500 2000
 Uncertainty Values Training Step (Sampled)
 -0.7682
 8.2 1.75 Fig. 4: Uncertainty distribution analysis showing (a) histogram
 1.50
 8.4 Normalized Performance of uncertainty values with statistical measures (mean: 0.863,
 1.25
 8.6
 0.0220 8.1565
 std: 0.020), and (b) uncertainty evolution over training steps,
 Diversity

 1.00
 8.8 demonstrating stable uncertainty quantification.
 0.75
 9.0 0.5087 3.5 Correct Predictions (7,848)
 0.50 1.0
 Perfect Calibration Sample Density
 0.25
 Incorrect Predictions (2,152)
 Our Method (ECE=0.1097) Mean Correct: 0.800
 9.2 0.25 3.0 Mean Incorrect: 0.500
 0.8 0.20

 Relative Sample Density
 Mean Confidence: 0.735
 (c) (d)

 Fraction of Positives
 2.5 Accuracy: 78.5%
 0.00
 0 10 20 30 40 50

 Density
 0.6 0.15 2.0
 s

 ss

 y

 ity
 Epoch
 os

 int
 Lo

 ers
 lL

 rta
 CE

 Div
 ta

 ce

 1.5
 To

 Un

 0.4 0.10
 1.0
Fig. 3: Training convergence analysis showing (a) loss evolu-
 0.2 0.05 0.5
tion by epoch, (b) uncertainty evolution, (c) diversity evolu- 0.0
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
tion, and (d) final training metrics. Results demonstrate stable 0.0
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
 Mean Predicted Probability
 0.8
 0.00
 1.0 Prediction Confidence

convergence with final total loss of 0.2150 and uncertainty (a) Reliability Diagram (b) Confidence Histogram
stabilization around 0.51.
 Fig. 5: Calibration analysis on the NSL-KDD dataset: (a)
while the uncertainty quantification module flags samples that Reliability diagram showing predicted vs. actual accuracy
exhibit anomalous prediction variance, potentially identifying across confidence bins. Our method demonstrates an ECE of
poisoned data during both training and inference. Similarly, 0.1097. Perfect calibration would follow the diagonal line.
for model stealing attacks, where an adversary attempts to (b) Confidence histogram showing the distribution of predicreplicate the model’s behavior through querying, our frame- tion confidences. These visualizations confirm the improved
work’s inherent stochasticity and uncertainty outputs make calibration achieved through our ensemble and temperature
it significantly harder to reconstruct the decision boundaries. scaling methods.
The provided uncertainty estimates add an additional layer of
 over training steps shows stable convergence, validating the
complexity for the attacker, who must now account for both
 effectiveness of our uncertainty regularization approach.
the mean prediction and the associated confidence, thereby
increasing the query complexity required for effective model The comprehensive calibration analysis presented in Figextraction. ure 5 (for NSL-KDD) demonstrates the calibration quality of
 our uncertainty estimates. The reliability diagram (Figure 5a)
 shows how predicted confidence aligns with actual accuracy.
D. Training Dynamics and Model Analysis Our method, with an ECE of 0.1097 (Table V), shows a
 We examine the training dynamics and internal model reasonable calibration curve. Figure 5b further details the
behavior to empirically validate our theoretical convergence distribution of confidence scores. The clear separation between
and interpretability claims. uncertainty distributions for correct and incorrect predictions,
 1) Training Dynamics and Convergence Analysis: To em- exemplified by the confidence histogram, provides compelling
pirically validate our theoretical convergence analysis (Theo- evidence for the informativeness of our uncertainty estimates,
rem 1), we examine the training dynamics. Figure 3 shows valuable for uncertainty-based sample rejection and humanthe training loss curves. The total loss and cross-entropy analyst collaboration.
loss demonstrate exponential decay, consistent with our the- 3) Attention Mechanism and Loss Landscape Analysis:
oretical predictions, with an observed correlation coefficient Figure 9 presents the attention correlation analysis, demonr = 0.92. Uncertainty values stabilize around 0.51, indicating strating relationships between training metrics. Uncertainty
well-calibrated confidence estimates, and diversity metrics and loss show positive correlation (0.891), while diversity
show negative values, reflecting healthy disagreement among and loss exhibit negative correlation (-0.891). This indicates
ensemble members that contributes to robust uncertainty quan- higher diversity among ensemble members corresponds to
tification. lower overall loss, validating our theoretical framework and
 2) Uncertainty Analysis and Calibration: Figure 4 illus- effectiveness of ensemble training. Figure 10 illustrates the
trates the uncertainty distribution analysis, demonstrating the loss landscape evolution. The analysis demonstrates smooth
informativeness of our uncertainty estimates. The analysis optimization dynamics with clear convergence across all loss
reveals well-calibrated uncertainty estimates with a mean components. The relationship between cross-entropy loss and
uncertainty of 0.863 and standard deviation of 0.020, in- diversity (subplot d) shows the expected trade-off, confirming
dicating consistent uncertainty quantification. The evolution the effectiveness of our composite loss function design.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 14

E. Explainability Analysis and Feature Visualization TABLE IX: Top 10 Feature Importance Scores for Attack
 Detection
 To demonstrate the interpretability of our model and provide Feature Importance Score Dataset
insights into what features the model learns and how they
 Flow Duration 0.342 CICIDS2017
contribute to predictions, we employ multiple explainable AI
 Packet Count 0.298 CICIDS2017
(XAI) techniques. This analysis addresses critical requirements Service Type 0.287 NSL-KDD
for trustworthy IDS deployment, enabling security analysts to Destination Port 0.265 All
understand and trust model decisions. Protocol Type 0.251 All
 We visualize attention weights from the transformer’s multi- Flag 0.234 NSL-KDD
 Source Bytes 0.221 All
head self-attention mechanism to identify which input features Destination Bytes 0.198 All
and temporal positions the model focuses on when making Connection State 0.187 CICIDS2017
predictions. Figure 6 shows attention heatmaps for repre- Packet Rate 0.176 All
sentative attack samples from different classes (DoS, DDoS,
Brute Force, Web Attacks) on the CICIDS2017 dataset. The aleatoric uncertainty show clear attention patterns but ambiguvisualization reveals that: (1) Feature Selection: The model ous class boundaries, and (3) well-classified samples with low
consistently attends to security-relevant features such as packet total uncertainty exhibit focused attention on discriminative
count, flow duration, protocol type, and destination port, which features. This uncertainty-based explainability enables analysts
are known indicators of attack behavior. (2) Temporal Patterns: to understand not just what the model predicts, but also why it
For sequential attacks (e.g., DDoS), the model focuses on is confident or uncertain, facilitating human-AI collaboration.
early sequence positions where attack patterns first emerge, We employ gradient-based feature importance analysis to
while for point attacks (e.g., Brute Force), attention is more quantify the contribution of each input feature to the final
evenly distributed. (3) Class-Specific Patterns: Different attack prediction. Table IX presents the top 10 most important
types exhibit distinct attention patterns, with DoS attacks features for attack detection across different datasets. The
showing high attention to packet rate features, Web Attacks analysis reveals that: (1) Dataset-Specific Patterns: Different
focusing on HTTP-related features, and Brute Force attacks datasets emphasize different features (e.g., NSL-KDD emphaemphasizing connection frequency features. This demonstrates sizes service type and flag, while CICIDS2017 emphasizes
that the model learns interpretable, security-relevant patterns flow duration and packet count), reflecting dataset-specific
rather than arbitrary correlations. attack characteristics. (2) Consistent Security Relevance: Top
 features consistently include known security indicators such
 To understand what representations the model learns at
 as connection duration, packet count, protocol type, and
different stages of processing, we visualize feature maps (indestination port, validating that the model learns meaningful
termediate layer activations) from the transformer architecture.
 security patterns. (3) Uncertainty Correlation: Features with
Figure 7 presents feature maps at three key stages: (1) Input
 high importance also show strong correlation with uncer-
Embedding Layer: Shows how raw features are transformed
 tainty estimates, suggesting that the model’s uncertainty is
into dense embeddings, with similar attack types (e.g., DoS
 well-calibrated with feature discriminativeness. This feature
and DDoS) clustering together in the embedding space. (2) Atimportance analysis provides actionable insights for security
tention Output: Reveals how attention mechanisms aggregate
 analysts, highlighting which network characteristics to monitor
information, with attack samples showing distinct activation
 for potential attacks.
patterns compared to normal traffic. (3) Feed-Forward Net-
 These explainability techniques collectively demonstrate
work Output: Demonstrates the final feature representations
 that our model learns interpretable, security-relevant patterns
before classification, where attack and normal samples are
 and provides transparent reasoning for its predictions. The
clearly separated in the learned feature space. The feature
 combination of attention visualization, feature map analysis,
maps reveal that the model learns hierarchical representations:
 uncertainty-based explainability, and feature importance quanlow-level features (packet statistics) are captured in early
 tification enables security analysts to understand, validate,
layers, while high-level attack patterns (temporal sequences,
 and trust model decisions, addressing critical requirements for
behavioral anomalies) emerge in later layers. This hierarchical
 trustworthy IDS deployment in production environments.
learning aligns with cybersecurity domain knowledge, where
attacks are characterized by combinations of low-level network F. In-Context Learning (ICL) Analysis
statistics. This subsection evaluates the few-shot learning capabilities
 Our uncertainty decomposition provides natural inter- of our framework using the ICL formulation described in
pretability: high epistemic uncertainty indicates that the model Section III. Attack families are defined based on the attack
lacks knowledge about similar examples (suggesting novel or type taxonomy from the CICIDS2017 dataset documentation,
rare attack patterns), while high aleatoric uncertainty indicates grouping attacks by their behavioral patterns and technical
inherent ambiguity in the data (e.g., borderline cases between characteristics. We use 11 attack families: (1) DoS (Denial
normal and attack). Figure 8 visualizes uncertainty estimates of Service), (2) DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service), (3)
alongside attention weights for a set of test samples, showing Brute Force, (4) Web Attacks, (5) Botnet, (6) Infiltration, (7)
that: (1) samples with high epistemic uncertainty often have Heartbleed, (8) Port Scan, (9) SQL Injection, (10) XSS (Crossdiffuse attention patterns, indicating the model is uncertain Site Scripting), and (11) FTP-Patator. For the ICL experiments,
about which features to focus on, (2) samples with high we split these families into: 7 families for meta-training (DoS,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 15

 Attention Weight Visualization Uncertainty-Based Explainability

 (a) DoS Attack (b) DDoS Attack (a) Attention Pattern (b) Uncertainty Estimates
 1.0 1.0 Diffuse Attention Novel Patterns
 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.7
 High attention to Attention to early
 0.0
 packet rate features sequence positions 0.600
 2.5 0.6
 2.5 2.5 0.8
 5.0

 Attention Weight
 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.450

 Sequence Position

 Uncertainty
 7.5 0.6
 0.4
 5.0 5.0
 10.0
 0.3

 Attention Weight

 Attention Weight
 0.4
 Sequence Position

 Sequence Position
 7.5 0.6 7.5 0.6 12.5
 0.2 0.150
 15.0 0.2
 10.0 10.0 0.1
 17.5
 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.0
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 Epistemic Aleatoric Total
 12.5 12.5
 Sequence Position

 (c) Attention Pattern (d) Uncertainty Estimates
 15.0 15.0 Clear Attention Ambiguous Boundaries
 0.2 0.2 1.0 0.7
 0.0
 0.600
 17.5 17.5 2.5 0.6
 0.8
 5.0

 Attention Weight
 0.5 0.450

 Sequence Position
 0.0 0.0

 Uncertainty
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 7.5 0.6
 0.4
 Sequence Position Sequence Position
 10.0
 0.3
 (c) Brute Force Attack (d) Web Attacks Attack 0.4
 1.0 1.0 12.5
 0.0 0.0 0.2
 Attention to Attention to 0.150
 15.0 0.2
 connection frequency HTTP-related features
 0.1
 2.5 2.5 17.5
 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 Epistemic Aleatoric Total
 5.0 5.0 Sequence Position

 (e) Attention Pattern (f) Uncertainty Estimates
 Focused Attention Discriminative Features
 Attention Weight

 Attention Weight
 Sequence Position

 Sequence Position

 7.5 0.6 7.5 0.6
 0.0 1.0 0.7

 2.5 0.6
 10.0 10.0 0.8
 5.0

 Attention Weight
 0.5

 Sequence Position
 0.4 0.4

 Uncertainty
 7.5 0.6
 0.4
 12.5 12.5
 10.0
 0.4
 0.3
 15.0 15.0 12.5 0.200
 0.2 0.2 0.2
 15.0 0.2 0.100 0.100
 17.5 17.5 0.1
 17.5
 0.0 0.0
 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 Epistemic Aleatoric Total
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 Sequence Position
 Sequence Position Sequence Position

Fig. 6: Attention weight visualization showing which features Fig. 8: Uncertainty-based explainability showing uncertainty
and temporal positions the model focuses on for different estimates alongside attention patterns: (a) High epistemic
attack types: (a) DoS attack with high attention to packet uncertainty with diffuse attention (novel patterns), (b) High
rate features, (b) DDoS attack with attention to early sequence aleatoric uncertainty with clear attention but ambiguous
positions, (c) Brute Force attack with attention to connection boundaries, and (c) Low uncertainty with focused attention
frequency, and (d) Web Attack with attention to HTTP-related on discriminative features. This visualization enables analysts
features. The heatmaps demonstrate that the model learns to understand both what the model predicts and why it is
interpretable, security-relevant attention patterns. confident or uncertain.
 1.00
 Feature Map Visualization
 0.0 (b)
 (a) Input Embedding Layer (b) Attention Output (c) Feed-Forward Network Output
 (a) 0.75 0.5
 0
 Feature Clustering
 1.0
 0
 Information Aggregation
 1.0
 0
 Final Representations
 1.0
 Uncertainty 1.000 0.575 0.584 2.5
 0.50
 3
 0.8
 3
 0.8
 3
 0.8 5.0 0.0
 0.25
Feature Dimension

 Feature Dimension

 Feature Dimension

 7.5

 Diversity
 Activation

 Activation

 Activation

 0.6 0.6 0.6
 6 6 6

 Loss
 Diversity 0.575 1.000 0.997 0.00 0.5
 9
 0.4
 9
 0.4
 9
 0.4
 10.0
 0.25
 12.5
 0.2 0.2 0.2
 12 12 12
 1.0
 0.0 0.0 0.0
 0.50
 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
 Sequence Position
 15.0 17.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
 Sequence Position
 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5
 Sequence Position
 15.0 17.5
 Loss 0.584 0.997 1.000 15.0
 0.75 17.5 1.5

 Uncertainty Diversity Loss 1.00
Fig. 7: Feature map visualization showing learned represen- 0.5 0.6 0.7
 Uncertainty
 0.8 0.9

tations at different processing stages: (a) Input embedding
layer showing feature clustering, (b) Attention output show- Fig. 9: Attention correlation analysis showing (a) correlation
ing information aggregation patterns, and (c) Feed-forward matrix between uncertainty, diversity, and loss metrics, and
network output showing final feature representations with (b) scatter plot of uncertainty vs diversity colored by loss valclear separation between attack and normal samples. The ues, demonstrating the relationships between different training
visualization reveals hierarchical learning of security-relevant components.
patterns. applications remains challenging. Performance improvements
DDoS, Brute Force, Web Attacks, Botnet, Port Scan, SQL with more shots may reflect better statistical estimation rather
Injection), 2 families for meta-validation (Infiltration, XSS), than true ICL adaptation. We have added a dedicated discusand 2 families for meta-testing (Heartbleed, FTP-Patator). This sion in Section III-C (Limitations and Generalization Bounds)
split ensures that the model must generalize to completely that explicitly addresses this limitation and its implications for
unseen attack families during testing, providing a rigorous future work. To address concerns about overfitting and generevaluation of few-shot adaptation capabilities. alization, we evaluate the model’s performance on completely
 unseen attack families (Heartbleed, FTP-Patator) that were
 Table XII presents few-shot learning capabilities. Our ICL- not included in meta-training or meta-validation. The results
Ensemble-Full method achieves the best F1-scores across show that our method achieves F1-scores of 0.8234 (1-shot)
all shot settings (0.8456 to 0.9123), demonstrating effective to 0.8912 (20-shot) on these novel families, demonstrating
scaling with more context examples. The results outperform reasonable generalization despite the risk of overfitting to
MAML and MatchingNetworks while remaining competitive meta-training tasks. However, performance on novel families
with PrototypicalNetworks. While our approach draws in- is slightly lower than on meta-validation families, indicating
spiration from ICL theory, we acknowledge that definitively that the model benefits from exposure to diverse attack behavdemonstrating genuine in-context learning for cybersecurity iors during meta-training. Preliminary analysis suggests that

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 16

 (a) (b) TABLE X: Fairness Analysis: ICL Performance Across Ex-
 0.7
 0.5 ample Quality Levels
 0.6

 Cross-Entropy Loss
 0.0 Example F1-Score ECE Mean
 0.5
 Trust-
 Total Loss

 0.5 0.4 Quality Uncertainty worthiness
 0.3
 1.0
 0.2
 High Quality 0.9123 0.045 0.12 High
 1.5 0.1
 Medium 0.8567 0.082 0.21 Moderate
 0.0
 Quality
 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0 500 1000 1500 2000
 Training Step (Sampled) Training Step (Sampled) Low Quality 0.7234 0.156 0.34 Low
 0.0 (c) 0.0 (d)
 0.5 Overall 0.8456 0.078 0.19 Moderate-
 2.5 2.5
 High
 5.0 5.0 0.0
 7.5 7.5 TABLE XI: Attack Family Distribution for ICL Experiments

 Total Loss
Diversity

 Diversity

 0.5
 10.0 10.0
 12.5 12.5
 Split Families Count Examples
 1.0
 15.0 15.0 Meta-Training DoS, DDoS, 7 Training
 1.5
 17.5 17.5 Brute Force, attack types
 0 500 1000 1500 2000 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Web Attacks,
 Training Step (Sampled) Cross-Entropy Loss Botnet, Port
 Scan, SQL
Fig. 10: Loss landscape analysis showing (a) total loss evolu- Injection
tion, (b) cross-entropy loss evolution, (c) diversity evolution, Meta-Validation Infiltration, 2 Validation for
and (d) relationship between loss components. Results demon- XSS early stopping
strate stable optimization dynamics with clear convergence Meta-Testing Heartbleed, 2 Unseen attack
patterns. FTP-Patator types

 TABLE XII: In-Context Learning Performance (F1-score)
the transformer attention mechanism may focus on security-
 Method 1-shot 5-shot 10-shot 20-shot
relevant features, supporting our theoretical framework.
 MAML [42] 0.7234 0.7456 0.7623 0.7789
 PrototypicalNetworks [43] 0.8500 0.8723 0.8834 0.8912
 MatchingNetworks [63] 0.7823 0.8012 0.8156 0.8234
G. Example Quality and Fairness Analysis ICL-Ensemble-Single 0.8234 0.8567 0.8789 0.8912
 ICL-Ensemble-Full 0.8456 0.8723 0.8934 0.9123
 ICL performance critically depends on the quality and
representativeness of context examples. To assess the model’s
robustness to imperfect examples and its trustworthiness under a valuable signal to analysts that predictions may be less
varying example quality conditions, we conduct a fairness trustworthy, enabling uncertainty-aware decision making.
analysis that evaluates prediction consistency and uncertainty These findings highlight the importance of example selecreliability. We define example quality based on three criteria: tion for reliable ICL deployment. While our method demon-
(1) Representativeness: how well the example captures the strates reasonable robustness to moderate example quality, it
characteristic patterns of its attack family, (2) Clarity: how remains sensitive to very poor examples, which could lead
distinct the example is from normal traffic and other attack to incorrect predictions and reduced analyst trust, especially
types, and (3) Diversity: how well the example set covers the under time pressure. The uncertainty estimates serve as a valuattack family’s behavior space. Examples are labeled as ”high able safeguard, increasing when example quality is low and
quality” if they satisfy all three criteria, ”medium quality” if alerting analysts to potential prediction unreliability. Future
they satisfy two criteria, and ”low quality” if they satisfy only work should focus on automated example quality assessment
one or none. and selection strategies to ensure robust ICL performance in
 practical deployments.
 Table X presents the fairness analysis results, showing
F1-scores and calibration metrics (ECE) across different ex- H. Cross-Dataset Analysis and Performance Trade-offs
ample quality levels. The analysis reveals that: (1) High- Our comprehensive evaluation across four diverse datasets
quality examples lead to the best performance (F1=0.9123, reveals important patterns in performance characteristics and
ECE=0.045) and most reliable uncertainty estimates, enabling highlights the trade-offs between different evaluation metrics.
trustworthy predictions that analysts can confidently inter- This analysis helps readers understand when and why our
pret. (2) Medium-quality examples result in slightly degraded method performs well or faces challenges, providing actionperformance (F1=0.8567, ECE=0.082) but maintain reason- able insights for deployment decisions.
able uncertainty calibration, suggesting the model can handle The method demonstrates strong performance on UNSWmoderate example quality. (3) Low-quality examples cause NB15 (F1=97.00%) and good calibration on SWaT (ECE
significant performance degradation (F1=0.7234, ECE=0.156) 0.0248), while showing different performance characteristics
and poor calibration, indicating that weak examples can in- on CICIDS2017 (F1=86.70%) and NSL-KDD (F1=77.55%).
deed misdirect the model and produce unreliable predictions. This variability reflects fundamental differences in dataset
The increased uncertainty estimates for low-quality examples characteristics: (1) Class Balance: UNSW-NB15 has a more
(mean uncertainty: 0.34 vs. 0.12 for high-quality) provide balanced class distribution (31.9% normal, 68.1% attacks

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 17

 F1-Score vs Ensemble Size ECE vs Ensemble Size
 0.8 0.200
distributed across 9 classes), enabling better learning of attack

 Expected Calibration Error (ECE)
 0.175

patterns. In contrast, CICIDS2017 exhibits extreme imbalance 0.7
 0.150

(80.3% Benign, with some attack classes representing less

 F1-Score
 0.6 0.125

than 0.001% of samples), making it challenging to learn rare 0.100
 0.5
attack patterns. (2) Feature Quality: UNSW-NB15 features are 0.075

well-engineered and discriminative, while NSL-KDD contains 0.4 0.050

 0.025
older, less refined features that may not capture modern attack 2 4 6 8 10 2 4 6 8 10
 Ensemble Size Ensemble Size
characteristics. (3) Dataset Size: CICIDS2017’s large size
(2.8M samples) provides more training data but also amplifies Fig. 11: Ensemble size analysis showing the effect of ensemble
the impact of class imbalance, while SWaT’s size (495K size on (a) F1-score performance and (b) Expected Calibration
samples) with binary classification simplifies the learning task. Error (ECE). Results demonstrate optimal F1-score perfor-
 Our method prioritizes calibration quality and uncertainty mance at ensemble size 5, with diminishing returns beyond
reliability over raw accuracy, which is more appropriate for this point, and good ECE at this size.
security applications. This design choice creates a trade-off: TABLE XIII: Loss Function Component Ablation Study on
methods optimized solely for accuracy (e.g., DeepEnsemble on NSL-KDD Dataset
CICIDS2017 achieving 99.05% F1) may achieve higher raw Loss Configuration F1-Score ECE Uncertainty Correlation
 LCE only 0.7124 0.2156 -0.42
performance but often suffer from poor calibration, leading LCE + Ldiversity 0.7418 0.1834 -0.58
to overconfident predictions that are unreliable for decision- LCE + Luncertainty 0.7291 0.1672 -0.71
 LCE + Ldiversity + Luncertainty (Full) 0.7755 0.1567 -0.78
making. Our approach achieves competitive accuracy (86.70%
F1 on CICIDS2017) while maintaining excellent calibration
 intrusion detection framework. The ablation analysis system-
(ECE 0.0583), enabling trustworthy uncertainty estimates.
 atically evaluates the impact of ensemble size, loss function
This trade-off is particularly valuable in security applications
 components, architectural choices, and training strategies on
where understanding prediction confidence is critical for reboth detection performance and uncertainty quality.
source allocation and risk assessment. For example, a wellcalibrated model with 85% accuracy and ECE 0.05 is more 1) Ensemble Size Analysis: Figure 11 presents the ensemuseful than an overconfident model with 95% accuracy and ble size analysis, demonstrating the optimal trade-off between
ECE 0.25, as the former provides reliable confidence estimates performance and computational efficiency. The analysis rethat guide analyst decisions. veals that performance improvements are meaningful when
 increasing from single models to ensembles of 3-5 members,
 (1) NSL-KDD: Lower F1-score (77.55%) reflects the
 with optimal performance achieved at ensemble size M=5.
dataset’s age and less refined features, but our method achieves
 Beyond this point, additional ensemble members provide diexceptional precision (99.00%) and low FPR (1.09%), making
 minishing returns while computational costs increase linearly,
it suitable for applications prioritizing false positive minvalidating our choice of 5 ensemble members for the main
imization. (2) CICIDS2017: The lower F1-score (86.70%)
 experiments.
compared to some baselines is explained by extreme class
imbalance and our method’s focus on calibration. Per-class 2) Loss Function Component Analysis: We systematically
analysis (Table VII) shows strong performance on common evaluate the contribution of each component in our composite
classes (Benign, DDoS) and challenges on rare classes (Heart- loss function: Ltotal = LCE + λ1 Ldiversity + λ2 Luncertainty .
bleed, Infiltration), which is expected given the severe imbal- Table XIII presents the ablation results on NSL-KDD dataset.
ance. (3) UNSW-NB15: Excellent performance (97.00% F1) The results demonstrate that each component contributes
demonstrates the method’s effectiveness when datasets have meaningfully to the overall performance. The diversity loss
balanced classes and high-quality features. (4) SWaT: The improves F1-score by 0.0294 and enhances calibration (ECE
recall-precision trade-off (78.20% recall vs. 90.17% precision) reduction from 0.2156 to 0.1834). The uncertainty loss signifis appropriate for critical infrastructure, where false positives icantly improves uncertainty informativeness (correlation imare costly. The outstanding calibration (ECE 0.0248) enables provement from -0.42 to -0.71) while maintaining competitive
reliable uncertainty-based decision making. detection performance. The combination of all components
 These findings demonstrate that our method achieves strong achieves the best overall performance across all metrics.
precision, calibration, and low false positive rates across 3) Architecture Component Analysis: We evaluate the condiverse benchmarks, with performance characteristics that tribution of key architectural components by comparing our
align with dataset properties. The reliability in uncertainty full ensemble approach against simplified variants. Table XIV
quantification and robust performance on both balanced and presents the architectural ablation results. The architectural
imbalanced datasets suggest strong suitability for real-world ablation confirms that ensemble aggregation provides subdeployment in security and industrial applications, particularly stantial improvements over single models (0.0773 F1-score
where trustworthy and interpretable predictions are required. improvement). Diversity training enhances both performance
 and calibration quality, while uncertainty calibration is crucial
 for reliable confidence estimates (ECE improvement from
I. Ablation Study 0.2891 to 0.1567).
 We conduct comprehensive ablation studies to validate 4) Training Strategy Ablation: We evaluate the impact
the contribution of each component in our uncertainty-aware of different training strategies on model performance and

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 18

 TABLE XIV: Architecture Component Ablation Study (a) Optimal (1e-3) 77.5 (b) (diversity)
 (uncertainty)
Architecture Variant F1-Score ECE Inference Time (ms) 76 Optimal
 77.0 Optimal

 F1-Score (%)

 F1-Score (%)
Single Transformer 0.6982 0.2834 1.6
 74
Ensemble w/o Diversity Training 0.7423 0.2156 8.2 76.5
Ensemble w/o Uncertainty Calibration 0.7618 0.2891 8.0
Full Ensemble (Ours) 0.7755 0.1567 8.0 72
 76.0

 TABLE XV: Training Strategy Ablation Study 70 75.5

Training Strategy F1-Score ECE Adv. Robustness Training Time 10 4 10 3 10 2 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
 Learning Rate Regularization Weight
Standard Training 0.7512 0.1834 0.856 2.1 h (c) (d)
 77.5 Optimal (50) Optimal (0.1)
+ Adversarial Training 0.7689 0.1672 0.921 3.2 h
 77.0 77
+ Meta-Learning 0.7702 0.1598 0.912 4.8 h
+ Both (Full Method) 0.7755 0.1567 0.941 5.1 h 76.5
 76

 F1-Score (%)

 F1-Score (%)
 76.0
robustness. Table XV presents the training strategy ablation 75.5 75

results. The training strategy ablation demonstrates that adver- 75.0
 74
 74.5
sarial training significantly improves robustness (from 0.856
 74.0 73
to 0.921) while maintaining detection performance. Meta- 20 40 60 80 100 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
 Sequence Length Dropout Rate
learning contributes to better calibration and slight perfor-
 Fig. 12: Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis showing the effect
mance improvements. The combination of both strategies
 of (a) learning rate, (b) regularization weights λ1 and λ2 ,
achieves optimal results across all metrics.
 (c) sequence length, and (d) dropout rate on F1-score per-
 Note: Training times are reported in hours (h) as they
 formance. Results demonstrate robustness to hyperparameter
represent total training duration, while inference times are
 choices within reasonable ranges.
reported in milliseconds (ms) as they represent per-sample
processing latency. This unit distinction reflects the different C&W, 8.0% for PGD). Uncertainty estimates reliably indiscales and practical relevance of these metrics: training is a cated prediction correctness and potential evasion attempts,
one-time offline process measured in hours, while inference enhancing operational security and trustworthiness in IDS.
occurs per-sample in real-time systems where millisecond- Despite these advancements, some limitations persist, inlevel latency is critical. cluding reliance on local convexity in theoretical analysis and
 5) Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis: We conduct sys- incomplete demonstration of in-context learning for evolving
tematic hyperparameter sensitivity analysis for the key pa- cyber threats. Future research will address these gaps by
rameters in our framework. Figure 12 shows the sensitivity exploring deeper and more expressive transformer architecanalysis results. The analysis reveals that our method is tures, advancing uncertainty-guided active learning and robust
robust to hyperparameter choices within reasonable ranges. adversarial training methods, and developing adaptive calibra-
The learning rate of 10−3 provides optimal performance with tion techniques to ensure reliable uncertainty estimates across
stable convergence. The regularization weights λ1 = 0.1 and varied deployment settings.
λ2 = 0.05 achieve the best balance between performance and
 Code Availability: The source code for this work is publicly
uncertainty quality. Sequence length of 50 captures sufficient
 available at https://github.com/xiufengliu/uncertainty id.git.
temporal context while maintaining computational efficiency.
 In summary, our comprehensive evaluation demonstrates R EFERENCES
that the Bayesian Ensemble Transformer framework provides
 [1] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey
a principled and practical solution for uncertainty-aware in- of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges,”
trusion detection. We now conclude by summarizing our Cybersecurity, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2019.
contributions and discussing future research directions. [2] P. K. Sadhu, V. P. Yanambaka, and A. Abdelgawad, “Internet of things:
 Security and solutions survey,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 19, p. 7433, 2022.
 [3] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian
 V. C ONCLUSION deep learning for computer vision?” Advances in neural information
 processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
 We presented a novel uncertainty-aware intrusion detection [4] C. Guo, G. Pleiss, Y. Sun, and K. Q. Weinberger, “On calibration
framework, the Bayesian Ensemble Transformer, designed for of modern neural networks,” in International conference on machine
cybersecurity applications. This framework integrates single- learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1321–1330.
 [5] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
layer transformer blocks within an ensemble to provide prin- Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
cipled uncertainty decomposition into epistemic and aleatoric neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
components, backed by theoretical convergence guarantees [6] D. Woodward, M. Hobbs, J. A. Gilbertson, and N. Cohen, “Uncertainty
 quantification for trusted machine learning in space system cyber secuand empirical validation. Our comprehensive experiments rity,” in Proc. of SMC-IT. IEEE, 2021, pp. 38–43.
across NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, UNSW-NB15, and SWaT [7] J. Quiñonero-Candela, M. Sugiyama, A. Schwaighofer, and N. D.
datasets demonstrated F1-scores that vary by dataset character- Lawrence, “Dataset shift in machine learning,” The MIT Press, 2009.
 [8] L. Bieringer, K. Grosse, M. Backes, B. Biggio, and K. Krombholz, “Inistics, with strong performance on UNSW-NB15 (97.00%) and dustrial practitioners’ mental models of adversarial machine learning,”
competitive results on other benchmarks (77.55% to 86.70%), in Proc. of SOUPS, 2022, pp. 97–116.
alongside superior calibration (ECE 0.0248 to 0.2278). The [9] Y. Ovadia, E. Fertig, J. Ren, Z. Nado, D. Sculley, S. Nowozin, J. Dillon,
 B. Lakshminarayanan, and J. Snoek, “Can you trust your model’s uncerframework exhibited robust performance against sophisticated tainty? evaluating predictive uncertainty under dataset shift,” Advances
adversarial attacks, with minimal accuracy drops (3.6% for in neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 19

[10] U. C. Akuthota and L. Bhargava, “Transformer based intrusion detection [36] K. Wang, C. Gou, Y. Duan, Y. Lin, X. Zheng, and F.-Y. Wang,
 for iot networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2025. “Uncertainty quantification for deep learning-based object detection: A
[11] S. Fort, H. Hu, and B. Lakshminarayanan, “Deep ensembles: A loss survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07835, 2019.
 landscape perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02757, 2019. [37] P. Wiessner, G. Bezirganyan, S. Sellami, R. Chbeir, and H.-J. Bungartz,
[12] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and “Uncertainty-aware time series anomaly detection,” Future internet,
 E. Vázquez, “A comprehensive survey on network anomaly detection,” vol. 16, no. 11, p. 403, 2024.
 Telecommunication systems, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 2379–2396, 2014. [38] J. Von Oswald, E. Niklasson, E. Randazzo, J. Sacramento, A. Mordvint-
[13] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “A survey of data mining and machine sev, A. Zhmoginov, and M. Vladymyrov, “Transformers learn in-context
 learning methods for cyber security intrusion detection,” IEEE Commu- by gradient descent,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
 nications surveys & tutorials, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2016. PMLR, 2023, pp. 35 151–35 174.
[14] S. Mukkamala, G. Janoski, and A. Sung, “Intrusion detection using neu- [39] E. Akyürek, D. Schuurmans, J. Andreas, T. Ma, and D. Zhou, “What
 ral networks and support vector machines,” in Proc. of the international learning algorithm is in-context learning? investigations with linear
 joint conference on neural networks, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 1702–1707. models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.15661, 2022.
[15] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. [40] S. Garg, D. Tsipras, P. S. Liang, and G. Valiant, “What can transformers
 5–32, 2001. learn in-context? a case study of simple function classes,” Advances in
[16] J. Cannady, “Artificial neural networks for misuse detection,” National neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 30 583–30 598, 2022.
 information systems security conference, vol. 26, pp. 368–381, 1998. [41] D. Dai, Y. Sun, L. Dong, Y. Hao, S. Ma, Z. Sui, and F. Wei, “Why
[17] R. Vinayakumar, M. Alazab, K. Soman, P. Poornachandran, A. Al- can gpt learn in-context? language models implicitly perform gradient
 Nemrat, and S. Venkatraman, “Deep learning approach for intelligent descent as meta-optimizers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10559, 2022.
 intrusion detection system,” in IEEE access, vol. 7. IEEE, 2019, pp. [42] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning
 41 525–41 550. for fast adaptation of deep networks,” in International conference on
[18] C. Yin, Y. Zhu, J. Fei, and X. He, “A deep learning approach for intrusion machine learning. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
 detection using recurrent neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. [43] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
 21 954–21 961, 2017. learning,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017,
[19] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A pp. 4077–4087.
 survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Computers & [44] A. Madry, A. Makelov, L. Schmidt, D. Tsipras, and A. Vladu, “Towards
 security, vol. 86, pp. 147–167, 2019. deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks,” arXiv preprint
[20] R. Chinnasamy, M. Subramanian, S. V. Easwaramoorthy, and J. Cho, arXiv:1706.06083, 2017.
 “Deep learning-driven methods for network-based intrusion detection [45] M. Tavallaee, E. Bagheri, W. Lu, and A. A. Ghorbani, “A detailed
 systems: A systematic review,” ICT Express, 2025. analysis of the kdd cup 99 data set,” in CISDA. Ieee, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[21] Y. Zhang, R. C. Muniyandi, and F. Qamar, “A review of deep learning [46] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, A. A. Ghorbani et al., “Toward generating
 applications in intrusion detection systems: Overcoming challenges in a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization.”
 spatiotemporal feature extraction and data imbalance,” Applied Sciences, ICISSp, vol. 1, no. 2018, pp. 108–116, 2018.
 vol. 15, no. 3, p. 1552, 2025. [47] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “Unsw-nb15: a comprehensive data set for
[22] J. Zhu and X. Liu, “An integrated intrusion detection framework network intrusion detection systems (unsw-nb15 network data set),” in
 based on subspace clustering and ensemble learning,” Computers and Proc. of MilCIS. IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–6.
 Electrical Engineering, vol. 115, p. 109113, 2024. [48] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
[23] G. Apruzzese, M. Colajanni, L. Ferretti, A. Guido, and M. Marchetti, research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. of
 “Addressing adversarial attacks against security systems based on ma- ICCIIS. Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
 chine learning,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 104, pp. 150– [49] A. J. A. Immastephy and K. Punitha, “A systematic review on network
 178, 2018. intrusion detection system based on machine learning and deep learning
[24] D. J. MacKay, “A practical bayesian framework for backpropagation approach,” in E3S Web of Conferences, vol. 540. EDP Sciences, 2024,
 networks,” Neural computation, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 448–472, 1992. p. 14006.
[25] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable [50] L. Zou, X. Luo, Y. Zhang, X. Yang, and X. Wang, “Hc-dttsvm: A
 predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” Advances in network intrusion detection method based on decision tree twin support
 neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017. vector machine and hierarchical clustering,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp.
[26] C. Blundell, J. Cornebise, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra, “Weight 21 404–21 416, 2023.
 uncertainty in neural network,” in International conference on machine [51] V. K. Pandey, S. Prakash, T. K. Gupta, P. Sinha, T. Yang, R. S. Rathore,
 learning. PMLR, 2015, pp. 1613–1622. L. Wang, S. Tahir, and S. T. Bakhsh, “Enhancing intrusion detection in
[27] J. Gawlikowski, C. R. N. Tassi, M. Ali, J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng, wireless sensor networks using a tabu search based optimized random
 A. Kruspe, R. Triebel, P. Jung, R. Roscher et al., “A survey of uncertainty forest,” Scientific Reports, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 18634, 2025.
 in deep neural networks,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 56, no. [52] L.-r. Yu, Q.-h. Lu, and Y. Xue, “Dtaad: Dual tcn-attention networks for
 Suppl 1, pp. 1513–1589, 2023. anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Knowledge-Based
[28] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Systems, vol. 295, p. 111849, 2024.
 Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in international [53] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2016, pp. 1050–1059. in multivariate time series,” in Proc. of the AAAI, vol. 35, no. 5, 2021,
[29] A. Sheinkman and S. Wade, “The architecture and evaluation of bayesian pp. 4027–4035.
 neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11808, 2025. [54] P. Malhotra, A. Ramakrishnan, G. Anand, L. Vig, P. Agarwal, and
[30] H. Chen, R. Ma, X. Liu, and R. Liu, “Detecting energy theft with G. Shroff, “Lstm-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor anomaly departially observed anomalies,” International Journal of Electrical Power tection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.00148, 2016.
 & Energy Systems, vol. 162, p. 110323, 2024. [55] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “Mad-gan:
[31] J. Platt et al., “Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and Multivariate anomaly detection for time series data with generative
 comparisons to regularized likelihood methods,” Advances in large adversarial networks,” pp. 703–716, 2019.
 margin classifiers, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 61–74, 1999. [56] C. Zhang, D. Song, Y. Chen, X. Feng, C. Lumezanu, W. Cheng, J. Ni,
[32] B. Zadrozny and C. Elkan, “Transforming classifier scores into accurate B. Zong, H. Chen, and N. V. Chawla, “A deep neural network for
 multiclass probability estimates,” in Proc. of the 8th ACM SIGKDD, unsupervised anomaly detection and diagnosis in multivariate time series
 2002, pp. 694–699. data,” vol. 33, no. 01, pp. 1409–1416, 2019.
[33] A. Kumar, P. S. Liang, and T. Ma, “Verified uncertainty calibration,” in [57] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019, pp. 3787– J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
 3798. graph attention network,” pp. 841–850, 2020.
[34] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential deep learning [58] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 to quantify classification uncertainty,” Advances in neural information detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural
 processing systems, vol. 31, 2018. network,” pp. 2828–2837, 2019.
[35] K. Grosse, P. Manoharan, N. Papernot, M. Backes, and P. Mc- [59] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “Tranad: Deep transformer
 Daniel, “Statistical detection of adversarial examples,” in arXiv preprint networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” arXiv
 arXiv:1702.06280, 2017. preprint arXiv:2201.07284, 2022.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3694131

 20

[60] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, “Usad:
 Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” pp. 3395–
 3404, 2020.
[61] D. Zhan, W. Zhang, L. Ye, X. Yu, H. Zhang, and Z. He, “Anomaly detection in industrial control systems based on cross-domain representation
 learning,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
 2024.
[62] N. Carlini and D. Wagner, “Towards evaluating the robustness of neural
 networks,” IEEE symposium on security and privacy, pp. 39–57, 2017.
[63] O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, D. Wierstra et al., “Matching
 networks for one shot learning,” in Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 2016, pp. 3630–3638.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.