6984 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 PrivNet—Generative AI-Augmented Quantum
 Privacy Framework for Vehicular Networks
 Kamran Ahmad Awan , Member, IEEE, Korhan Cengiz , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Ibrahim Alrashdi , Member, IEEE, Maha Abdelhaq, Member, IEEE, Mueen Uddin , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Hamed Alsufyani , Member, IEEE, Raed Alsaqour , Member, IEEE,
 and Celestine Iwendi , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Vehicular networks face increasing challenges to I. I NTRODUCTION
ensure security, privacy, and efficiency in dynamic communication environments. Current solutions often lack adaptability
to evolving threats and efficient mechanisms for preserving
privacy and reducing computational overhead. This study proposes PrivNet, a framework that integrates generative AI with
 T HE evolution of vehicular networks and Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) has been underpinned by significant
 advancements in various technological domains [1], [2], [3].
advanced cryptographic and trust mechanisms to address these Cryptographic systems have been central to the security
limitations. The framework comprises the Quantum-Augmented of communications, providing mechanisms to ensure data
Holographic Cryptographic System (QAHCS) for dynamic integrity and confidentiality [4], [5]. Blockchain technologies
and secure key generation, the Neural Overlap Privacy
 have emerged as tools for decentralized trust management [6],
System (NOPS) for adaptive pseudonym morphing and
entropy-driven identity obfuscation, and the Self-Supervised [7], mitigating the risks associated with a single point of
Generative Anomaly Detection (SS-GAI) module for real-time failure. Meanwhile, anomaly detection methodologies have
threat modeling and counter-anomaly injection. The system gained traction in the domain of vehicular networks [8], [9],
also incorporates Hyperledger Mesh for energy-efficient and [10], offering proactive measures to counter malicious activsecure transaction validation. Simulations were performed using
NSL-KDD, CICIDS2017, and Car-Hacking/VeReMi datasets for
 ities and ensure uninterrupted operations. Current research
300 minutes. The results demonstrate a 12% improvement in exhibits notable limitations that constrain the effectiveness
detection accuracy, a 23% improvement in energy efficiency, and of these technologies in vehicular networks. For example,
a 22% reduction in resource utilization. while cryptographic systems introduce security [11], [12], their
 Index Terms— Intelligent transport systems, generative AI, computational demands often become a barrier to scalability,
quantum computing, anomaly detection, data integrity, privacy especially in dynamic vehicular environments [13].
preservation. The increased reliance on such networks for safety-critical
 Received 5 February 2025; revised 18 April 2025 and 30 May 2025; as well as non-safety-critical operations increases the need
accepted 11 July 2025. Date of publication 29 July 2025; date of cur- for mechanisms that are capable of protecting sensitive data
rent version 2 June 2026. This work was supported by the Princess and ensuring network non-interruption [14], [15], [16]. Some
Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, under Grant
PNURSP2025R97. The Associate Editor for this article was H. Karimipour. of the practical implications include improved passenger
(Corresponding authors: Korhan Cengiz; Kamran Ahmad Awan.) safety, better traffic management, and improved public trust
 Kamran Ahmad Awan is with the Department of Information Tech- in autonomous vehicle systems [17], [18]. The problem is
nology, The University of Haripur, Harīpur 22630, Pakistan (e-mail:
kamranawan.2955@gmail.com). that existing solutions do not balance the demands for privacy,
 Korhan Cengiz is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Prince security, and operational efficiency without making computa-
Mohammad Bin Fahd University, Al Khobar 31952, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: tional burdens excessively prohibitive.
kcengiz@pmu.edu.sa).
 Ibrahim Alrashdi is with the Department of Computer Science, College The proposed PrivNet framework addresses fundamental
of Computer and Information Sciences, Al Jouf University, Sakaka 73211, challenges in vehicular networks, rooted in quantum-inspired
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: irrashdi@ju.edu.sa). cryptography, dynamic trust management, and anomaly
 Maha Abdelhaq is with the Department of Information Technology, College
of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman detection. It utilizes the quantum Augmented Holographic
University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: Cryptographic System (QAHCS), generating multispectrum
msabdelhaq@pnu.edu.sa). interference patterns to build keys resistant to classical and
 Mueen Uddin is with the College of Computing and IT, University of Doha
for Science and Technology, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: mueen.malik@ieee.org). quantum threats. Hyperledger Mesh introduces chaotic clus-
 Hamed Alsufyani is with the Department of Computer Science, College tering and dynamic fragmentation for decentralized trust with
of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 11673, minimal latency and reduced energy demand [19]. PrivNet
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: h.alsufyani@seu.edu.sa).
 Raed Alsaqour is with the Department of Information Technology, College can support secure platooning, intersection management,
of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 93499, and V2X data exchanges in autonomous fleet coordination.
Saudi Arabia (e-mail: raed.ftsm@gmail.com). It also embeds a neural overlap privacy system that con-
 Celestine Iwendi is with the Centre of Intelligence of Things, University of
Bolton, BL3 5AB Bolton, U.K. (e-mail: celestine.iwendi@ieee.org). textually morphs vehicular identities, preserving anonymity
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3589871 while ensuring accountability. Anomaly detection is handled
 1558-0016 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK 6985

by a self-supervised generative module that adapts to emergent TABLE I
threats and synthesizes counter-anomalous responses. The C OMPARISON OF I DENTIFIED P ROBLEMS AND P ROPOSED S OLUTIONS
main contribution of this research study can be summarized
as:
 1) Novel encryption mechanism based on holographic
 memory and quantum-state overlap simulation to generate dynamic, and multi-dimensional keys.
 2) Decentralized trust mechanism employs chaotic clustering and stochastic fragmentation to replace conventional
 blockchain consensus models.
 3) Privacy preservation module is developed, employing neural mapping techniques to dynamically morph
 vehicular identities to ensure robust anonymity while
 maintaining traceability.
 The structure of this article can be summarized as follows:
Section II presents an in-depth review of existing approaches.
Section III details the design, technical components, and
integration of the proposed PrivNet framework. Section IV
discusses the simulation setup, evaluation metrics, and results.
Finally, Section VI concludes the study.

 II. R ELATED W ORK
 Anomaly detection and secure communication have been
pivotal areas of research in vehicular networks. Techniques
employing deep learning models have shown significant potential for intrusion detection, especially in complex in-vehicle
networks, as highlighted by methods utilizing convolutional
neural networks and adversarial generative networks [9], [20],
[21]. Blockchain-based mechanisms, such as multi-sharding
architectures, have been proposed to improve data sharing
efficiency, introducing novel avenues to improve privacy
 detection, but lack adaptability to evolving threats and
and scalability in vehicular networks [7], [22]. Furthermore,
 often fail to explain detected anomalies [16]. Blockchainadvances in cryptographic approaches, particularly those that
 based approaches improve privacy and scalability; however,
incorporate modular arithmetic and elliptic curve systems,
 issues such as high computational overhead and energy
have focused on resisting specific threats, such as denial of
 inefficiency remain unresolved. Cryptographic mechanisms,
service attacks [5], [23], [24].
 while robust against specific threats, are computationally
 Distributed authentication schemes for roaming services
 intensive and struggle to handle dynamic vehicular scenarusing smart contracts in mobile vehicular networks address
 ios [2], [3]. Similarly, distributed authentication schemes
some of the above issues [25]. Such methods generally and privacy-preserving reputation systems face scalability
suffer from some computational overheads and scalabil- bottlenecks and overhead in real-time implementations. The
ity bottlenecks. Privacy-preserving reputation management in proposed PrivNet framework addresses these limitations by
cloud-assisted vehicular networks has been another critical integrating generative AI with quantum-inspired cryptographic
domain which focuses on the protection of sensitive infor- systems and blockchain mechanisms (see Table I). It combines
mation while ensuring the trust value of the systems [26]. the Self-Supervised Generative Anomaly Detection (SS-GAI)
Joint Radar-Communication mechanisms against eavesdrop- module for adaptive threat detection, the QAHCS module
ping are robust transmission solutions tailored to vehicular for dynamic key generation, and the Hyperledger Mesh
scenarios [18], [27]. This has been followed by neural module for energy-efficient transaction validation, achieving
network-based methods that can explain the detection of significant improvements in privacy, detection accuracy, and
anomalies in vehicle network behaviors [10], [28]. Though scalability.
these methodologies address transparency and detection accuracy, they often struggle to adapt to emerging threat patterns.
Similarly, privacy-preserving access control schemes tailored III. P ROPOSED P RIV N ET F RAMEWORK
for software-defined vehicular networks have made strides in The PrivNet framework is a novel integration of advanced
combining efficiency with confidentiality, but their practical cryptographic, privacy-preserving, and security mechanisms
deployment in large-scale networks remains limited [12], [24]. designed to address the multifaceted challenges of vehicular
 Current vehicular network solutions face several criti- networks while ensuring scalability, adaptability, and effical limitations. Deep learning models excel at anomaly ciency in dynamic operational environments.
6986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 1) The communication process begins when vehicles
 encrypt their messages through keys that NQIC produces
 to establish secure data transmission.
 2) HL-MDF receives encrypted messages that get
 fragmented into multiple parts before being distributed
 across decentralized chaotic ledger clusters for
 processing.
 3) The system uses NOPS to change vehicle identities
 dynamically while preserving anonymity through
 pseudonym adaptation for maintaining system
 accountability.
 4) The SS-GAI system tracks network behavior through
 self-generated baseline comparisons to identify abnormal system activities which it then neutralizes.
 5) The system enables authorized users to retrieve fragmented data which becomes secure information for
 making real-time decisions about traffic management or
 threat response.

 B. Next-Gen Quantum-Inspired Cryptography (NQIC)
 The modules of NQIC, QAHCS, offer an innovative encryption method by integrating quantum-like holographic memory
 structures. Quantum-state overlap simulations begin with two
 states, |φ1 ⟩ and |φ2 ⟩, in a multidimensional Hilbert space
 as defined in Equations 1 and 2, respectively. The quantum
 overlap between the two states is computed using Equation 3,
 which incorporates the phase differences θi j .
Fig. 1. Workflow of the proposed PrivNet framework where n
the generative anomaly detection engine (SS-GAI) transforms vehicu- X
lar tensor streams X (t) via anomaly induction and synthesis pipeline |φ1 ⟩ = αi |bi ⟩ , (1)
 fa g(z) i=1
X −→ Xanom −−→ Xgen → Xcorr , evaluated using metrics Pres = Teff ·Lopt
and suppression ratio Sanom . The RQAHCS module initiates encryption through m
 X
quantum state overlap ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ = αi β j eiθi j dφ and holographic interference |φ2 ⟩ = β j |c j ⟩ , (2)
 modulated by entropy dynamics η(κ) → κd
 P i(ω x+ϕ y)
H(x, y) = ke
 k k
 j=1
for key generation K = F (H). The encrypted stream De = D ⊕ K Z
flows into the NOPS pseudonymization system, where neural mappings ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ = αi β j eiθi j dφ. (3)
N : (Vi , t, C)
 ⃗ 7→ Pi yield robust identities governed by morphing feedback
Mi = P f + 1Pi and entropy H(Pi ). The Hyperledger Mesh dynamically
 n
fragments data D → {Fi }i=1 under entropy field E f , forms chaotic trust The composite state |φc ⟩ and holographic interference pattern
graphs G = (V, E) with edge scores Ei j , and computes validation outcomes H(x, y) are formulated in Equations 4 and 5. The encryption
{Rt , Ri } using stochastic consensus Tn ∼ G · St .
 key K is then derived via a Fourier transform of the interference pattern, as shown in Equation 6.
A. Framework Architecture
 The PrivNet framework is designed as a modular and |φc ⟩ = ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩ |φ1 ⟩ ⊗ |φ2 ⟩ , (4)
interconnected system comprising four primary components: Xp

QAHCS, HL-MDF, NOPS and SS-GAI. The integration of H(x, y) = ei(ωk x+ϕk y) , (5)
PrivNet’s components is achieved through a layered architec- k=1
 Z ∞
ture, where each layer performs distinct roles Figure 1. K H(x, y)e−i(ux+vy) d x dy. (6)
 The NQIC module provides secure communication through −∞
encryption of V2V and V2I data. HL-MDF receives these
 Encrypted data De is generated using the key K as described
encrypted data and breaks them into smaller chaotic clusin Equation 7. To further enhance security, entropy-controlled
ters for trust evaluation and decentralized storage. NOPS
 noise is added to the key in Equation 8, and decryption is perchanges vehicular identities actively to maintain anonymity
 formed using Equation 9. These steps, detailed in Equations 7
but enables authorized entities to trace vehicles. The SS-GAI
 to 9, ensure data confidentiality even in adversarial settings.
module operates simultaneously with the system by identifying potential threats through self-evolving anomaly detection De = D ⊕ K, (7)
algorithms that analyze traffic patterns. The PrivNet framework functions in practical deployment through a step-by-step Kd = K + η(K), (8)
iterative process: D = De ⊕ Kd . (9)
AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK 6987

 Algorithm 1 NQIC Workflow chaotic clustering principles. Dynamic fragmentation begins
 Input: Quantum states |φ1 ⟩, |φ2 ⟩; Plaintext data D with data D divided into smaller fragments Fi :
 Output: Encrypted data De ; Security metric S Fi = F(D, α, β), (14)
1 begin
 n
 Compute the encryption key K using the
 [
2
 D= Fi , (15)
 quantum-state overlap ⟨φ1 |φ2 ⟩, the composite state i=1
 |φc ⟩, and the holographic interference pattern H(x, y)
 Hi = H(Fi ). (16)
 (Equations 3, 4, 5, 6);
3 Encrypt the plaintext D using De = D ⊕ K and add Here, Equation 14 models the fragmentation process based
 entropy-controlled noise η(K) to generate the on parameters α and β, while 15 and 16 define the fragmodified key Kd (Equations 7, 8); mentation’s hashed outputs. Entropy is added to ensure
4 Decrypt the data using D = De ⊕ Kd to verify the unpredictability:
 process (Equation 9); n
 X
5 Evaluate the security metric S to quantify robustness Ef = ∥Fi − Hi ∥2 , (17)
 against adversarial threats (Equation 10); i=1
6 Recalibrate encryption keys dynamically by Fr = Fi + η(Fi ), (18)
 leveraging interference patterns I (x, y) and
 amplitude coefficients An (Equations 11, 12); where E f (Equation 17) calculates entropy and η(Fi ) intro-
7 Generate final encryption keys by applying the duces controlled noise, ensuring fragment randomness. The
 Fourier transform on recalibrated interference fragmented data is organized across a chaotic mesh graph
 patterns (Equation 13); G = (V, E):
8 end
 Ei j = σi j · exp(−∥Fi − F j ∥), (19)
9 return De , S X
 Pc = Ei j log(Ei j ). (20)
 (i, j)∈E

Robustness of the encryption is evaluated using a security met- Here, Equation 19 defines edge weights based on similarity
ric S, defined in Equation 10, which quantifies the deviation scores σi j , while Equation 20 computes chaotic entropy Pc
between the actual and guessed keys. across the graph. Trust scores for clusters are determined
 dynamically:
 ∥K − Kg ∥
 S= , (10) 1 X
 N
 ∥K∥ Ck = Ei j , (21)
 N
To support dynamic encryption capabilities, the framework i=1
 m
includes interference-based key recalibration. Equation 11 X
describes the interference pattern I (x, y), while Equation 12 St = Ck . (22)
 k=1
computes the amplitude coefficients An for each term.
 Equation 21 calculates the average trust score Ck for each
 N
 X cluster, and 22 aggregates scores for the entire network. The
 I (x, y) = An cos(ωn x + φn y), (11) entire trust network Tn is modeled as:
 n=1

 1 X
 M Tn = G × St . (23)
 An = |⟨bm |cn ⟩|2 , (12)
 N Trust nodes validate incoming transactions using probabilistic
 m=1
 consensus, avoiding static blockchain mechanisms. The vali-
The final step, shown in Equation 13, uses the Fourier dation probability Rt is given as:
transform of the interference pattern to produce adaptive
 ∥Fr ∥
encryption keys. The system’s ability to dynamically recali- Rt = , (24)
brate holographic parameters as per Equations 11—13 ensures ∥D∥
strong, context-aware encryption for secure communication in Ld = Rt × Pc . (25)
vehicular networks. The encryption and decryption process of Equations 24 and 25 measure validation probability and assothe QAHCS is described in Algorithm 1. ciated latency reduction. Final security and verification rates
 Z ∞Z ∞ are determined iteratively:
 F(I ) = I (x, y)e−i(ux+vy) d x dy. (13)
 T
 −∞ −∞ X Rt
 Sf = , (26)
 Tn
 t=1
C. Dynamic Blockchain Alternative: Hyperledger Mesh Rv = S f · Ld , (27)
 The Hyperledger Mesh provides a transformative decentral- where 26 evaluates the overall security metric, and 27 comized ledger mechanism by utilizing dynamic fragmentation and putes the verification rate Rv .
6988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 Algorithm 2 Dynamic Privacy Augmentation Mechanism To introduce pseudonym variability, a fuzzification process is
 Workflow applied:
 ⃗ previous
 Input: Vehicle identity Vi , contextual factors C,
 P f = Pi + η(Pi ), (33)
 pseudonym Pprev n
 Output: Robust pseudonym Probust H(Pi ) = −
 X
 pk log( pk ), (34)
 1 begin
 k=1
 2 Generate pseudonym Pi using the neural mapping
 function N (Equations 28, 29); where Equation 33 defines the fuzzified pseudonym, and 34
 3 Compute overlap Poverlap and privacy metric Sprivacy calculates entropy H(Pi ) for variability. The pseudonym’s
 to assess pseudonym uniqueness (Equations 30, 31); dynamic behavior is modeled as:
 4 Calculate the adaptation rate Radapt to model Z t2
 ∂P f
 pseudonym dynamics (Equation 32); Tswitch = dt, (35)
 t1 ∂t
 5 Apply fuzzification to generate P f , and compute
 entropy H(Pi ) for variability (Equations 33, 34); Pfinal = P f ⊕ Pprev . (36)
 6 Evaluate switching rates Tswitch and compute the final Equation 35 evaluates switching rates, while 36 generates
 pseudonym Pfinal (Equations 35, 36); the final pseudonym after applying variability. The system
 7 Calculate morphing dynamics Mi and contextual evaluates pseudonym morphing efficiency as follows:
 variations 1Pi (Equations 37, 38);
 8 Evaluate privacy resilience Qres and obfuscation Mi = Pfinal + 1Pi , (37)
 efficiency Robfuscation (Equations 39, 41); ∂Pfinal
 9 Integrate iterative feedback to compute the robust 1Pi = · 1C,
 ⃗ (38)
 ∂ C⃗
 pseudonym Probust (Equations 42, 43);
10 end
 where 37 models morphing dynamics, and 38 incorporates
11 return Probust
 contextual variations. To assess privacy resilience and obfuscation efficiency:
 ∥Mi − Pauth ∥
 Qres = 1 − , (39)
D. Dynamic Privacy Augmentation Mechanism ∥Pauth ∥
 ∥1Pi ∥
 The NOPS introduces a biologically inspired mechanism for Smorph = , (40)
the preservation of privacy, utilizing dynamic pseudonym mor- Z∥Pi ∥
phing and contextual adaptability. As shown in Algorithm 2, Robfuscation = ⃗
 Smorph · Eobfuscation d C. (41)
fuzzy pseudonymization and entropy-driven variability facilitation system ensures robust privacy without compromising Equation 39 evaluates resilience against attacks, while 41
system accountability. quantifies obfuscation efficiency. Finally, to enhance robust-
 The pseudonym generation begins with a neural mapping ness, iterative morphing feedback is integrated:
function N , producing pseudonyms Pi from vehicle identity ∂Mi
Vi : Miter = Mi + α , (42)
 ∂t
 (k)
 Pi = N (Vi , t, C),
 ⃗ (28) Probust = lim Miter . (43)
 k→∞
 Xn
 N (Vi , t, C)
 ⃗ = wi j φ j (Vi , t, C).
 ⃗ (29) Here, Equation 42 introduces iterative feedback, leading to the
 j=1 robust pseudonym Probust as defined in 43.

Here, N is a neural mapping function, C⃗ represents contextual
 E. Generative Anomaly Intelligence
factors, and wi j denotes the weights connecting neurons.
Equation 28 generates pseudonyms, while 29 describes The SS-GAI introduces an innovative framework for
the mapping process. To quantify the overlap between dynamic anomaly detection and counter-anomaly synthesis.
pseudonyms and their privacy strength: The detailed process for dynamic anomaly detection and
 Z counter-anomaly synthesis is described in Algorithm 3.
 Poverlap = Pi ∩ P j d C,⃗ (30) Anomaly detection initiates with traffic data T represented
 as a multidimensional tensor X across time t:
 Poverlap
 Sprivacy = 1 − , (31) X (t) = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }, (44)
 Pi ∪ P j
 ∂Pi 1
 Radapt = . (32) P(xi ) = e−E (xi ) , (45)
 ∂ C⃗ Z
 E(xi ) = ∥X − Xnorm ∥2 . (46)
Equation 30 calculates the overlap between pseudonyms,
while 31 measures privacy efficiency. The adaptation rate Equations 44 through 46 define the traffic data structure, its
Radapt , as in 32, captures the dynamics of pseudonyms. probability distribution P(xi ), and the energy function E(xi )
AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK 6989

 Algorithm 3 Self-Supervised Generative Anomaly Detec- refine performance, threat efficiency Teff and resilience probtion (SS-GAI) Workflow ability Pres are computed:
 Input: Traffic data T , normalized behavior model Xnorm , T
 threshold ϵ 1 X
 Teff = Sanom , (55)
 Output: Final corrected data Xfinal , resilience metric Pres T
 i=1
 1 Data Representation and Anomaly Detection
 Lopt = min(Ltotal ), (56)
 2 Represent T as tensor X (t); compute P(x i ), E(x i );
 3 foreach x i ∈ X (t) do
 Pres = Teff · Lopt . (57)
 4 if P(xi ) < ϵ then
 Equations 55 through 57 quantify the module’s performance,
 5 Mark xi as anomaly, add to Xanom ;
 combining efficiency and resilience metrics.
 6 end
 7 end
 8 Compute detection rate Rdet ; IV. S IMULATION AND E VALUATION
 9 Generative Counter-Anomalous Data Synthesis
 The experimental simulations were performed using
10 foreach x j ∈ Xanom do
 MATLAB, integrating TensorFlow and PyTorch libraries. The
11 Sample Z ∼ N (0, I );
 NSL-KDD and CICIDS2017 datasets were selected to bench-
12 Generate Xgen = G(Z);
 mark intrusion detection [29], [30], while the Car-Hacking and
13 Compute loss Lgen ;
 VeReMi datasets provided vehicle network-specific anoma-
14 Synthesize corrected data Xcorr ;
 lies [31], [32], [33]. Comparative analyzes is perform
15 end
 against NADS [20], MSBC [22], DASC [25], MSRD [23],
16 Iterative Correction and Suppression
 CBACS [24], PPRU [26], STRC [27], and XNAD [28].
17 Aggregate Xcorr across iterations to form Xfinal ;
18 Calculate suppression efficiency Sanom ;
19 Performance Metrics Evaluation A. Dataset Preprocessing and Partitioning
20 Evaluate Teff , Lopt , and Pres ;
 Let D = {xi , yi }i=1
 N denote the dataset, where xi ∈ Rn
21 return Xfinal , Pres
 represents the feature vector and yi ∈ Y the corresponding
 label. For NSL-KDD, categorical features were transformed
 via φ : C → {0, 1}k using one-hot encoding, and numerical
to quantify deviation from normal behavior. The anomaly set features were scaled by min-max normalization:
Xanom is identified and quantified as follows: ( j)
 ( j) xi − min(x ( j) )
 Xanom = {X (t) : P(xi ) < ϵ}, (47) xi = , ∀ j ∈ [1, n]
 max(x ( j) ) − min(x ( j) )
 |Xanom |
 Rdet = , (48) yielding D̃NSL . The transformed set was partitioned such that
 |X |
 D̃NSL = Dtrain ∪ Dtest , with |Dtrain | = 0.7N and |Dtest | =
where Equation 47 isolates anomalies, and Equation 48 eval-
 0.3N . For CICIDS2017, let Ft denote a set of network flows
uates the detection rate. The detected anomalies are analyzed
 in window t, and let ρ(x (i) , x ( j) ) be the Pearson correlation
using a generative model G, synthesizing counter-anomalous
 between features. Redundant features satisfying ρ ≥ 0.9 were
data Xgen :
 removed, and standardization applied:
 G(Z) = Xgen , (49) ( j)
 ( j) xi − µ( j)
 µ( j) = E[x ( j) ], σ ( j) =
 p
 Z ∼ N (0, I ), (50) xi = , Var [x ( j) ]
 σ ( j)
 Lgen = ∥Xanom − G(Z)∥2 , (51)
 The resulting dataset D̃CIC was split into training, validation,
 Xcorr = Xanom + Xgen . (52)
 and test sets in the ratio 3 : 1 : 1. Car-Hacking data were
Equations 49 through 52 detail the generative process, utilizing represented as H = {(m i , ti )}, where m i are CAN frames.
a latent variable Z sampled from a Gaussian distribution Byte vectors were extracted by applying ψ : Hex → R8 , and
to produce corrected data Xcorr . Counter-anomalous data frames with entropy H (m i ) < ε were discarded:
injection ensures iterative improvement, with subsequent eval- 8
uations performed using the following metrics: X count(b)
 H (m i ) = − pb log pb , pb =
 n 8
 b=1
 (i)
 [
 Xfinal = Xcorr , (53)
 i=1
 Retained samples were partitioned into Htrain and Htest with
 ∥Xfinal ∥ 70% and 30% proportions, respectively. For VeReMi, let V =
 Sanom = 1 − , (54) {(gi , θi , di )} be the set of GPS logs, heading deviations, and
 ∥Xorig ∥
 delays. Samples with ∥gi ∥ < δ were pruned, and labeling was
where Equation 53 aggregates corrected data across iterations, aligned with ground truth λi ∈ {0, 1}. The final filtered dataset
and Equation 54 calculates suppression efficiency. To further was divided into Vtrain and Vtest with a 60:40 ratio.
6990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 PrivNet achieved a resistance level of 98. 5%, supported
 by the ability of generative AI to simulate advanced attack
 patterns. Quantum-resistance tests revealed PrivNet’s effectiveness, scoring 96.7%, outperforming the nearest contender,
 STRC, by 7.3%.
 As shown in Figure 3, the PrivNet framework again outperformed its peers. With an entropy score of 98.3% and a
 negligible probability of re-use of keys of 0. 02%, it ensured
 exceptional cryptographic robustness. The resistance to brute
 force and quantum attacks stood at 97. 9% and 95. 8%,
 respectively, and generative AI effectively mitigates risks.
 The results of the Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets are
 consolidated in Figure 3. PrivNet recorded its highest entropy
 scores: 98. 9% and 99. 2%, respectively, indicating near perfect
 randomness in key generation. The resistance to brute force
 and quantum attacks was consistently high (98.7% and 97.5%),
 reflecting the system’s ability to adapt to various scenarios in
 the vehicular network.
Fig. 2. Performance evaluation of PrivNet showcasing pseudonym reuse rate,
identity obfuscation success rate.
 D. Latency Analysis
B. Privacy Preservation Level Latency evaluation aims to assess the efficiency of secure
 communication facilitated by PrivNet in vehicular networks
 The evaluation of the NOPS focuses on its ability to
 (VANETs). The latency results for the NSL-KDD dataset
anonymize vehicular identities while preserving the integrity
 are summarized in Figure 4. PrivNet demonstrated a supeof privacy. The performance of PrivNet is compared with
 rior end-to-end latency of 2.6 milliseconds (ms) on average,
NADS, MSBC, DASC, MSRD, CBACS, STRC, and XNAD
 outperforming all baseline models. Comparatively, NADS and
during a simulation period of 300 minutes. The results for the
 MSBC exhibited higher latencies of 4.2 ms and 4.0 ms, respec-
NSL-KDD dataset are shown in Figure 2. PrivNet achieved
 tively, due to their reliance on non-generative frameworks.
the highest identity obfuscation success rate of 96.5%. The
 The trust management latency for PrivNet was reduced by
pseudonym reuse rate was limited to 0.03%, indicating a robust
 approximately 18% compared to STRC.
system for preserving privacy. The fidelity of the synthetic
 Figure 4 illustrates the results for the CICIDS2017 dataset.
identities generated by NOPS reached 94.7%, demonstrat-
 PrivNet achieved an overall latency of 2.3 ms, reflecting
ing its effectiveness in producing indistinguishable synthetic
 a reduction 20% compared to CBACS and STRC. The
profiles.
 encryption latency for PrivNet was optimized at 1.0 ms,
 Figure 2 presents the results for the CICIDS2017 dataset.
 demonstrating its efficiency in real-time operations. Figure 4
PrivNet achieved a pseudonym reuse rate of only 0.02%. Its
 presents the combined analysis for the Car-Hacking and
success rate in identity obfuscation was 97 1%, demonstrat-
 VeReMi datasets. PrivNet recorded an end-to-end latency of
ing its adaptability in real-world scenarios. Furthermore, the
 2.1 ms, demonstrating the lowest latency among all models
fidelity of synthetic identities reached 95.2%, highlighting the
 tested. The PrivNet encryption module performed at 0.9 ms
reliability of generative AI in the creation of indistinguishthat indicates a high degree of operational efficiency.
able pseudonyms. Figure 2 consolidates the results for the
Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets. PrivNet achieved near-zero E. Anomaly Detection Accuracy
pseudonym reuse rates (0.01%), indicating unmatched robust-
 The SS-GAI forms a core component of the PrivNet
ness in identity anonymization. The identity obfuscation
 framework, enabling adaptive threat modeling and countersuccess rates reached 98.3% and 97.8%, respectively. The
 anomalous data synthesis. Figure 5 summarizes the perforfidelity of the synthetic identities was consistently high
 mance of PrivNet and the baseline models for anomaly
(96. 8% for Car Hacking and 96. 3% for VeReMi).
 detection using the NSL-KDD dataset. PrivNet achieved a
 detection rate of 98.7%, outperforming STRC and XNAD,
C. Cryptographic Strength which recorded 94.5% and 93.2%, respectively. The false
 The cryptographic strength of the proposed framework, positive rate for PrivNet was reduced to 1.1%, attributed to
“PrivNet”, was evaluated using QAHCS. Key metrics such the precision of generative AI in producing realistic counteras cryptographic key entropy, key reuse probability, and anomalous scenarios.
resistance to brute force and quantum-based attacks. The The results of the CICIDS2017 dataset are presented in
results of the NSL-KDD dataset are summarized in Figure 3. Figure 5. PrivNet demonstrated remarkable adaptability at
The proposed QAHCS demonstrated higher entropy values 97.5%, significantly outperforming other models. Its detection
(97.8%) and a significantly reduced probability of key reuse rate of 99.1% highlights the efficacy of SS-GAI in identifying
(0. 04%) compared to baseline models. Although MSBC and complex attack vectors. Baseline models such as CBACS and
DASC exhibited moderate resistance to brute force attacks, STRC showed strong but comparatively lower performance,
AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK 6991

Fig. 3. Comparative evaluation of PrivNet against state-of-the-art models showcasing pseudonym reuse rates, identity obfuscation success rates, and synthetic
fidelity.

 F. Energy Efficiency
 This section analyzes the energy consumption of the
 Hyperledger Mesh system integrated with generative AI
 for optimized transaction validation. PrivNet exhibited a
 significant reduction in energy consumption, with an average
 energy per transaction of 0.52 Joules, compared to 0.85 Joules
 in NADS. The PrivNet system achieved an overall energy
 efficiency rate of 61% which surpassed both MSBC and DASC
 baseline models at 45% and 48% respectively. The implementation of generative AI decreased computational resource
 utilization by 22%.
 PrivNet proved to be highly energy-efficient as it consumed
 an average of 0.45 Joules per transaction while surpassing all
 baseline models. The system achieved an energy efficiency
 rate of 65% which exceeded the 50% and 52% efficiency
 rates of MSBC and STRC respectively. The simulation period
 saw a 25% decrease in computational resource utilization
 because of the generative AI integration. PrivNet demon-
Fig. 4. Latency evaluation of PrivNet compared to state-of-the-art models
depicting encryption, trust management. strated superior performance than all baseline models through
 its 0.56 Joules average transaction energy consumption and
with detection rates of 94.8% and 95.2%, respectively. The 60% energy efficiency. The energy efficiency results showed
false positive rate of PrivNet of 0. 9% underscores its ability PrivNet performing better than MSRD and STRC since they
to minimize erroneous classifications. Figure 5 provides a achieved 51% and 53% respectively. The implementation of
combined analysis of the Car-Hacking and VeReMi datasets. generative AI for anomaly validation decreased computational
PrivNet achieved a detection rate of 98.9% with a false resource usage by 23% which substantially improved energy
positive rate of 1.3%, outperforming all baselines. Genera- efficiency throughout the 300-minute simulation period.
tive AI significantly improved adaptability to unseen attack
vectors, achieving 96.8%. The PrivNet precision score of V. D ISCUSSION
97.6% further emphasizes its effectiveness in creating robust The combination of generative AI with quantum-inspired
countermeasures. cryptography and dynamic blockchain mechanisms enhanced
6992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Fig. 5. Comparative analysis of PrivNet and state-of-the-art models evaluating detection rate, false positive rate, adaptability.

both anomaly detection accuracy and privacy preservation and mechanisms to address a critical challenges in vehicular secuenergy efficiency. The SS-GAI module showed its ability to rity. The practical implications of this work offer substantial
detect new threat patterns better than baseline models by improvements in real-time vehicular communication systems.
achieving detection accuracy improvements of up to 12% PrivNet demonstrates strong applicability to real-world scenaracross multiple datasets. The analysis of privacy preserva- ios, including secure autonomous driving, traffic coordination,
tion mechanisms showed that the Neural Overlap Privacy and vehicle-to-infrastructure authentication. Performance anal-
System (NOPS) improved pseudonym reuse and obfuscation ysis reveals that PrivNet outperforms state-of-the-art models,
success. The framework used dynamic pseudonym morph- with an improvement in energy efficiency of up to 23%,
ing and entropy-driven variability to achieve an 18% higher improvements in detection accuracy of 12%, and a reducanonymization success rate than competing models. PrivNet’s tion in resource utilization 22%. Future work will explore
modular structure supports compatibility with DSRC and the enhancement of the scalability and adaptability of this
C-V2X protocols that allows integration into existing vehicular framework across diverse vehicular networks.
communication stacks without architectural disruption. Additionally, hardware resource limitations and latency sensitivity
 DATA AVAILABILITY S TATEMENT
have been addressed through lightweight encryption schemes
and asynchronous anomaly detection. The Hyperledger Mesh This study utilised two publicly available intrusion-detection
module enabled energy-efficient transaction validation reduces benchmarks hosted on IEEE Dataport. The first is the
energy consumption per transaction by 23% while maintaining NSL-KDD dataset (DOI: 10.21227/425a-3e55; dataset URL:
scalability. Comparisons with models such as NADS and https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/nsl-kdd). The second is
MSBC confirmed PrivNet’s ability to balance performance and the CICIDS2017 dataset (DOI: 10.21227/akxq-9v09; dataset
efficiency. URL: https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/cicids2017).

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The integration of innovative technologies in vehicular networks has significant potential to improve security, efficiency, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers
and privacy. The proposed PrivNet framework introduces a Supporting Project Number (PNURSP2025R97), Princess
novel approach by combining generative AI with blockchain Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
AWAN et al.: PrivNet—GENERATIVE AI-AUGMENTED QUANTUM PRIVACY FRAMEWORK 6993

 R EFERENCES [17] S. A. Siddiqui, A. Mahmood, Q. Z. Sheng, H. Suzuki, and W. Ni, “Trust
 [1] H. Li, Y. Chen, K. Li, C. Wang, and B. Chen, “Transportation Internet: A in vehicles: Toward context-aware trust and attack resistance for the
 sustainable solution for intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 9,
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15818–15829, Dec. 2023. pp. 9546–9560, Sep. 2023.
 [2] G. Sun, L. Song, H. Yu, V. Chang, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “V2 V [18] Y. Yao, F. Shu, X. Cheng, H. Liu, P. Miao, and L. Wu, “Automotive radar
 routing in a VANET based on the autoregressive integrated moving optimization design in a spectrally crowded V2I communication environaverage model,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 908–922, ment,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 8253–8263,
 Jan. 2019. Aug. 2023.
 [3] G. Sun, Y. Zhang, D. Liao, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Bus- [19] G. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Yu, X. Du, and M. Guizani, “Intersection fogtrajectory-based street-centric routing for message delivery in urban based distributed routing for V2V communication in urban vehicular
 Vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 67, no. 8, ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 6,
 pp. 7550–7563, Aug. 2018. pp. 2409–2426, Jun. 2020.
 [4] Z. Ying, S. Cao, X. Liu, Z. Ma, J. Ma, and R. H. Deng, “PrivacySignal: [20] K. Agrawal, T. Alladi, A. Agrawal, V. Chamola, and A. Benslimane,
 Privacy-preserving traffic signal control for intelligent transportation sys- “NovelADS: A novel anomaly detection system for intra-vehicular
 tem,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16290–16303, networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11,
 Sep. 2022. pp. 22596–22606, Nov. 2022.
 [5] J. Xiao et al., “CALRA: Practical conditional anonymous and leakage- [21] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent Deepresilient authentication scheme for vehicular crowdsensing communica- Learning-Based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,”
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1273–1285, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854,
 Jan. 2025. Feb. 2023.
 [6] C. Gu, B. Ma, and D. Hu, “A dependable and efficient decentralized [22] J. Huang et al., “Secure data sharing over vehicular networks based on
 trust management system based on consortium blockchain for intelligent multi-sharding blockchain,” ACM Trans. Sensor Netw., vol. 20, no. 2,
 transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1–23, Mar. 2024.
 pp. 19430–19443, Dec. 2024. [23] M. A. Al-Shareeda and S. Manickam, “MSR-DoS: Modular square root-
 [7] Y. Chang et al., “Hierarchical adaptive cross–coupled control of traffic based scheme to resist denial of service (DoS) attacks in 5G-enabled
 signals and vehicle routes in large-scale road network,” Comput.-Aided vehicular networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 120606–120615,
 Civil Infrastruct. Eng., May 2025, doi: 10.1111/mice.13508. 2022.
 [8] G. Zheng, Q. Ni, and Y. Lu, “Privacy-aware anomaly detection and [24] X. Zhang, H. Zhong, C. Fan, I. Bolodurina, and J. Cui, “CBACS:
 notification enhancement for VANET based on collaborative intrusion A privacy-preserving and efficient cache-based access control scheme
 detection system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 12, for software defined vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 pp. 21172–21182, Dec. 2024. Security, vol. 17, pp. 1930–1945, 2022.
 [9] D. Song, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, and J. Han, “Modeling lane-changing [25] K. Xue, X. Luo, Y. Ma, J. Li, J. Liu, and D. S. L. Wei, “A distributed
 spatiotemporal features based on the driving behavior generation mech- authentication scheme based on smart contract for roaming service in
 anism of human drivers,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 284, Jul. 2025, mobile vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 5,
 Art. no. 127974. pp. 5284–5297, May 2022.
[10] X. Peng, S. Song, X. Zhang, M. Dong, and K. Ota, “Task offloading [26] Z. Liu et al., “PPRU: A privacy-preserving reputation updating scheme
 for IoAV under extreme weather conditions using dynamic price driven for cloud-assisted vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 double broad reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1–16, Feb. 2025.
 no. 10, pp. 17021–17033, May 2024. [27] Y. Yao, F. Shu, Z. Li, X. Cheng, and L. Wu, “Secure transmission scheme
[11] J. Liu, L. Zhang, C. Li, J. Bai, H. Lv, and Z. Lv, “Blockchain-based based on joint radar and communication in mobile vehicular networks,”
 secure communication of intelligent transportation digital twins system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 10027–10037,
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22630–22640, Sep. 2023.
 Nov. 2022. [28] S. Aziz et al., “Anomaly detection in the Internet of vehicular networks
[12] D. Song, J. Zhao, B. Zhu, J. Han, and S. Jia, “Subjective driving using explainable neural networks (xNN),” Mathematics, vol. 10, no. 8,
 risk prediction based on spatiotemporal distribution features of human p. 1267, Apr. 2022.
 Driver’s cognitive risk,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, [29] G. Mohi-ud-din, “NSL-KDD,” IEEE Dataport, 2018, doi: 10.21227/42
 pp. 16687–16703, Nov. 2024. 5a-3e55.
[13] S. Zhang et al., “Federated learning in intelligent transportation systems: [30] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 Recent applications and open problems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 3259–3285, May 2024. ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, Jan. 2018.
[14] X. Feng, J. Wu, A. K. Bashir, J. Li, A. Shen, and M. D. Alshehri, [31] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
 “Vulnerability-aware task scheduling for edge intelligence empowered detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
 trajectory analysis in intelligent transportation systems,” IEEE Trans. vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
 Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 4661–4670, Apr. 2023. [32] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
[15] Y. Lai, Y. Xu, D. Mai, Y. Fan, and F. Yang, “Optimized large-scale road detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
 sensing through crowdsourced vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 Syst., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 3878–3889, Apr. 2022. [33] J. Kamel, M. Wolf, R. W. van der Hei, A. Kaiser, P. Urien, and
[16] Z. Xiao et al., “Predicting urban region heat via learning Arrive-Stay- F. Kargl, “VeReMi extension: A dataset for comparable evaluation of
 Leave behaviors of private cars,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., misbehavior detection in VANETs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun.
 vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 10843–10856, Sep. 2023. (ICC), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.