IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 2007

 Proactive Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection for
 Consumer IoT Applications Using Lightweight
 Ensemble Learning With Anomaly Analysis
 Bipasha Guha Roy, Deepsubhra Guha Roy , Piyali Datta , Surbhi Bhatia Khan , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Asma Alshuhail, and Oumaima Saidani

 Abstract— The rapid proliferation of consumer IoT devices Index Terms— Zero-trust, intrusion detection, consumer IoT
from smart home hubs to wearables has expanded the attack security, ensemble learning, anomaly detection, edge computing,
surface, introducing new security and privacy challenges. Tradi- adaptable defense.
tional Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) often rely on implicit
trust and heavyweight computation, making them unsuitable for I. I NTRODUCTION
resource-constrained consumer electronics. This paper presents
a proactive, lightweight zero-trust IDS tailored for consumer
applications. Our two-layer architecture integrates a supervised
stacked ensemble classifier (Random Forest, XGBoost, Light-
 C ONSUMER applications such as smart home hubs,
 wearable health trackers, and connected appliances have
 become deeply integrated into daily life. However, this
GBM) to detect known threats and an unsupervised DBSCAN hyper-connectivity also exposes consumer devices to sophis-
(Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise)
-based anomaly detector to identify zero-day attacks. We intro- ticated cyber threats. Traditional IDS solutions, typically
duce a feature reduction pipeline driven by correlation and designed for centralized infrastructures, often assume implicit
variance analysis, reducing the feature set by over 50% to fit trust among components and demand computational resources
edge hardware constraints. Evaluated on the CICIDS collection unsuitable for resource-constrained consumer devices [1].
dataset (over 9 million flows), the framework achieves 98.48% In response, zero-trust security frameworks are gaining tracaccuracy while maintaining real-time processing capability on
Raspberry Pi-class hardware. By continuously scrutinizing both tion, treating all entities as untrusted by default and requiring
malicious and benign traffic, our system delivers proactive, trust- continuous verification. Yet, proactively detecting known and
enhancing defense critical to modern consumer IoT applications. unknown threats under stringent hardware and latency constraints remains challenging. This work presents a lightweight,
 two-layer zero-trust IDS designed specifically for consumer
 IoT applications. The system combines supervised ensemble
 Received 13 August 2025; revised 17 September 2025 and 21 October learning for high-accuracy detection of known threats with
2025; accepted 9 November 2025. Date of publication 21 November 2025; unsupervised anomaly detection to proactively uncover zerodate of current version 25 March 2026. This work was supported in part by
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, through day attacks.
the Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers Supporting Designing effective intrusion detection for consumer IoT
Project, under Grant PNURSP2026R760; in part by the Deanship of Scientific environments requires lightweight deployment, detection of
Research, Vice Presidency for Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King
Faisal University, Saudi Arabia, under Grant KFU254151. (Corresponding unknown threats, and trust enforcement. The literature addressauthors: Deepsubhra Guha Roy; Asma Alshuhail.) ing the following domains is discussed here.
 Bipasha Guha Roy and Deepsubhra Guha Roy are with the IEM Centre
of Excellence for Cloud Computing and IoT, Department of CSE (AIML),
Institute of Engineering and Management, University of Engineering and
 A. Zero-Trust Security in IoT
Management, Kolkata 700091, India (e-mail: mahatobipasha.91@gmail.com; Zero-Trust Architecture (ZTA) assumes no implicit trust
roysubhraguha@gmail.com).
 Piyali Datta is with the IEM-IIT Mandi Centre for Joint Research on
 across devices or networks and enforces continuous verifi-
Human Computer Interaction, Department of CSE (AIML), Institute of cation [2], [3]. While ZTA has gained traction in enterprise
Engineering and Management, University of Engineering and Management, contexts, its extension to consumer IoT is still emerging [4].
Kolkata 700091, India (e-mail: piyali.datta@iem.edu.in).
 Surbhi Bhatia Khan is with the School of Science, Engineering and Alalmaie [5] implemented a Zero-Trust edge IDS, integrating
Environment, University of Salford, M5 4WT Manchester, U.K., also access control and anomaly detection for smart city IoT, but
with the Centre for Research Impact and Outcome, Chitkara University, their deep learning approach introduces latency and energy
Rajpura, Punjab 140401, India, and also with the Division of Research
and Development, Lovely Professional University, Phagwara 144411, India challenges.
(e-mail: s.khan138@ieee.org).
 Asma Alshuhail is with the Department of Information Systems, College B. Lightweight IDS for Consumer IoT
of Computer Science and Information Technology, King Faisal University,
Al-Ahsa 31982, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: alshuhail@kfu.edu.sa). IoT-focused IDSs often prioritize low computational cost.
 Oumaima Saidani is with the Department of Information Systems, College Roy [6] proposed an IDS combining Principal Component
of Computer and Information Sciences, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrah- Analysis (PCA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) for
man University, P.O. Box 84428, Riyadh 11671, Saudi Arabia (e-mail:
oscaidani@pnu.edu.sa). smart homes, achieving moderate accuracy with minimal
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3635619 resource demands. Bafghi [7] introduced LightGBM-based
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2008 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF E XISTING IDS A PPROACHES FOR I OT S ECURITY

lightweight IDS with efficient training but limited general- TABLE II
ization to unknown [8]. These solutions either lack anomaly S YMBOL TABLE : N OTATION AND D ESCRIPTION
detection or do not integrate proactive ZT policies [9].

C. Ensemble and Hybrid Learning Approaches
 Nassreddine [10] evaluated ensemble classifiers for network
attacks, showing robustness but requiring powerful nodes.
Chen [11] adopted a hybrid deep RL and autoencoder model
to capture temporal dependencies, but their design suits cloud
settings, not edge devices.

D. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection in IoT
 Unsupervised models like DBSCAN are valuable for zeroday detection. Alsmadi and Xu [12] demonstrated DBSCAN’s
utility for IoT botnet detection. However, unsupervised models
alone often misclassify benign outliers as [4], [13]. Our
work combines the strengths of supervised ensemble learning
and unsupervised DBSCAN in a two-layer ZT framework Conventional IDS frameworks either rely heavily on cenoptimized for consumer devices. tralization or operate under static trust assumptions, rendering
 Table I compares selected works across key dimensions. them inadequate for zero-day resilience and continuous
As seen, few systems simultaneously enforce zero-trust, sup- verification in evolving consumer IoT topologies. Additionport lightweight edge deployment, and detect novel threats. ally, models optimized for enterprise-scale networks are
Our approach addresses this triad by integrating supervised computationally impractical for constrained platforms Raspensemble classifiers with unsupervised clustering in a layered berry Pi, and can be implemented using ESP32, or similar
zero-trust design suitable for consumer applications. microcontroller-based systems. To address these gaps, our
 motivation stems from the following core objectives:
 • Proactive Zero-Trust Enforcement: Design an intrusion
 II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT AND M OTIVATION
 detection framework grounded in zero-trust architecture
 The proliferation of consumer edge- IoT devices has
 principles, where no entity (internal or external) is trusted
reshaped the digital landscape, embedding computation into
 by default (all communication is continuously verified).
daily-use electronics such as smart thermostats, security cam-
 • Dual-Mode Detection Capability: Integrate both supereras, wearable devices, and home automation systems using
 vised and unsupervised techniques to detect known
IoT applications and protocols [16], [17]. Despite their grow-
 (signature-based) and zero-day (anomaly-based) attacks
ing ubiquity, these devices often remain highly vulnerable
 using a layered ensemble structure.
to cyberattacks due to their inherent design constraints and
 • Edge-Compatible Efficiency: Ensure the proposed
lack of robust, integrated security frameworks. Consumer IoT
 model maintains a lightweight computational footprint,
environments pose distinct challenges:
 enabling real-time inference and low power consumption
 • Resource Constraints: Most devices operate on
 on consumer-grade embedded platforms.
 low-power processors with limited RAM and stor- This research is driven by the growing need to operationalage, severely restricting the use of conventional or ize zero-trust principles in the context of consumer IoT, where
 compute-intensive security solutions [18]. attack surfaces are wide, defense capabilities are fragmented,
 • Heterogeneity and Dynamism: IoT networks are and user tolerance for false alerts is minimal. The goal is to
 dynamic, composed of a wide variety of protocols, device build a trustworthy, scalable, and proactive defense mechanism
 types, and transient connectivity states-complicating the tailored to the realities of consumer device security.
 design of generalized intrusion detection [19], [20].
 • High Privacy Sensitivity: Consumer data, including III. P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK
 voice, video, health, and location information, neces- A. Proposed Architecture: Layered Design
 sitates privacy-preserving models with minimal data To satisfy the stringent security, efficiency, and scalability
 leakage and low tolerance for false outcome [21], [22]. demands of consumer IoT applications, we propose a layered
ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS 2009

 achieving both horizontal and vertical trust enforcement.
 By avoiding centralized inference or deep learning models, the
 architecture is both edge-compliant and latency-aware. Feature reduction was carried out using correlation filtering and
 variance thresholding, while DBSCAN parameters (ε, minPts)
 were empirically tuned via grid search to balance anomaly
 precision and false positive rate.

 B. Research Problem Formulation and Hypotheses
 This work is guided by two core research questions, each
 linked to a hypothesis that is evaluated through the proposed
 layered intrusion detection framework.
 RQ1: Can a lightweight ensemble model accurately classify
Fig. 1. Layered architecture of the proposed proactive zero-trust IDS for
consumer IoT applications. known attacks in consumer IoT traffic while maintaining edge
 deployability?
Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection System (ZT-IDS) designed 1) Hypothesis H1 : A compact ensemble classifier E =
for proactive threat mitigation. The architecture, illustrated { f RF , f XGB , f LGB } with dimensionality-reduced input x ′ ∈ Rk
in Fig. 1, follows the foundational zero-trust paradigm of can achieve classification accuracy A ≥ τ1 (e.g., 95%) on
continuous verification and operates in two tightly coupled known attack instances with total inference time TE < δ ms
analytical layers. This modular design is optimized to execute on edge hardware. Formally,
on resource-constrained edge devices such as Raspberry Pi, Ex∼Dknown ⊮ arg max E(x ′ ) = y ≥ τ1 , TE < δ
  
 (1)
smart home hubs, or IoT gateways, where memory and processing power are at a premium. where Dknown is the known-attack traffic distribution, and
 1) Feature Reduction Module: Incoming traffic flows are ⊮(·) is the indicator function.
first preprocessed and passed through a lightweight feature RQ2: Can DBSCAN identify previously unseen (zero-day)
engineering unit that employs correlation-based filtering and attacks with minimal false positives when applied only to
variance thresholding. Redundant or low-informative features Layer-1-benign flows?
are discarded, reducing dimensionality while preserving dis- 2) Hypothesis H2 : Applying DBSCAN on a filtered set of
criminatory power. This module ensures the downstream benign-labeled samples X benign can detect novel attacks with
classifiers receive a compact representation x ′ ∈ Rk , where anomaly precision P ≥ τ2 (e.g., 90%) and false-positive rate
k ≪ d, the original feature space dimension. F P R < γ . Let:
 2) Layer 1 – Ensemble-Based Classifier: The first detection DBSCANε (X benign ) = C1 , . . . , Cn , O (2)
layer is a supervised ensemble meta-classifier that identifies known attack patterns employing a stacked ensemble of where O represents outlier points, then:
three heterogeneous learners: Random Forest (RF), XGBoost |O ∩ Dzero-day | |O ∩ Dbenign |
(XGB), and LightGBM (LGB). Each base model produces ≥ τ2 , FPR = <γ (3)
 |O| |Dbenign |
a probabilistic prediction, which is aggregated using a soft
voting mechanism or a learned meta-layer: where Dzero-day and Dbenign denote zero-day and truly benign
 instances, respectively.
 1
 Pens (x ′ ) = f RF (x ′ ) + f XGB (x ′ ) + f LGB (x ′ )
 
 C. Methodology: Mathematical Formulation and Sequence
 3 Let x ∈ Rd be an input feature vector after reduction.
 If the ensemble confidence exceeds a classification thresh- 1) Layer 1: Stacked Ensemble: Each base classifier h m (x)
old θ, the flow is labeled as malicious and appropriate alerts maps x to a probability of being malicious: pm =
are generated. Otherwise, it is forwarded to the anomaly h m (x), m ∈ {1, . . . , M}. The ensemble combines these
detection layer for deeper scrutiny. using a meta-classifier g (logistic regression): pens (x) =
 3) Layer 2 – DBSCAN-based Anomaly Detector: Traffic g h 1 (x), h 2 (x), . . . , h M (x) . Traffic is flagged malicious if
instances deemed benign by Layer 1 are subjected to unsu- pens (x) ≥ θens . While the computational complexity of
pervised clustering using DBSCAN. This layer targets the Random Forest is O(n log n) per tree, XGBoost / LightGBM
detection of zero-day or previously unseen attacks by isolating needs O(K d log n), with K boosting iterations.
outliers in high-dimensional space. Formally, for each point x ′ : 2) Layer 2: DBSCAN-Based Anomaly Detector: Remaining
 Nε (x ′ ) = {x j ∈ Rk : ∥x ′ − x j ∥ ≤ ε} benign traffic passes to DBSCAN. For sample pairs (xi , x j ),
 d(xi , x j ) ≤ ε. Samples with fewer than minPts neighbors
If |Nε (x ′ )| < minPts, the sample is treated as an anomaly and become outliers and are reclassified as malicious. The comflagged as a potential zero-day threat. Otherwise, it is logged plexity is O(n 2 ) (optimized to O(n log n) with indexing).
as legitimate traffic. 3) Knowledge Base and Continuous Verification: The IDS
 This dual-layer structure enforces a proactive defense continuously updates the statistical knowledge base, i.e., mean
cycle: Layer 1 detects known threats with high precision, and variance of benign flow as well as the cluster structure
while Layer 2 continuously monitors for emergent anomalies from DBSCAN, enabling adaptive detection over time.
2010 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

D. Dbscan Clustering TABLE III
 Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn } ⊂ Rd be the set of benign-labeled E VALUATION OF L AYER -1 AND L AYER -2 FOR D IFFERENT I OT S CENARIOS
vectors. For each point xi , define:
 Nε (xi ) = {x j ∈ X : ∥xi − x j ∥ ≤ ε}
Points with |Nε (xi )| < minPts are labeled outliers. The hyperparameter (ϵ and minPts) tuning is performed by assessing the
quality of the cluster using the Silhouette Score.
 anomaly detection via DBSCAN as Nε (x) = {x j : ∥x − x j ∥ ≤
 ε}, |Nε (x)| < minPts ⇒ x ∈ O.
E. Evaluation Metric Formulation DBSCAN was selected over alternatives such as Isolation
 To comprehensively assess the performance of the proposed Forest and k-means because it does not assume linear sep-
Zero-Trust Intrusion Detection System (ZT-IDS), we formulate arability or fixed cluster counts, making it more suitable for
a multi-perspective evaluation model composed of classifi- sparse IoT traffic where attack flows appear as density outliers.
cation accuracy, anomaly precision, false positive rate, and As shown in Table III, our ensemble consistently outperforms
resource efficiency. lightweight baselines such as Decision Tree and SVM across
 Layer 1: Ensemble Classifier Metrics are considered to be all scenarios, justifying its selection for Layer-1.
the Accuracy, Precision, Recall, F1-score, and Area Under the
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC) [23]. Algorithm 1 Two-Layered Proactive Zero-Trust IDS
 N with true labels
 Let the set of test samples be X = {xi}i=1 Require: Input network flow x , lightweight ensemble classifier g , anomaly detector A
 N N (e.g., DBSCAN), thresholds θens , θan
Y = {yi}i=1 and predicted labels Ŷ = { ŷi}i=1 from the 1: x ′ ← FEATUREREDUCTION(x) {Preprocessing and normalization}
ensemble classifier E. Then, we define: 2: Layer-1: pens ← g(h 1 (x ′ ), h 2 (x ′ ), h 3 (x ′ )) {Ensemble of base learners}
 3: if pens ≥ θens then
 TP +TN 4: return Alert: Known Attack (L1)
 Accuracy = (4) 5: else
 T P + T N + FP + FN 6: Layer-2: label ← A. pr edict (x ′ ) {Anomaly-based zero-day detection}
 TP 7: if label == outlier then
 Precision = (5) 8: return Alert: Zero-Day Detected (L2)
 T P + FP 9: else
 TP 10: L OG F LOW(x’, pens ) {Benign flow; update edge knowledge base}
 Recall (TPR) = (6) 11: end if
 T P + FN 12: end if
 Precision · Recall
 F1-score = 2 · (7)
 Precision + Recall
 Z 1 1) System-Level Metrics: To ensure feasibility on consumer
 AUC-ROC = T P R(F P R −1 (x)) d x (8) devices, we evaluate:
 0
 Inference Latency T
where T P, T N , F P, and F N represent true positives,
 N
true negatives, false positives, and false negatives, respec- 1 X
 = ti (per flow) (13)
tively [23]. N
 i=1
 Layer 2: Anomaly Detection Metrics (DBSCAN) Let
X benign ⊂ X be the samples labeled as benign by Layer 1. Memory Footprint M
DBSCAN partitions these into K clusters and a set of = Peak RAM usage during inference
outliers O: (14)
 DBSCANε (X benign ) ⇒ {C1 , . . . , C K }, O = Noise (9) ModelSize S = Disk space-trained model components (15)

 OTP : true zero-day anomalies correctly marked as outliers An efficient edge-compatible model must satisfy T < δt ,
and OFP : benign points wrongly marked as outliers. M < δm , S < δs , where δt , δm , and δs are device-specific
 |OTP | operational thresholds (e.g., δt < 50ms, δm < 100MB, etc.).
 Anomaly Precision = (10)
 |OTP | + |OFP |
 |OFP | IV. I MPLEMENTATION AND E VALUATION
 False Positive RateLayer 2 = (11) A. Real-Time Evaluation Scenarios
 |Xbenign |
 To validate the ZT-IDS framework across diverse consumer
 Additionally, we define the Noise Ratio as:
 IoT environments, five representative real-time scenarios were
 |O| emulated on Raspberry Pi hardware, each increasing in traffic
 ρ= (12)
 |Xbenign | complexity and threat intensity (see Table III). The evaluation considers inference latency (T ), memory footprint
 (S), accuracy, and anomaly precision, following the metric
F. Algorithm: Two-Layered Proactive Zero-Trust IDS formulations described in Section V. In the Smart Light
 Algorithm 1 summarizes the layered intrusion detection Bulb case (Scenario 1), the IDS analyzed deterministic Wi-Fi
pipeline integrating both known and zero-day attack detec- traffic under minimal noise. Results show 98.1% accuracy,
tion. Formally, Layer-1 ensemble classification is defined as latency T = 8.7ms, and near-zero outlier ratio (ρ ≈
pens (x) = 13 ( f R F (x) + f X G B (x) + f LG B (x)), and Layer-2 0), confirming suitability for low-risk static IoT devices.
ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS 2011

 TABLE IV
 S CENARIO -W ISE S HAPLEY A DDITIVE E X P LANATIONS (SHAP) I NTERPRETATION AND ATTACK S IMULATION S TRATEGY

Fig. 2. SHAP feature importance (Top 10 Features) across five IoT attack scenarios. Each bar chart highlights dominant features contributing to model
decision per scenario.

Fig. 3. ZT-IDS framework across multiple dimensions: (a) Layer-1 classification and Layer-2 anomaly detection, (b) Feature separability in attack flows,
(c) Outlier isolation of zero-day anomalies, (d) Temporal deviations under attack, (e) Classification precision across known threats, and (f) Feature-wise
behavior divergence between benign and malicious flows.

The Smart Door Lock (Scenario 2) introduced a spoofed 0.86 recall despite variability in payloads, while Layer-2 disaccess attempt over Zigbee; while the ensemble layer misclas- tinctly clustered DNS-tunneled packets (F P R < 10%). In the
sified one flow, Layer-2 (DBSCAN) successfully isolated the Multi-IoT Home with Botnet Infection (Scenario 4), five
spoof as an outlier, achieving over 80% anomaly precision. heterogeneous devices generated concurrent flows, validating
The Smart Camera with DNS Tunneling (Scenario 3) scalability. The ensemble maintained F1 ≥ 0.92 with latency
tested encrypted flow handling, where Layer-1 maintained T < 40ms and memory M < 70MB, successfully isolating
2012 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP FOR ZT-IDS I MPLEMENTATION E VALUATION M ETRICS FOR E DGE V S C LOUD O FFLOADING

 C. Visualization Framework and Interpretability Analysis
 To enhance interpretability and scenario-specific insight,
 a visualization suite (Figure 3) was developed for the proposed
 ZT-IDS. The radar chart (a) contrasts Layer-1 (ensemble
 classifier) and Layer-2 (DBSCAN anomaly detector) using
 accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score-highlighting that
 while Layer-1 detects known attacks efficiently, Layer-2
 strengthens defense against unseen anomalies, validating the
 hybrid architecture. The 3D PCA projection (b) reveals the
compromised nodes without affecting benign ones. Finally, separability and overlap of benign and malicious flows in latent
the Wearable Health Monitor under Zero-Day Attack (Sce- space, supporting risk estimation. The DBSCAN cluster map
nario 5) simulated jitter-based stealth injections in BLE traffic. (c) visualizes how outliers are isolated from dense benign
As expected, Layer-1 exhibited moderate AUC-ROC (< 0.85) regions, confirming Layer-2’s unsupervised capability. The
due to unseen timing variations, while Layer-2 achieved 94% time-series view (d) captures flow-duration deviations linked
anomaly precision with ρ ≈ 0.12, demonstrating resilience to to attack events, indicating temporal sensitivity. The confusion
novel threats. matrix (e) summarizes Layer-1 results, showing strong true
 Overall, these five scenarios illustrate the adaptability of positive and negative rates with minimal misclassifications.
ZT-IDS to both known and unknown attacks in constrained IoT Finally, the parallel coordinates plot (f) visualizes variations
environments. The hybrid ensemble–DBSCAN architecture across SHAP-ranked features (e.g., port, protocol, and timing
maintains low latency and energy footprint while effectively flags), enabling multi-dimensional interpretation of benign vs.
scaling across traffic diversity and device types. attack traffic. Together, these visual analyses provide both
 quantitative validation and intuitive interpretability of ZT-IDS
B. Experimental Setup decisions across diverse IoT scenarios.
 Experiments were performed on a Raspberry Pi 4
(4 GB RAM), validating the ZT-IDS on the CICIDS dataset D. Comparative Discussion
containing over 9 million network flows of benign and attack The visualization suite links numeric results to semantic
traffic. Table V summarizes hardware, frameworks, and eval- insights, showing each ZT-IDS component’s role in decisionuation metrics. The Pi consumed 3.5–4.2 W during active making. It enables real-time detection interpretation, model
detection, confirming its suitability for low-power IoT deploy- refinement, and forensic analysis. The combined use of clasment. The “Botnet” scenario emulates volumetric DDoS and sification and anomaly detection is validated through their
PortScan misuse, while the “Zero-Day” case injects synthetic complementary performance in visualizations. ZT-IDS delivers
jitter into benign flows to represent unseen temporal anoma- strong results-98.48% accuracy, sub-1GB memory use, and
lies. Botnet traffic exhibits high ACK rates and bursty packets, ultra-low latency-making it suitable for real-time edge deploywhereas Zero-Day attacks show timing irregularities in Flow ment. Table VI highlights ZT-IDS performance across five
Duration and Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) Std. Figure 2 shows consumer IoT scenarios under edge, hybrid, and cloud-assisted
SHAP interaction values for the most influential features— modes. Key metrics include inference time, power use, latency,
Destination Port and Flow Duration. Each point represents a and offloading bandwidth. In lightweight cases (e.g., Smart
test flow, where horizontal spread denotes interaction strength. Bulb, Botnet), edge-only execution yields low latency (6-15
The nearly symmetric clustering of Destination Port around ms) and power (3.5-4.1 W). For complex threats like DNS
zero indicates context-dependent influence, while Flow Dura- tunneling or zero-day attacks, offloading reduces inference
tion interacts subtly with it to separate benign and attack time (e.g., 3.1 ms on TPU) but adds network latency. Cloud
flows. The tight spread near zero suggests limited higher-order GPU use also improves detection precision in high-threat cases
effects, validating the lightweight model’s interpretability. The at modest bandwidth cost (1.2-1.5 MB/s). These results suplatency-jitter plots are grouped under performance metrics, port adaptive deployment: using the cloud for complex threats
and memory–bandwidth under resource metrics (Figs. 4-5), while maintaining edge autonomy for routine tasks, core to the
supporting efficient IoT-level visualization and interpretive zero-trust model of continuous verification. Beyond classificavalidation. tion accuracy, we also report anomaly precision (92.4%) and
ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS 2013

Fig. 4. System performance metrics across Zero-Trust IDS scenarios: (a) latency profiling, (b) edge resource utilization, (c) jitter variability, (d) delay
time-series, (e) flow volume distribution.

false-positive rate (< 3%) for the DBSCAN layer, together the architecture’s flexibility: low-power edge inference for
with latency measurements confirming sub-15ms inference at known benign or high-frequency traffic, with cloud-enhanced
the edge. These complementary results further validate the detection for stealthy, encrypted, or zero-day threats.
robustness of the proposed IDS across both supervised and
unsupervised detection modes. G. Resource Utilization Metrics Across IoT Security
 Scenarios at the Edge
E. System Performance Visualization
 To evaluate the operational viability of the proposed
 To assess the real-time viability and responsiveness, we con- ZT-IDS in varied consumer IoT environments, we measured
ducted multi-metric profiling for each emulated scenario. inference latency, jitter variability, memory usage, and band-
Figure 4 presents latency, resource usage, timing variability, width overhead (Figure 6). Inference latency (Figure 6a)
and traffic behavior across the five IoT threat scenarios. The remains under 15 ms in most edge-only setups, such as Smart
average inference latency is lowest in edge-only scenarios, Bulb and Door Lock, while attack-intensive scenarios like
such as Smart Bulb (Figure 4(a)), validating the feasibil- DNS Tunnel and Zero-Day show slightly longer delays due
ity of local processing. However, latency increases notably to encrypted or obfuscated flows. Memory usage (Figure 6b)
in cloud-assisted scenarios due to transmission and queu- reaches around 70 MB for complex traffic such as Botnet and
ing overhead. Figure 4(b) reflects the CPU and memory Zero-Day, but the ensemble-based architecture keeps overall
utilization trends. Scenario 4 (Botnet) shows higher mem- demands moderate. Bandwidth overhead (Figure 6c) peaks at
ory requirements due to the volume of anomalous flows about 1.8 MB/s for cloud-reliant scenarios, whereas edge-only
and ensemble activity. In Figure 4(c), jitter variability is modes incur no offloading, making the approach well-suited to
pronounced in Scenario 5 (Zero-Day), simulating stealthy bandwidth-limited environments. Jitter variability (Figure 6d)
timing-based anomalies. Stable timing behavior is evident in is minimal for benign traffic but shows wider distributions
Scenarios 1 through 3. Figure 4(d) illustrates packet delay in Zero-Day and DNS Tunnel, supporting temporal anomaly
signals, with offloaded scenarios showing greater fluctua- detection in the Layer-2 engine. These observations confirm
tion, indicating queue and network variability effects. Lastly, that ZT-IDS preserves computational feasibility at the edge
Figure 4(e) visualizes packet flow volume over time. Sce- while ensuring robust detection.
nario 4 (Botnet) and Scenario 5 (Zero-Day) exhibit bursty
traffic due to attack behavior and noise injection, while Scenario 1 demonstrates periodic, stable flow characteristics. H. System Impact Analysis With and Without ZT-IDS
 To assess the runtime efficiency we analyzed system
F. Edge Vs. Cloud Deployment Trade-Offs resource usage across Before Attack (normal operation), Dur-
 We present a compact comparison of three critical met- ing Attack without IDS (unmitigated compromise), and During
rics in Figure 5, where Figure 5(a) reveals that end-to-end Attack with ZT-IDS (active defense). (i) Before attack, the
inference latency remains lowest for edge-only deployments, baseline performance is under expected load, (ii) during attack
such as the Smart Bulb and Botnet scenarios, where local (no IDS), sharp spikes arise in memory, disk I/O, network,
processing avoids external round-trip delays. In contrast, and power due to malicious activity, and (iii) with ZT-IDS,
cloud-reliant setups-especially the DNS Tunnel and Zero-Day same threat scenario occurs, but with active anomaly detection
cases-suffer increased latency due to transmission and queue- and mitigation reducing system strain. Lightweight baselines
ing delays. The hybrid GPU mode (e.g., Door Lock) offers a such as decision-tree and SVM-based IDS have been reported
latency-power middle ground. Figure 5(b) shows power usage in prior IoT studies, but our two-layer hybrid demonstrates
increases significantly when GPU/TPU inference is triggered, superior adaptability by combining supervised ensemble detecreflecting the cost of cloud burst compute and data uplink. tion with unsupervised anomaly discovery, enabling improved
Edge-native scenarios remain energy-efficient under 4.5W, handling of zero-day threats while sustaining low edge latency.
suitable for lightweight devices like Raspberry Pi 4 or Jetson 1) Comparative Discussion: The attacks increase activity
Nano. Figure 5(c) demonstrates that offloading introduces across cores, suggesting multi-threaded payloads (Fig. 7a).
notable bandwidth overhead (up to 1.8 MB/s in the DNS ZT-IDS significantly curbs surges in memory, power, nettunneling case), which may strain consumer-grade uplinks and work, and I/O (Fig. 7b), and ZT-IDS cuts memory use
introduce potential bottlenecks. Together, these results support by 28%, disk I/O by 17%, and network load significantly,
2014 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 5. End-to-end inference latency across edge and cloud modes for each scenario. Edge-only scenarios achieve the lowest latency, while cloud-offloaded
cases introduce network-induced delays, highlighting the trade-off between accuracy and responsiveness.

Fig. 6. Resource utilization metrics across IoT security scenarios: distribution of latency, jitter, memory, and offloading bandwidth under Zero-Trust analysis.

Fig. 7. System resource utilization: live CPU load distribution, memory/network/disk/power profile over time, and summarized resource cost with and without
ZT-IDS.

with slight power efficiency gains (Fig. 7c). These results V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
confirm ZT-IDS’s ability to reduce the impact of attacks This study introduces proactive ZT-IDS, a lightweight
with minimal overhead, supporting it for resource-constrained two-layer intrusion detection framework for consumer IoT
consumer IoT. with 98.48% accuracy and <15 ms latency, demonstrat-
 For completeness, we briefly contrast our approach with ing feasibility for IoT deployments. Unlike prior IoT IDS
simpler lightweight baselines such as Decision Tree (DT) and studies that depend on deep models or single-mode detec-
SVM, which are commonly applied in IoT IDS literature. tors, the proposed model uniquely combines a lightweight
While DT and SVM achieve reasonable accuracy on known ensemble (RF + XGBoost + LightGBM) for known attacks
attack classes, prior studies and our preliminary trials showed with a DBSCAN anomaly layer for zero-day detection.
limited robustness against zero-day anomalies and higher Unlike existing approaches tested only in high-resource setfalse positive rates. In comparison, our ensemble-DBSCAN tings, this framework demonstrates scalable, interpretable,
pipeline sustains stronger accuracy with lightweight efficiency, and edge-deployable intrusion detection, enhanced with
demonstrating a better balance between detection reliability SHAP-based explainability and robust performance against
and edge deployability. timing-based (jitter) evasion attacks. The proposed ZT-IDS
ROY et al.: PROACTIVE ZERO-TRUST INTRUSION DETECTION FOR CONSUMER IoT APPLICATIONS 2015

scales efficiently under thousands of concurrent flows, sustain- [2] A. Rehman et al., “Immersive embedded consumer model leveraging
ing sub-45 ms per-flow latency and under 90 MB memory even AI with zero-trust architecture for cyber-physical system,” IEEE Trans.
 Consum. Electron., p. 1, Mar. 2025.
during high-volume simulations on Raspberry Pi-class hard- [3] A. Hussain et al., “Ensuring zero trust IoT data privacy: Differential
ware. The ensemble–DBSCAN pipeline maintains throughput privacy in blockchain using federated learning,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
without observable degradation in classification accuracy or Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1167–1179, Feb. 2025.
 [4] S. M. Nagarajan, G. G. Devarajan, M. S. Thangakrishnan, T. V. Ramana,
anomaly precision, primarily due to the reduced feature A. K. Bashir, and A. A. AlZubi, “Artificial intelligence-based zero
space and asynchronous flow batching at the preprocessing trust security approach for consumer industry,” IEEE Trans. Consum.
layer. This confirms its feasibility for real-world consumer Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5411–5418, Aug. 2024.
IoT deployments involving dense, bursty traffic. A super- [5] K. N. Q. M. S. A. Iftikhar, F. B. Hussain and M. Sookhak, “Securing
 edge based smart city networks with software defined networking
vised ensemble classifier with an unsupervised DBSCAN and zero trust architecture,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 244, 2025,
anomaly detector balances accuracy with edge deployability. Art. no. 104341.
The ensemble achieved 97. 4% precision and 96. 9% F1 [6] A. Roy, “Lightweight intrusion detection for IoT using SVM and PCA,”
 Int. J. Netw. Secur., 2022.
score for known attacks, while the anomaly layer attained [7] R. Bafghi, “A lightweight ensemble learning framework for IoT intrusion
91.2% precision on zero-day threats with less than 4. 7% detection,” Comput. Secur., 2021.
false positives. ZT-IDS also reduced memory usage, disk I/O, [8] S. U. Jan, S. Ahmed, V. Shakhov, and I. Koo, “Toward a lightweight
 intrusion detection system for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Access,
and network overhead by 28%, 17%, and 57% during attacks, vol. 7, pp. 42450–42471, 2019.
showing its effectiveness and system stability under threat. [9] N. Musa Shanono, Z. Muslim, N. Azman Abu, S. Rahayu Selamat, and
Future work will explore the following: H. Nahar, “Intrusion detection system in lightweight devices: Issues and
 challenges,” Bull. Electr. Eng. Informat., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 800–812,
 Adaptive Thresholding: Feb. 2025.
 Dynamically adjust ensemble and anomaly detection thresh- [10] G. Nasserddine, M. Nassereddine, and O. Al-Khatib, “Ensemble learning
olds based on behavioral baselines to improve robustness in for network intrusion detection based on correlation and embedded
 feature selection techniques,” Computers, vol. 14, Oct. 2025.
evolving traffic conditions. [11] M. Emeç and M. Ozcanhan, “A hybrid deep learning approach for
 Federated Deployment: intrusion detection in IOT networks,” Adv. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 22,
 We will extend this lightweight Z-T IDS through fed- pp. 3–12, 2022.
erated or distributed detection frameworks, allowing opt-in [12] I. Alsmadi and D. Xu, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in IoT using
 DBSCAN,” Comput. Commun., 2020.
collaborative learning across heterogeneous IoT devices while [13] K. Zhang, J. Sun, Q. Feng, X. Huang, C. Jiang, and M. S. Hossain, “Joint
preserving privacy [24]. optimization of fairness and energy efficiency in zero-trust federated
 Explainable AI Integration: learning for consumer Internet of Things: A lossy communication perspective,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1156–1166,
 Incorporate explainability tools such as SHAP or Local Feb. 2025.
Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME) to enhance [14] D. Javeed, M. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A federated
trust and interpretability of model decisions for security ana- learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for Internet of
 Things,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 162, 2024, Art. no. 103540.
lysts and users. [15] M. Ester, H. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A density-based algorithm
 Adversarial Robustness Testing: for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc.
 Evaluate resilience against evasion, poisoning, and adver- KDD, 1996, pp. 226–231.
 [16] D. Guha Roy, B. Mahato, D. De, and R. Buyya, “Application-aware
sarial attacks to ensure model integrity in adversarial end-to-end delay and message loss estimation in Internet of Things
environments. (IoT)—MQTT-SN protocols,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 89,
 Autonomous Knowledge Base Update: pp. 300–316, Dec. 2018.
 [17] B. Guha Roy, D. Guha Roy, P. Datta, S. B. Khan, A. Albuali, and
 Automate online learning by enabling continuous updates to A. Almusharraf, “Quality of experience aware service selection model to
the statistical and clustering components of the IDS without empower edge computing in IoT,” Int. J. Distrib. Sensor Netw., vol. 2025,
manual intervention. no. 1, Jan. 2025, Art. no. 5573818.
 [18] F. Pereira, R. Correia, P. Pinho, S. I. Lopes, and N. B. Carvalho, “Chal-
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT lenges in resource-constrained IoT devices: Energy and communication
 This work was supported in part by Princess Nourah bint as critical success factors for future IoT deployment,” Sensors, vol. 20,
 no. 22, p. 6420, Nov. 2020.
Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, through the [19] W. J. Ladeira et al., “Consumer adoption of Internet of Things,”
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University Researchers J. Consum. Behav., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 673–693, Mar. 2025.
Supporting Project, under Grant PNURSP2026R760; in part [20] J. Z. Zhang and C.-W. Chang, “Consumer dynamics: Theories, methods,
 and emerging directions,” J. Acad. Marketing Sci., vol. 49, no. 1,
by the Deanship of Scientific Research, Vice Presidency for pp. 166–196, Jan. 2021.
Graduate Studies and Scientific Research, King Faisal Univer- [21] A. A. Tudoran, “Rethinking privacy in the Internet of Things: A
sity, Saudi Arabia, under Grant KFU254151; and in part by the comprehensive review of consumer studies and theories,” Internet Res.,
Institute of Engineering and Management (IEM) Trust under vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 514–545, Mar. 2025.
 [22] W. Kim, Y. Park, J. Shin, and M. Jo, “Consumer preference structure
Grant IEMT(S)/2024/02-G19 and Grant IEMT(S)/2023/02- of online privacy concerns in an IoT environment,” Int. J. Market Res.,
G05. vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 630–651, Sep. 2022.
 [23] S. Zhang, M. Li, and J. Li, “WaveConv-sLSTM-KET: A novel frame-
 R EFERENCES work for the multi-task analysis of oil spill fluorescence spectra,” Appl.
 [1] D. Guha Roy, B. Mahato, D. De, and S. N. Srirama, “Quality of Sci., vol. 15, no. 6, p. 3177, Mar. 2025.
 experience aware recommendation system with IoT data filtration for [24] P. Das, M. Singh, and D. G. Roy, “Framework using federated deep
 handshaking among users using MQTT-SN protocol,” J. Ambient Intell. learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Netw. Secur. Blockchain Technol. (ICNSBT),
 Humanized Comput., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 8811–8826, Jul. 2023. vol. 481. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, p. 369.