IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026 1063

 RDSAD: Robust Threat Detection in Evolving Data
 Streams via Adaptive Latent Dynamics
 Abdullah Alsaedi , Zahir Tari , and Redowan Mahmud

 Abstract—Cyber-Physical Systems (CPSs) are the backbone of various cyber threats. These vulnerabilities, if exploited, can lead
Industry 4.0, seamlessly integrating physical and software compo- to substantial disruptions in their underlying physical processes.
nents for advanced automation in diverse sectors. Recent cyber Consequently, CPSs face significant risks and threats that can
incidents have shown that these systems are increasingly vulnerable to targeted attacks. Undetected attacks on CPSs can disrupt compromise their overall security and integrity [2], [3]. Targeted
operations, compromise safety, and cause significant economic attacks, involving carefully planned steps to achieve specific
losses. Thus, anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) goals, have become a major threat [1], [2]. Attackers often
are essential to ensure their safety and security, especially in an manipulate CPS data (i.e., sensor readings, and actuator states) to
unsupervised setting where manual labelling is cost-prohibitive. disrupt operations. Unlike Information Technology (IT) attacks,
However, current methods encounter significant challenges with
complex and evolving characteristics of data streams generated CPS attacks can have severe consequences, as demonstrated
from CPSs, like high dimensionality, uncertainty, and changing by the targeted attack on the Ukrainian power grid, impacting
patterns, often resulting in high false alarms and missed attacks. approximately 225,000 of customers [4]. Similarly, in 2021,
This article introduces RDSAD, an unsupervised, robust and adap- hackers attempted a cyberattack on a water treatment plant in
tive anomaly-based intrusion detection method tailored to effec- Oldsmar, Florida, using a zero-day exploit to gain unauthorised
tively monitor evolving complex CPS data streams. RDSAD integrates two innovative components: Dynamic Deviation Recog- remote access. This enabled them to maliciously alter the chemnition (DDR) for capturing the underlying system dynamics, and ical levels of the water supply [5]. Several other high-profile
Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) for adaptive model updates incidents, including the Colonial pipeline ransomware attack
in response to changing patterns. Through extensive evaluations, and Stuxnet-like events, further demonstrate the seriousness of
the experimental results demonstrate the superior performance targeted attacks on critical infrastructure [1], [2], [4]. Convenof RDSAD compared with static and streaming state-of-the-art
methods. It achieved the best AUC of 0.90 and 0.88 on SWaT and tional security measures in IT-based systems (e.g., firewalls and
WADI datasets, respectively, and it obtained efficient runtime with intrusion detection systems) are insufficient for comprehensive
large data streams. CPS protection. Their inability to analyse and detect attack
 Index Terms—Cyber-physical systems, cybersecurity, anomaly
 patterns within operational data, such as sensor readings or
detection, concept drift, deep state-space model. actuator commands, makes them vulnerable to targeted attacks
 that manipulate such data at a granular level [2], [6]. These
 limitations have motivated researchers to develop new intru-
 I. INTRODUCTION
 sion detection methods specifically tailored for CPSs [2], [3],
 YBER-PHYSICAL Systems (CPSs) have emerged as es-
C sential technologies within Industry 4.0, seamlessly integrating physical and software components. This drives advance-
 [6], [6], [7]. These methods focus on monitoring CPS data to
 identify malicious activities like unauthorised changes in sensor
 readings or actuator commands, potentially indicating attempts
ments in automation, intelligent decision-making, and connec- to alter the internal operations of the target CPSs [2], [6].
tivity, transforming industrial processes and powering critical Recently, anomaly-based Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs)
infrastructure like smart factories, power plants, and water net- have emerged as a promising solution in CPS security due to their
works [1]. With the growing prevalence of CPSs, their inte- ability to learn from CPS data autonomously, without relying
gration with the Internet has become increasingly widespread. on human intervention [3], [6], [7]. These anomaly-based IDSs
However, this connectivity also exposes their vulnerabilities to can leverage the power of Machine Learning (ML) methods to
 learn the ‘normal’ behaviour patterns of the CPS during training.
 Received 26 February 2024; revised 31 May 2025; accepted 22 September During runtime, they can automatically detect anomalies and de-
2025. Date of publication 24 September 2025; date of current version 14 January viations from these patterns as potential cyberattacks, enabling
2026. (Corresponding author: Abdullah Alsaedi.)
 Abdullah Alsaedi and Zahir Tari are with the RMIT Centre of Cyber preventive actions [1], [2]. While they are effective at detecting
Security Research and Innovation (CCSRI), School of Computing Tech- such attack patterns, several critical challenges arise.
nologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: al- Challenge 1. Capturing the underlying normal behaviour
saedi.abdullah11@gmail.com; zahir.tari@rmit.edu.au).
 Redowan Mahmud is with the School of Electrical Engineering, Comput- in complex systems: A core challenge in anomaly detection
ing and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia lies in designing models that effectively learn the underlying
(e-mail: mdredowan.mahmud@curtin.edu.au). normal behaviour “normality” in dynamic and unpredictable
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3614294, provided by the authors. environments like CPSs [8], [9]. CPSs, as engineered systems,
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3614294 integrate control logic with dynamic environments, leading to

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1064 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

interactions characterised by uncertainty and complex temporal Adaptive Latent Dynamics Learning (RDSAD). It is specifically
dependencies. Capturing these intricacies is crucial for accurate tailored for real-time monitoring of complex CPS data streams.
detection [8], [9]. Moreover, CPS data often presents additional It effectively captures the underlying normal behaviour, detects
challenges like high dimensionality and the absence of ground deviations as attack patterns, and adaptively updates its detection
truth labels [10]. Effectively handling these factors while simul- model to accommodate changing behaviours. It achieves this
taneously accounting for uncertainty and temporal dynamics through two key components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition
makes unsupervised anomaly detection in CPSs a significant (DDR) and Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA).
challenge. To address the first challenge, the DDR integrates a novel neu-
 Challenge 2. Adapting to normality shifts in CPSs: CPSs face ral architecture, inspired by deep state space-based generative
constant changes due to factors like environmental variations, models [8], [9], to effectively capture low-dimensional latent
technology integration, and operational shifts [1]. These changes dynamics of the underlying normal behaviour of monitored syscan lead to concept drift [11], where the underlying statistical tems. Unlike prior works [13], [14], [15], [21], [22], [23], [24],
properties of data evolve over time. In anomaly detection, this [25], DDR explicitly considers both the uncertainty and temporal
manifests as a normality shift [12], meaning the definition of dependencies in data streams through two distinct latent states:
the underlying patterns of normal behaviour changes. Although continuous states for temporal learning and stochastic states
significant progress has been made in anomaly-based intrusion for uncertainty modelling, leading to improved inference and
detection methods, most existing methods [13], [14], [15], [16], more effective threat detection. Additionally, DDR incorporates
[17] work under a closed-world and static assumption. This a statistics-driven emission approach [18], [28], with density remeans they expect real-time data distribution to relatively match construction and moving averages, further enhancing robustness
the training data. This assumption might hold true in static envi- in dynamic environments.
ronments but hinders their effectiveness in dynamic and evolving To effectively adapt to the evolving environments and norsystem states where data patterns shift unpredictably [11], [18]. mality shifts (the second challenge), the SMA continuously
For instance, in water treatment plants, variations in raw water monitors for shifts in the underlying latent dynamics and adapquality due to seasonal changes can redefine normal opera- tively updates the model in response. Contrary to existing methtion [11]. Static-based anomaly detection models, unaware of ods [21], [22], [23], [24], [25] that are prone to catastrophic
this evolving normality, might misclassify normal events as forgetting due to continuous adaptation and self-poisoning from
anomalies or miss actual attacks, potentially reducing system misinterpreting attack or anomalous observations (the third
trust and security [11], [12], [19]. Therefore, deploying adaptive challenge), SMA employs a robust update decision approach
anomaly detection solutions is crucial for CPSs. These solutions to prevent self-poisoning and an adaptive regularisation term
can continuously learn and adjust to changing data patterns, en- to preserve previously acquired knowledge, ensuring model
suring reliable and effective intrusion detection even in dynamic integrity and reliability. The key contributions of this paper are
environments [12], [19], [20]. outlined as follows:
 Challenge 3. Overcoming self-poisoning and catastrophic r Developed a novel unsupervised anomaly-based threat
forgetting: Recent works [21], [22], [22], [23], [24], [25] have detection method, RDSAD, that learns and adapts to the
proposed streaming anomaly detection solutions that contin- evolving normal behaviours of the monitored system, enuously update the detection model in real time to address abling robust and accurate detection of potential attacks.
challenge 2. However, these solutions often rely on passive r Designed a Dynamic Deviation Recognition (DDR) based
updates that encounter additional issues. These updates can on an innovative neural architecture, enabling robust repbe resource-intensive, especially with high-dimensional data resentation of system dynamics and effective threat detecstreams [11], [26]. More importantly, they face two major tion.
challenges: self-poisoning [27] and catastrophic forgetting [26]. r Introduced a Shift-aware Model Adaptation (DMA)
Self-poisoning occurs when the model mistakenly learns from method that continually tracks shifts in underlying dynamattack observations as normal behaviour during the passive ics. It adaptively updates RDSAD in response to these shifts
updates. This can lead to an inability to accurately detect real through a robust update decision. This minimises the risk
attacks in the future [10], [27]. Catastrophic forgetting happens of self-poisoning from anomalous observations, ensuring
when continuous updates cause the model to forget previously sustained model accuracy and reliability. Additionally, it
learned patterns of normal behaviour as it adapts to new data. preserves the integrity of accumulated knowledge via an
This can result in misclassifying legitimate normal events as adaptive regularisation term.
attacks [26], [27]. The combined impact of these challenges r Conducted comprehensive experiments and evaluations on
can be significant, resulting in increased false alarms, missed four distinct datasets to evaluate the performance of the
attacks, and reduced system trust. Addressing them is crucial for proposed RDSAD. The experimental results demonstrate
developing robust and reliable threat detection methods capable that RDSAD outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms
of adapting to evolving normal behaviour while preserving their of both performance metrics and runtime efficiency.
knowledge base. The paper is structured as follows: Section II introduces some
 To address the aforementioned limitations, we introduce a basic notations and concepts. Section III details the proposed
novel unsupervised anomaly-based threat detection method, RDSAD. Section IV presents the related works. Section V
called Robust Attack Detection for Evolving Data Streams via outlines the experimental setup, followed by Section VI, which
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1065

 TABLE I prior distribution over the latent dynamics and θ is the model
 DESCRIPTION OF NOTATIONS
 parameter. However, direct computation of pθ (z|x) is a challenging task except for a simple model, mainly due to the intractable integral
  involved in computing the marginal likelihood
 pθ (x) = pθ (x|z) pθ (z)dz [29]. As a solution to this issue,
 variational inference [30] is applied to estimate an approximate
 distribution of the true posterior, denoted as qφ (z|x). Therefore, the problem is formulated as an optimization problem to
 maximize the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), L formulated
 as:

 L(φ, θ; x) = Eqφ (z|x) [log pθ (x|z)] − DKL (qφ (z|x)||p(z))
 (2)
 where the Kullback-Leibler divergence, DKL , ensures that the
 approximate distribution q(z|x) is close to the prior distribution
 p(z). The qφ (z|x) and pθ (x|z) are the inference and generative
discusses the experimental results. Finally, Section VII provides models, respectively. These models are constructed using deep
a summary and concludes the paper. neural networks and then trained jointly via backpropagation,
 leveraging the reparameterisation trick for gradient compu-
 II. PRELIMINARIES AND BACKGROUND tation [30]. Lastly, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) can
 be employed to establish connections between the SSMs and
A. Basic Notation Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [8], enabling the acquisition
 This paper presents vectors as bold lower-case letters, such of non-linear State-Space Models (SSMs) that incorporate the
as x. Matrices are denoted in bold upper-case letters, such as latent dynamics and emission models as outlined in (1a) and
X. The time index is denoted as subscript xt . A sequence (1b), thereby offering a powerful approach to handle complex,
of observations from time 1 to t is represented as x1:t . The real-world sequential data streams.
necessary notations for the proposed solution are outlined in
Table I.
 D. Neural Ordinary Differential Equations
B. State-Space Models Neural Ordinary differential equations (neural ODEs) are a
 This section briefly introduces State-Space Models (SSMs) significant advancement in modelling dynamical systems, given
since RDSAD works on an SSM-like model. SSMs are widely their capability to capture long-term dependencies and manage
used to model sequential data by learning the relationship be- irregularly sampled time series data [31]. Traditional approaches
tween latent variable z t and observed variable xt . It is assumed to modelling time-series and sequential data, such as Recurrent
that an observation xt depends directly on a latent process z t : Neural Networks (RNNs), involve applying a sequence of transformations to a hidden state at fixed intervals:
 z t = fθ (z t−1 , xt ) + t , (latent dynamics) (1a)
 x̄t = gθ (z t ). (emission) (1b) ht = fθ (ht−1 , xt ) (3)

where z ∈ RL , x ∈ Rm , and θ represents the model parameters.
 where t ∈ {0, . . . , T } and h is the hidden state. In contrast,
fθ is the transition function that governs the latent dynamics
 neural ODEs describe the continuous evolution of hidden states
(i.e., it defines the evolution of the state over time), while
 using an ordinary differential equation: h = f (h(t), t), where
gθ is the emission function, which outlines the relationship
 f acts as a neural network. Given an initial value h(t0 ), this
between the latent state and the observed data. SSMs offer an
 dynamic can yield results at any time point t1 :
elegant framework for modelling and estimating densities of
data streams. Nonetheless, classical SSMs are often limited to  t1
linear models, thereby lacking the capacity to effectively model h(t1 ) = h(t0 )+ f (h(t), t)dt = ODESolve(h(t0 ), f, t0 , t1 ).
complex real-world data streams. t0
 (4)
C. Deep SSMs and Variational Inference However, the integral in (4) requires expensive numerical
 solvers, resulting in high computation costs. To overcome this
 The State-Space Models (SSMs) can be effectively extended issue, Neural Flow [31] was proposed as a recent advancement in
by incorporating Neural Networks (NNs) into the structure, neural ODEs. It models the solution curve of ODE directly with a
leading to Deep State-Space Models (Deep SSMs) [8], [9]. neural network, substantially lowering computation costs. Neu-
These deep SSMs can capture the characteristics of latent dy- ral ODEs and Neural Flow have proven practical and effective
namics z, achieved through the computation of the posterior approaches in modelling dynamic systems handling irregularlydistribution pθ (z|x) = pθ (xptθ|z)p
 (x)
 θ (z)
 , where pθ (z) denotes the sampled data streams.
1066 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 Definition 2 (Self-Poisoning [27], [32]): Let A represent a
 set of attack observations, self-poisoning occurs when a detection model M with parameters Φ inadvertently learns from A
 during its continual update process, compromising its ability to
 accurately detect future attacks.
 Catastrophic forgetting (depicted as the trailing-off pattern in
 Fig. 1) is formally defined as:
 Definition 3 (Catastrophic Forgetting [26]): Let H represent
 a set of historical observations reflecting normal behaviour.
 Catastrophic forgetting occurs when the performance of M
Fig. 1. Adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detection in evolving data streams.
 on H decreases significantly after being continuously updated
 with new data. This happens because new information gradually
 replaces information about past normal behaviour within the
E. Problem Definition model’s internal parameters Φ.
 Let X = {x1 , x2 , . . . } represent high-dimensional observations from CPSs arriving in a continuous stream. Given the
 III. THE PROPOSED SOLUTION
unbounded nature of such data streams, we employ sliding
windows of size T to process the data in real-time. A sliding This section discusses RDSAD in more detail. Fundamentally,
window W , starting at time step t, is defined as a sequence RDSAD adaptively learns from the evolving normal behaviours
of T consecutive observations, xt+1:t+T = {xt+1 , . . . , xt+T }, of the monitored system, ensuring robust and accurate detection
where each xt ∈ Rm is an m-dimensional vector associated with of attacks even as the system changes. The effectiveness of
a timestamp t. RDSAD stems from its two essential components: Dynamic De-
 Adaptive unsupervised anomaly-based intrusion detection viation Recognition (DDR) and Shift-aware Model Adaptation
aims to identify unusual patterns in these data streams that de- (SMA) as depicted in Fig. 2. The DDR component is dedicated
viate from established normal behaviour, potentially indicating to learning and capturing the underlying latent dynamics of the
attacks and system anomalies. As depicted in Fig. 1, the detec- monitored system, with any significant deviations from these
tion model M, parameterised by Φ, continuously analyses data learned dynamics detected as potential threats. It accomplishes
through sliding window W of size T . The model, M, performs this through its two integral phases: System Representation
inference on this window, generating a set of anomaly scores Learning (SRL) and Deviation Detection (DD), which together
for the observations within W , denoted as {M(xi ; Φ)|xi ∈ W }. form an effective and robust threat detection method. The SMA
Considering probability-based scoring, observations with scores enhances RDSAD with robust and adaptive model updates in
below a defined threshold, suggesting they have a low probability real time. This adaptability is achieved through two operations:
of being normal, are flagged as potential attacks. The model M latent-space shift identification and robust update decision. In
then updates its parameters Φ in an unsupervised manner, in- the following sections, a detailed discussion of each component
corporating the latest data from the stream to refine its detection is provided, beginning with the two phases of DDR followed by
capabilities. SMA.
 A key challenge in CPS anomaly detection lies in effectively
capturing the underlying patterns of normal behaviour. This task
 A. System Representation Learning (SRL)
is compounded by the inherent uncertainty and temporal dependencies within the high-dimensional data streams generated SRL aims to learn the underlying latent dynamics that govby CPSs [11]. In this context, each variable in data streams is ern the normal behaviour of monitored systems, transforming
perceived as a stochastic process produced with auto-correlated high-dimensional observations into effective low-dimensional
temporal properties [8], [10]. Furthermore, the dynamic nature latent representations. While real-world CPS data is often
of CPSs often leads to changes in the underlying patterns of high-dimensional, many physical systems operate on lowthe normal behaviour, known as normality shift [11], [12]. dimensional latent dynamics [2], [3], [7]. These underlying dy-
This poses a critical challenge to maintaining accurate anomaly namics can be effectively captured by a few latent state variables
detection over time. that represent the principal properties of the monitored systems.
 Definition 1 (Normality Shift [11], [12]): Given a time period Due to their reduced dimensionality, these representations are
[0, t], and a window of observations x0:t ={x0 , x1 , . . . , xt }, computationally efficient and memory-friendly, making them
following a certain distribution P0:t (x). Normality shift occurs optimal for monitoring system operations. The SRL comprises
at time t + 1 if ∃t : Pt (x) = Pt+1 (x), indicating a covariate a Temporal Embedding Network (TEN) and an inference model.
shift in the distribution of input data streams. TEN serves as a feature extraction layer that processes input data
 Building upon the challenges of adapting to normality streams, converting them into a form suitable for the inference
shifts, continuous learning through passive updates encounters model. Its primary function is to enhance the model’s capability
additional issues: self-poisoning [27] and catastrophic forget- to learn from the data streams, thereby enabling an effective
ting [26]. We formally define self-poisoning (highlighted in representation of the system’s underlying dynamics. The infer-
Fig. 1 by the red shaded area) as: ence model, working in conjunction with TEN, leverages the
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1067

Fig. 2. The overview of RDSAD.

temporally extracted features to model the probability distribution p(z t |x1:t ), where z t corresponds to compact, time-variant
latent states representing the system’s normal behaviour over
time. In what follows, we discuss the TEN and the inference
model in more detail.
 1) Temporal Embedding Network: Temporal Embedding
Network (TEN), denoted as ϕ, is constructed using Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCN) [33], which are known to
be more time-efficient than traditional RNN-based structures,
and can often produce superior prediction performance with Fig. 3. Graphical demonstration of inference and emission models. Nodes
 correspond to various variables, and edges indicate the dependencies between
sequential data. TCN is based on a 1-D convolution network them. Circular nodes represent latent stochastic variables, and diamond-shaped
that operates on temporal dimensions using a dilation factor d. nodes correspond to GRU-flow variables.
Formally, it is defined as:

 
 k−1
 ϕ(x) = f (i) · xs−d·i (5) factorised qφ distribution as follows:
 i=0
 
 T

where f ∈ R k×d
 refers to the convolutional filter of size k. s − qφ (z, h|x) = qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ), (6a)
d · i indicates the direction of past information in the streams. t=1
  
d corresponds to the dilation factor. When d = 1, this forms a qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ) ∼ N μzt , diag(σ 2zt ) , (6b)
regular convolution where the filter is applied to every sequential
element in the series. However, as d increases, the filter is applied μzt = ζφμ (z t−1 , ht , ϕ(xt )), (6c)
at larger gaps in the input series. This expands the receptive field σ zt = Softplus[ζφσ (z t−1 , ht , ϕ(xt ))]. (6d)
of the network to capture long-term patterns in the data.
 2) Inference Model: The inference model plays a crucial role The approximate posterior is modelled as a diagonal multiwithin SRL by capturing the latent dynamics of the observed variate Gaussian distribution, where μzt and σ zt represent the
data streams. Specifically, it models the posterior distributions mean and variance, respectively. These parameters are deterof the input observations x as compact latent dynamics (e.g., mined by two fully-connected neural networks with a single
z and h), represented as pθ (z, h|x). However, this direct mod- hidden layer, denoted as ζφμ and ζφσ , respectively. The softplus
elling of the posterior becomes intractable due to the inherently activation function, Softplus(x) = log(1 + ex ), is utilised to
complex integration involved (as discussed in Section II-C). ensure a positive and nonlinear transition from the latent states
Consequently, we leverage a filtering-based structured varia- to σ. Finally, φ refers to the parameter sets of the inference
tional inference [29]. This works particularly well for streaming model, while ϕ denotes the Temporal Embedding Network
data by approximating the posterior distribution of the current (TEN) (discussed in Section III-A1). A graph illustration of the
latent dynamics based only on past and current information. inference model is depicted in Fig. 3(a) in which the current
This approach creates a structured approximate posterior with a latent variable z t conditioned on the previous latent variable
1068 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

z t−1 , the current hidden state ht , and the current observation xt . σ̂ zt = Softplus[ζθσ̂ (z t−1 , ht )]. (8c)
In RDSAD, the internal dynamics of the underlying behaviours
are captured through the interaction of two distinct latent states: μ̂zt and σ̂ zt are the mean and variance of the transition dis-
(1) Continuous Latent States (h) and (2) Stochastic Latent States tribution, respectively. μ̂zt is derived from a fully-connected
(z). Together, these latent states provide a robust and compact neural network ζθμ̂ with a ReLU function, and σ̂ zt generated
representation, thereby enhancing the ability of RDSAD to by ζθσ̂ with the Softplus activation function. By considering the
detect potential deviations in the monitored system. uncertainty, the stochastic latent states can incorporate a certain
 Continuous latent states: They capture the long-term temporal level of randomness or variability, which can potentially improve
dependencies and transitions of the latent variables by tracking the capability of the model to handle complex and noisy data
their continuous evolution. This allows the model to effectively streams.
account for temporal dependencies within the data. We model
the transition function of h with ideas from neural Ordinary
 B. Deviation Detection
Differential Equations (neural ODEs). In particular, we utilise
GRU-flow [31] as the transition function to model the continuous RDSAD utilises a dynamic deviation detection approach that
latent state hi ∈ Rh . GRU-flow models the continuous evolution combines density reconstruction estimation with moving averof latent states h and captures their temporal dependencies in ages. This method assigns deviation scores to incoming observaa flexible and adaptive manner using an ordinary differential tions for real-time intrusion detection. Under the density-based
equation. As detailed in Section II-D, this approach leverages approach, normal observations typically exhibit normal bethe strengths of neural ODEs and Neural Flow [31], providing an haviours and have higher reconstruction densities. Conversely,
effective way to capture the continuous dynamics of the system. anomalies deviate from this normality and are statistically rare,
The evolution of the latent state in continuous time is defined leading to lower densities [34]. RDSAD leverages this principle
as: based on two main components: emission model and deviation
 verification.
 u(t, h) = αu · sigmoid(fu (t, h, ϕ(x))) (7a) 1) Emission Model: The emission model is constructed with
 r(t, h) = αr · sigmoid(fr (t, h, ϕ(x))) (7b) the ability to map the latent dynamics to sufficient statistics of
 certain conditional distributions of observations pθ (xt |z t , ht ),
 h̃(t, h) = tanh(fh̃ (t, r(t, h)  h, ϕ(x))) (7c) which relies on a sample from latent dynamics z t and ht as
  shown in Fig. 3(b). Current works in generative time-series
 Fh (t, h) = h + g(t) (1 − u(t, h))  h̃(t, h) − h (7d) models have commonly employed Gaussian distributions as an
 emission model [8], [9]. However, Gaussian distributions are
where u(.) and r(.) denote the update and reset gates, respec- known to be sensitive to extreme values and fluctuations, a
tively. The parameters αu and αr are scalars ∈ R that control the common characteristic of anomalies. This can lead the emisimpact of the gates and maintain the property of invertibility in sion model to inadvertently fit both normal and anomaly data
the flow, thereby facilitating the learning of long-term dependen- simultaneously. This simultaneous fitting leads to an inability to
cies and providing greater control over the state evolution. h̃(.) accurately identify true anomalies, compromising the effectiverepresents the intermediate hidden state. The functions fu , fr ness of the detection system [18]. To address this, we adopt the
and fh̃ are fully-connected neural networks that represent the Student-t distribution, a heavy-tailed distribution that is based
transformations applied to compute the gates and the candidate on the principles of robust statistics [18], [28]. The Student-t
hidden state. g is a continuous function that satisfies g(0) = 0, distribution is more robust to extreme values and fluctuations,
and  denotes element-wise multiplication. Fh (.) denotes the allowing for more accurate identification of true anomalies
flow function which models the evolution of the GRU state h in compared to a Gaussian assumption. Formally, we employ a
continuous time. Student-t distribution with a location-scale generalisation as the
 Stochastic latent states: These state variables capture latent emission model as follows:
dynamics generating the data and their associated uncertainty.
Each stochastic latent variable z t is conditioned on both the   v+1
 2 − 2
 γ v+1 2 1 x−μ
previous stochastic variable z t−1 and the current continuous p(x | v, μ, σ) =  v  √ 1+ ,
state ht . This allows it to extract information about the historical γ 2 vπσ v σ
context (from z t−1 ) and the current system context (from ht ), (9)
making it more reflective of the actual evolving state of the where γ denotes the gamma function and v represents the
system. This richer representation allows us to track subtle degrees of freedom. In this context, the emission model based
changes in the latent dynamics, which can manifest as normality on sufficient statistics can be expressed as:
shifts in the observed data (see Section III-D1). We employ a
 pθ (xt |z t , ht ) = ST (xt ; vxt , μxt , σxt ) . (10)
transition distribution for z that is characterised by a multivariate
Gaussian distribution, defined as follows: where θ represents the parameter sets of the emission model,
   and ST denotes the Student-t distribution. vxt , μxt , and σxt
 pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ) ∼ N μ̂zt , diag(σ̂ 2zt ) (8a)
 correspond to the sufficient statistics of the emission distribu-
 μ̂zt = ζθμ̂ (z t−1 , ht ), (8b) tion. These statistics are parameterised by a neural network as
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1069

follows: Algorithm 1: Deviation Threshold.
 vxt = Softplus[ζθv (z t , ht )] + 1 (11a)
 μxt = ζθμ (z t , ht ) (11b)
 σxt = Softplus[ζθσ (z t , ht )] (11c)
 μ
where the functions ζθv , ζθ and ζθσ are fully-connected neural
networks with one hidden layer. The heaviness of the tail is managed by the degree of freedom parameter v. Unlike traditional
approaches that consider v as a time-invariant constant, in our (POT) theorem [18], helps us focus on the tail of the deviation
configuration, v is parameterised using a neural network to allow score distribution, where potential anomalies are more likely to
it to be data-driven and adaptable over time [28]. By adopting reside. We leverage a Generalized Pareto distribution (GPD) to
the Student-t distribution and parameterising its components model this tail, and the threshold is obtained by fitting the tail
dynamically, our emission model is robust to extreme values proportion of a GPD as follows:
and fluctuations, leading to more accurate intrusion detection. − ξ1
 ξs
Compared to other heavy-tailed distributions (e.g., Cauchy and F̄ (s) = P (ε − s > s|s < ε) ∼ 1+ . (14)
 β
Laplace), the Student-t distribution offers a more stable and
adaptable formulation due to its tunable degrees of freedom, where F̄ represents the tail of the distribution, and ε is the initial
which balance tail heaviness and variance control [18], [28]. threshold of deviation scores. The parameters ξ and β correspond
 2) Deviation Verification: The deviation verification in- to the shape and scale of GPD, respectively. They are estimated
volves two primary steps: calculating a deviation score and through The Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE). The term
establishing a deviation threshold. ε − s refers to the portion below the initial threshold ε, which is
 Deviation Score: Building upon the emission model and den- empirically set to a low quantile. The final threshold η is obtained
sity reconstruction, we calculate a deviation score to quantify as follows:
how much an observation deviates from normal behaviour. We  
 −ξ̂
leverage the log-likelihood of the observation xt conditioned on β̂ N ·ρ
 η ≃ε− −1 . (15)
latent dynamics z t and ht as follows: ξˆ Nε

 t = log pθ (xt |z t , ht ). (12) where ρ is the target probability level for observing the event
where t denotes likelihood value. High log-likelihood indicates s < ε, N is the number of observations, and Nε is the number
good reconstruction, aligning with normal behaviour, while low of si that are less than the threshold value ε (i.e., the number of
values suggest deviations (i.e., anomalies). This approach allows si s.t. si < ε). Two parameters involved in POT require tuning:
for real-time requirements and efficient processing in streaming ρ and low quantile. They can be established empirically (see
settings [8]. To quantify this deviation, we define the deviation Section V-D). These model-wide parameters allow us to adapscore st at time t as the difference between the current likelihood tively adjust the deviation threshold to accommodate potential
and a measure of “consistent normal behaviour” ct : changes in the data over time. This adaptive nature is further
 enhanced by the Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) process
 st = t − ct , (13a) (Section III-D), which recalculates the threshold based on the
 latest data when changes are detected.
 1 ∗
 d
 ct = . (13b) Algorithm 1 summarises the initialisation steps for the deviad  tion threshold. The initial threshold ε is set as the low quantile of
 t =1
 the deviation score samples (s1 , . . . , sn ), where n is the number
 Here, ct dynamically captures this normal behaviour through
 of samples in s. In Line 3, we construct the set Y (i.e., “a portion
a moving average of past likelihood scores ∗ for normal obbelow the threshold”), which includes the differences between
servations within a window of size d. This is more robust
 the initial threshold ε and each score si that is below ε. This set
and adaptable than raw log-likelihood scores, as it considers
 is then used to fit a GPD, enabling us to infer the distribution
the recent context of normal behaviour. For instance, transient
 of the lower extreme values. The final threshold η is computed
changes or noise would not drastically affect the average comaccording to (15).
pared to a single score, providing a more accurate intrusion
detection in non-stationary environments. Next, We describe
 C. Model Training
how to automatically establish the deviation threshold, which
utilises the deviation score to drive the final detection decision. This section details the training process of RDSAD, which
 Deviation Threshold Settings: The deviation threshold serves jointly optimises the inference parameters (φ) and emission
as the criterion for determining whether an observation sig- parameters (θ) to learn effective latent representations within
nificantly deviates from normal behaviour. We automatically the “latent dynamic space”. This space captures the underlying
set this threshold using the principle of Extreme Value Theory structure and dynamics of the data streams, enabling accurate
(EVT) [18], a statistical approach for analysing extreme values deviation detection and adaptation. We achieve this joint optimiin data distribution. EVT, specifically the Peaks-Over-Threshold sation through Stochastic Gradient Variational Bayes (SGVB)
1070 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

estimator [30], which maximises the Evidence Lower BOund To quantify the difference between these windows and detect
(ELBO) objective L: potential shifts, we adopt a variant of the energy distance met-
 ⎡ ⎡ ⎤ ric [35]. This metric has several desirable statistical properties
 T that enable us to quantitatively measure changes between two
 ⎢
L(φ, θ) = ⎣Eqφ (zt |zt−1 ,ht ,xt ) ⎣log pθ (xt |z t , ht )⎦ sets of samples. By computing the energy distance, we derive
 t=1
    a change score δ. Formally, the change score δ is defined by
 reconstruction term
 ⎤ the energy distance E(., .), which is computed as the weighted
 average of squared distances between two sets of samples in
 ⎥
 − DKL (qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ) pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ))⎦ z-space as follows:
   
 KL-divergence term 2 
 T −1 T  2
  (i) 
 (16) δt = E(z r , z c ) := zr − zc(j)  . (17)
 T (T − 1) i=1 j=i+1
The ELBO comprises two main terms. The first term is the
 where . denotes the euclidean norm. Typically, δ approaches
‘reconstruction term’, which represents the log-likelihood of the
 a value close to 0 when the two sets of samples, z r and z c ,
data streams. It ensures the ability of the model to accurately
 are drawn from similar distributions, indicating a high degree of
reconstruct the input data xt from the latent dynamics z t and
 similarity. Conversely, δ increases as the difference between the
ht . The second term, the ‘KL-divergence term’, guides the
 two sample sets grows. The change score δ (17) provides a quaninference model towards learning informative latent dynamics.
 titative measure of changes in the latent space, allowing us to
This KL-divergence term measures the difference between the
 track shifts in the system’s dynamics over time. However, to dislearned variational distribution (qφ ) and a prior distribution
 tinguish between transient fluctuations and significant changes
(pθ ) on the latent dynamics, ensuring they capture meaningful
 in the underlying system dynamics, we need to effectively
information. The expectation E is approximated using Monte
 quantify the intensity and significance of the detected changes.
Carlo integration [29]. Instead of directly sampling z t from
 To this end, we leverage the intensity-aware analyser [36], which
qφ , we use a reparameterisation trick [30], where we sample
 builds upon the computed change scores δ. This analyser unitises
an auxiliary random variable  from a standard normal disconcepts from a CUSUM-like test, allowing us to track the
tribution N (0, I) and then obtain z t through a differentiable
 presence of changes and their intensity and persistence over time.
transformation gφ (.) as z t = gφ (xt , ). This allows us to obtain
 The intensity of the changes is measured through the cumulative
a differentiable estimator of the evidence lower bound L in (16)
 variable mt , defined in (18), which maintains the accumulated
during optimisation, as it permits gradients to flow back through
 difference between the recently observed score values and the
the network.
 average of previously observed values.

D. Shift-Aware Model Adaptation (SMA) mt = max(m̄t + δt − ν, 0), m0 = 0. (18)
 This section presents the Shift-aware Model Adaptation Here, m̄t is the calculated mean of the observed change score
(SMA). Unlike conventional approaches that necessitate fre- δt at time t, and ν is an adjustable parameter which represents
quent model updates [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], RDSAD in- the acceptable level of change, typically assigned a value near
corporates SMA, which provides robust and adaptive learning zero [36]. Finally, the intensity Δt at time t defines as Δt =
capabilities in real time. SMA continually monitors changes Mt − mt , where Mt = max0≤i≤t (mi ). If Δt exceeds a shift
in the underlying system dynamics, triggering an update only threshold Υ, then shift is identified, triggering potential model
when significant changes are identified. By selectively updating adaptation. The shift threshold Υ is dynamically calculated as a
the model based on relevant changes, it ensures that the model factor of the mean of the historical change scores, represented as
maintains accurate and effective in capturing the evolving dy- Υt = κ ∗ m̄t . Here, κ is a constant known as the ‘shift-factor’.
namics of the system. This is to minimise unnecessary updates, Consequently, lower κ increases potential adaptation frequency
which can be computationally expensive and potentially fail to by relaxing shift evidence requirements, while higher κ reduces
capture the historical semantic patterns. SMA involves two key it [36]. This dynamic approach allows the threshold to adjust
steps: 1) Latent-space shift identification and 2) robust update based on the average of change scores over time.
decision. In the subsequent sections, we discuss each step. 2) Robust Update Decision: The proposed robust update
 1) Latent-Space Shift Identification: The goal here is to decision selectively determines when to update the model by
track and identify normality shifts in system dynamics within leveraging information from latent-space shift identification and
the stochastic latent space. To achieve this, we introduce two deviation detection, ensuring reliable and accurate updates. In
latent windows of equal length T named the reference and particular, we incorporate a heuristic constraint that only uses
current window. The reference window, represented as z r = new normal observations for updates. This protects the model
{z t−T , . . . , z t−1 }, captures the historical samples and serves as from self-poisoning by anomalies, which could degrade its
a baseline for comparison, remaining fixed unless a shift is de- performance. The model update is triggered only when two
tected. The current window, denoted as z c = {z t−T +1 , . . . , z t }, conditions are met: 1) significant shift detected: the change
continuously updates with the latest stochastic latent variables, intensity Δt must exceed the dynamic shift threshold Υt , and 2)
reflecting the evolving characteristics of the latent dynamics. normal observation confirmed: the deviation score st must be
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1071

 Algorithm 2: Shift-Aware Model Adaptation (SMA). on detection performance. Specifically, the posterior distribution
 of the emission parameters learned from the previous sequence
 at time t − 1 becomes the new prior distribution for the current
 sequence at time t. The posterior distribution p(θ|x1:T ) after
 seeing T window of observations is recovered by applying
 Bayes’ rule:
 
 T
 p(θ|x1:T ) = p(θ) p(xt |θ) ∝ p(xT |θ)p(θ|x1:T −1 ). (20)
 t=1

 where p(xT |θ) is the likelihood of the observations, and
 p(θ|x1:T −1 ) is the previous posterior of the parameters θ which
 serves as the new prior. This allows the model to build upon the
 learned information from past observations, effectively utilising
 the posterior distribution as a prior belief to guide the inference
 model for the current sequence. This can facilitate knowledge
 transfer from the past to the current data streams (i.e., forward
 transfer) [38]. Moreover, it can alleviate catastrophic forgetting
above the deviation threshold η, confirming that the current ob- by penalising drastic changes from the previously learned inservation is likely normal. This ensures the model incorporates formation. Often, the posterior distribution is intractable, necesnew knowledge from legitimate normality shifts while being sitating approximation methods. We use the online variational
robust to anomalies or transient fluctuations. However, in some inference (VI) [37] to approximate the posterior of (20) by a
cases, an update might be declined even if a shift is detected: parametrised distribution p(θ|x1:T ) ≈ q̄(θ) through a sequence
shift with anomaly: if the change intensity is higher than the shift of projections, which are defined via the minimisation of KL
threshold Δt > Υt , but the deviation score st is less than or equal divergence over the set of allowed approximate posteriors Q:
to the deviation threshold η (e.g., potential attack observations),  
 q̄(θ) = arg min DKL q̄(θ) Z −1 q̄t−1 (θ)p(xt |θ) (21)
the model update is declined. This measure acts as a safeguard, q∈Q
ensuring the model is not inadvertently updated with unreliable
data, thereby preserving its integrity. The conditions for the where Z −1 is the normalisation constant. q̄(θ) is an approximate
model update process are summarised as follows: posterior modelled as a multivariate Gaussian distribution. How-
  ever, in the context of online variational inference, the variance
 Δt > Υt ∧ st > η, Initiate model update of the Gaussian posterior approximation tends to shrink as new
 (19)
 Δt > Υt ∧ st ≤ η, Decline model update observations are incorporated over time. This can potentially
 The overall functioning of the Shift-aware Model Adaptation lead to the loss of information from previous data streams,
(SMA) is outlined in Algorithm 2. Suppose the change score especially when learning from non-stationary and dynamic en-
Δt surpasses the shift threshold Υt and the deviation score st vironments [26], [38]. Similar to [38], we integrate Bayesian
is above the deviation threshold η. In that case, SMA initiates a exponential forgetting into the VI process as a forgetting factor,
reset of its internal variables and triggers an update (Line 11). which assigns progressively less weight to older observations.
However, if the change score Δt exceeds the shift threshold Υt This allows our model to adapt to new data while still retainwhile the deviation score st is equal to or less than the deviation ing valuable knowledge from the past. The forgetting factor is
threshold η, the model update is declined (Line 14). For all other incorporated into the update equation (20) for the approximate
instances where no shift is detected, SMA merely refreshes its posterior, ensuring recent observations have a stronger influence
internal statistics and proceeds to process the incoming data while gradually forgetting older ones. This helps maintain a balwithout taking additional actions (Line 17). ance between adaptation and knowledge preservation, mitigat-
 3) Adaptive Regularisation Term: To prevent catastrophic ing “posterior shrinkage” and enabling better continual learning.
forgetting, which occurs when a model forgets previously The Bayesian exponential forgetting is defined as follows:
learned information during adaptation, we incorporate an adap- ΔT /τ
 q̄t (θ) = q̄t−1 (θ)p(xt |θ)(1−) (22)
tive regularisation term inspired by Bayesian online learning [37]. This term encourages the model to update its where  is a small positive constant, and τ represents a timeparameters gradually, building upon past knowledge while in- constant corresponding to the mean value of the time-lags, excorporating new information effectively. Our adaptive regular- pressed as ΔT = T − t. By incorporating the forgetting factor,
isation term achieves this by penalising large changes in the the posterior distribution places a relatively higher emphasis on
model’s parameters. This ensures that the model builds upon the likelihood of recent observation, which allows the model to
its existing knowledge base rather than starting from scratch adapt to non-stationary data distributions and avoid excessive
with each new data point. We specifically perform Bayesian influence from past information.
inference over the emission parameter θ within our deep state To this end, we incorporate the adaptive regularisation term in
space-based generative model because of its significant impact (21) with the learning process of RDSAD, which is equivalent to
1072 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

maximising the evidence lower bound (ELBO). We can modify threshold η. Conversely, when st exceeds η (e.g., indicating
the ELBO in (16) with respect to q̄ and φ as follows: normal behaviour), the statistics for consistent behaviour (c)
 ⎡ ⎡ ⎤ get updated (Line 34). RDSAD continually processes the data
 ⎢
 T stream, removing the oldest observation from the sliding window
L(φ, q̄t (θ)) = ⎣Eqφ (zt |zt−1 ,ht ,xt ) ⎣log pθ (xt |z t , ht )⎦ (Line 39) and incrementing the timestep.
 t=1
   
 reconstruction term 1) Computational Complexity: The computational complex-
 ⎤ ity of RDSAD per input sequence is approximately O(T ·
 (D · H + H 2 )), where T is the sequence length, D is the
 ⎥
 − DKL (qφ (z t |z t−1 , ht , xt ) pθ (z t |z t−1 , ht ))⎦ feature dimension, and H is the size of the latent GRU state.
   
 KL-divergence term This complexity stems from the GRU-based modeling of latent
 dynamics (input-to-hidden and hidden-to-hidden transitions),
 − DKL (q̄t (θ) q̄t−1 (θ)) (23) along with amortized inference in the variational learning frame-
   
 adaptive regularisation term work. Since these operations are applied linearly over time,
 RDSAD’s complexity scales linearly with both sequence length
By incorporating the Bayesian adaptive regularisation with the
 and input dimensionality. Additionally, the Shift-aware Model
ELBO objective, the model can adapt to the underlying change
 Adaptation (SMA) module performs lightweight updates only
while retaining knowledge from previous observations. This
 when a significant concept drift is detected, introducing miniapproach enables efficient real-time learning and adaptation with
 mal computational overhead. These design choices ensure that
improved generalisation performance [26], [38].
 RDSAD remains efficient and scalable for real-time deployment
 Overall, RDSAD’s SMA mechanism specifically addresses
 in streaming CPS environments. This theoretical analysis aligns
the practical challenge of frequent normality shifts encountered
 with our empirical findings presented in Section VI-B.
in CPS environments. Our extensive experiments (Section VI-E)
involving varying anomaly contamination levels confirm SMA’s
effectiveness in dynamically adapting to shifts while minimiz- IV. RELATED WORK
ing performance degradation. This confirms RDSAD’s robust
 This section discusses existing anomaly-based detection
suitability for real-world CPS scenarios characterized by rapid
 methods in industrial applications that have garnered signifand frequent environmental variations.
 icant attention in recent years. Specifically, we focus on two
 distinct approaches: static-based and streaming-based detection
E. RDSAD Runtime Procedure approaches. These approaches represent different paradigms for
 RDSAD is initially trained offline with the available normal detecting malicious threats.
dataset to optimise the model parameters and set the threshold
settings. During the runtime, it actively monitors system be-
 A. Static-Based Detection
haviour for potential attack patterns. It also incrementally adapts
to incoming data streams when change is identified, adjusting its Static-based anomaly detection methods operate by performinternal structure to accommodate changes. Algorithm 3 outlines ing offline training on a batch of data and do not update their pathe overall runtime procedure of RDSAD. The algorithm begins rameters during runtime. While static-based detection methods
by initialising the necessary parameters and data structures. can operate in real time, they typically require frequent offline
Line 1 assigns the initial latent variables (z p ) using values training or model updates to adapt to changing patterns in the
from the training phase. The sliding window (W ) and the data effectively.
variable (z c ) maintaining the current latent variables are also Several static-based anomaly-based detection methods have
initialised. As new observations arrive, they are incorporated been proposed in various domains [7], [13], [14], [15]. Deep
into the sliding window. Once the window reaches its pre-set size learning-based anomaly detection, such as a deep one-class
(T ), the algorithm iterates through each timestep. Lines 13-17 classification method, named DeepSVDD [13], and Variational
depict the computation steps to construct the inference and Autoencoder (VAE) with a gating parameter β [14], have shown
emission models at the current timestep, thereby capturing the promise in capturing complex data patterns. Similarly, Zong
underlying data dynamics. Line 19 updates z c with the newly et al. [15] leverage a deep Autoencoder (AE) with Gaussian
derived latent variable (z t ), and the oldest latent variable is Mixture Model (GMM), named DAGMM, to flag anomalies
removed to maintain the window size. The likelihood score of in low-density regions of the learned normal behaviour distribuobservation xt is calculated in Line 18. RDSAD then calculates tion. However, the aforementioned methods cannot capture time
the deviation score s (Line 21). If an update is triggered by dependencies in sensor data.
the Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) (see Algorithm 2), In contrast, some recent works [16], [17] addressed some
z p is updated with z c (Line 24), and the deviation threshold is of these limitations by incorporating Long Short-Term Memrecalculated (Line 25). Line 27 updates the parameters (φ, θ) ory (LSTM) to capture temporal dependencies in sensor data,
using the Adam optimisation for an incremental model update. improving anomaly detection in sequential data. Malhotra et
RDSAD continuously assesses the current observation xt for al. [16] propose LSTM-ED, a multi-sensor anomaly detecdeviation from the normal behaviour in Line 30. Aa alarm is tion method based on LSTM. Furthermore, Park et al. [17]
raised if the deviation score st is less than or equal to the introduced LSTM-VAE, which integrates LSTM with VAE by
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1073

 Algorithm 3: RDSAD Runtime. their advancements, these static methods still face limitations, particularly their inability to handle temporal uncertainty
 effectively or proactively manage concept drift, self-poisoning,
 and catastrophic forgetting.
 Overall, the performance of static-based detection methods
 can degrade when faced with significant changes in the underlying data patterns. They often require manual intervention to
 update the model parameters, which can be time-consuming and
 not feasible in dynamic environments. This deficiency restricts
 their ability to promptly react to new or evolving threats, potentially compromising system security [23], [25], [26], [27].

 B. Streaming-Based Detection
 Unlike static-based anomaly methods, streaming-based
 anomaly detection methods enable real-time adaptation to evolving patterns in streaming data without frequent offline training [23], [25], [26]. Several popular streaming anomaly detection methods exist in the literature. Methods like STORM [21]
 and HS-Tree [22] utilise sliding window approaches for anomaly
 detection in streaming data, focusing on global distance-based
 anomalies and leveraging tree-based structures, respectively.
 Pevny et al. [24] present an ensemble-based approach called
 LODA that leverages histograms based on random projections to
 generate anomaly scores. Some works have utilised Deep Learning (DL) methods to propose online and streaming anomaly
 detection. Mirsky et al. propose KitNET [25], an online unsupervised deep learning approach that employs an ensemble of
 autoencoders for cyber-attack detection. However, these methods do not consider the time dependencies in the data streams.
 In contrast, Saurav et al. [23] develop Online-RNN-AD, a
 deep learning method for online time series anomaly detection
 that leverages Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to learn the
 temporal dependencies in the data streams. Moreover, Hartl et
 al. [42] introduced SDOstream, a streaming anomaly detection
 approach based on low-density models designed for real-time
 outlier detection. While effective in detecting anomalies in
 a streaming context, SDOstream lacks explicit mechanisms
replacing the feed-forward network in a VAE with LSTM. Nev- for handling temporal dependencies, uncertainty, and dynamic
ertheless, these methods also have their constraints, in capturing shifts.
the inherent variability and stochastic nature of sequential data Despite their advancements, these streaming-based methods
streams. In the context of sequential data modelling, incorporat- lack effective and shift-aware solutions that can proactively
ing the temporal dependencies of stochastic variables is crucial update the model when changes are detected in the underlying
for accurately representing the underlying dynamics of the input data patterns. Furthermore, they often exhibit some challenges
data streams [8], [9]. like self-poisoning and catastrophic forgetting, hindering their
 Recently, advanced static-based approaches leverage graph- ability to maintain model integrity over time and recognise
based methods, and digital-twin paradigms have emerged. Deng previously learned normal behaviours. While memory-based soet al. [39] introduced the Graph Deviation Network (GDN), lutions from online and continual learning literature like pseudoa method exploiting graph structures to effectively model fea- rehearsal methods [43] and experience replay [27] offer potential
ture relationships in multivariate time-series. Yang et al. [40] mitigation, their primary application in supervised learning sceproposed Agent-based Dynamic Thresholding (ADT), employ- narios limits their direct applicability to unsupervised intrusion
ing an adaptive dynamic thresholding approach to enhance detection in industrial CPS [26], [27].
robustness against evolving anomaly patterns. Similarly, dig- Table II provides a brief comparison between RDSAD and exitaL twin-based Anomaly deTecTion wIth Curriculum lEarn- isting static and streaming methods. In contrast to prior research,
ing (LATTICE) [41] leveraged digital-twin methodologies to RDSAD explicitly considers both the uncertainty and temporal
enhance anomaly detection in CPS environments, effectively dependencies in data streams. This allows RDSAD to capture
managing shifts through adaptive strategies. However, despite essential information from the data streams, leading to improved
1074 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE II originates from a large-scale water treatment plant replica lo-
 A COMPARISON OF EXISTING SOLUTIONS
 cated at the Singapore University of Technology and Design
 (SUTD). It was collected over 11 days, capturing the statuses
 and readings from 51 sensors and actuators. The WADI dataset
 contains measurements from 123 sensors and actuators gathered from the water distribution testing environment at SUTD
 University. Finally, the GAS dataset was collected over 36
 months from several chemical sensors installed in a gas delivery
 system. The objective is to keep track of six various types of
 gaseous substances. The first three datasets contain anomalies
 representing diverse security threats, including cyber-attacks
 designed to disrupt the availability and integrity of the testbed
 systems where the datasets originated. In the GAS dataset, the
 presence of Acetaldehyde, a harmful chemical, is considered a
 threat pattern. All datasets were labelled by domain experts, and
 TABLE III anomalies are exclusively found within the test data.
 SUMMARY OF THE DATASETS. THE ANOMALIES PERCENTAGE WITHIN THE
 TEST SAMPLES
 B. Benchmark Methods
 Several state-of-the-art methods are used as baselines to evaluate the performance of RDSAD. A selection of both static and
 streaming methods is considered to ensure a thorough comparison in the anomaly detection context. The static-based methods include: DeepSVDD [13], Beta-VAE [14], DAGMM [15],
 LSTM-ED [16], and LSTM-VAE [17], (see Section IV-A).
inference and more effective detection of deviation and changes.
 The streaming-based methods comprise: STORM [21], HS-
Furthermore, RDSAD incorporates a shift-aware update ap-
 Tree [22], Online RNN-AD [23], LODA [24], and KitNET [25],
proach, selectively updating the model when significant changes
 (see Section IV-B).
in data patterns are identified. It also employs robust update
decisions to prevent self-poisoning during the update process,
preserving the model’s integrity. Finally, RDSAD introduces an C. Implementation Settings
adaptive regularisation term that mitigates catastrophic forget- We implemented RDSAD using Python (version 3.7.14) and
ting in an unsupervised setting by constraining the parameter Pytorch (version 1.12.1). The machine on which RDSAD and
values to not change significantly from their previously learned all baseline methods are executed comes with an integrated
value. Unlike memory-based methods, RDSAD does not rely Intel Xeon, E5-1650 CPU, and 32.0 GB RAM, operating on a
on memory architectures or storage of prior data streams. By Windows 10 OS. To ensure reproducibility and fair comparison,
avoiding the need for storage of data, RDSAD reduces resource detailed implementation settings and baseline parameters are
demands and significantly mitigates potential data privacy con- available in Appendix A, available online.
cerns, making it a more effective and privacy-preserving solution.
 D. Parameters Settings
 V. EXPERIMENT DESIGN Here, we discuss the parameter settings for RDSAD. We
 empirically set the window size to T = 50 for GAS, T = 100
 Extensive experiments were carried out to compare the perfor SWaT and WADI and T = 150 for ToN_IoT, respectively.
formance of RDSAD with those of the state-of-the-art methods.
 The Temporal Embedding Network ϕ is configured with a
In what follows, we describe the datasets, benchmark methods,
 TCN model with two blocks of convolutional layers with ReLU
implementation settings, as well as the evaluation metrics used
 activation function. Each block has two temporal convolutional
in the experiments.
 layers with a kernel size of k = 3. Moreover, the inference and
 emission models are configured with two fully connected layers.
A. Datasets
 The inference model is structured with a first layer containing
 Four benchmark datasets, well-established in security re- 32 neurons and a second layer comprising 64 neurons. Consearch, are used for the experiments: TON_IoT [44], Se- versely, the emission model is constructed with 64 neurons in
cure Water Treatment (SWaT) [45], Water Distribution Dataset its first layer and 32 in the second. The GRU-flow is configured
(WADI) [46], and GAS [47]. Table III provides a summary of with 64 units. We observed that the chosen architecture of this
the characteristics of each dataset. Descriptions of each dataset. model provided sufficient capacity to achieve improved per-
The TON_IoT dataset comprises data streams collected from formance. However, incorporating additional capacity yielded
seven various IoT/IIoT services (e.g., weather and temperature) minimal benefits while simultaneously increasing model sizes
functioning on a medium-scale IoT network. The SWaT data and runtime. Furthermore, the scalar parameters αu and αr
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1075

of GRU-FLOW are set to their default values 0.4 and 0.8, VI. RESULTS
 z
 −e−z
respectively. The Tanh activation function tanh(z) = eez +e −z
 This section discusses the experimental results obtained from
is utilised in GRU-flow due to its computational efficiency. evaluating RDSAD on various aspects: overall performance,
We employ 2 -norm regularisation with a coefficient of 10−6
 scalability, robust updates, ablation study, and parameter senacross all layers as a measure to avoid model overfitting. The
 sitivity.
dimension of the z-space is empirically determined and set to
4 Section VI-G). For the deviation threshold, the value of q is
typically chosen within the range of 10−3 and 10−5 to allow A. Overall Performance
for some flexibility and accommodate potential errors in setting Table IV provides the precision, recall, F-score, and AUC
the value of q. In our experiment, we set q to (e.g., 10−4 ) for for our proposed RDSAD as well as the baseline methods
all datasets to achieve a high true positive rate (i.e., accurate applied across four public datasets: ToN_IoT, SWaT, WADI and
deviation detection) while keeping a low false positive rate (i.e., GAS. We conducted five experimental runs for each dataset
minimising incorrect detections). The low quantile is set to and reported the average and standard deviation (±) of the
0.01 for ToN_IoT, 0.05 for both SWaT and WADI and 0.07 for results. The highest-performing scores have been highlighted
GSA-Drift. For the adaptive regularisation term, We construct a in bold for easy reference. RDSAD consistently achieves the
Bayesian network over θ parameters using a fully-connected per- highest results across all the benchmark datasets. Specifically,
ceptron consisting of two layers. Each layers incorporates 100 it obtains the highest precision values of 0.7071 and 0.6157
hidden units, which employ ReLU activation functions. We use a on the ToN_IoT and GAS datasets, respectively. While GDN
Gaussian mean-field approximation over each of the parameters achieves exceptional precision of 0.9935 on SWaT, it has a lower
θ. We place a standard normal Gaussian over each parameter recall of 0.6812, indicating potential challenges in detecting all
as the initial prior (p0 (θ)). This choice reflects our initial belief anomalies in certain contexts. In contrast, RDSAD achieves an
about the parameter values before any data streams are observed. optimal balance with high precision (0.9175), recall (0.8552),
We set the parameter  for Bayesian exponential forgetting to and the highest F-score (0.8851) and AUC (0.9006). ADT
 = 0.05, as in the original paper. The coefficient λ controlling Shows balanced results across datasets, achieving an F-score
the regularisation in SMA (i.e., penalizing deviation from past of 0.6296 on ToN_IoT and 0.8043 on SWaT. On the WADI
latent encodings) was fixed at 0.1in our experiments. This value dataset, RDSAD has the second-best precision score of 0.8316
was selected based on preliminary runs using a grid search compared to LSTM-ED, which has the best precision of 0.9239.
over λ ∈ 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, where 0.1 yielded the most stable In addition, RDSAD achieves the best F-score with values of
trade-off between plasticity (i.e., adaptation to new concepts) 0.7628 and 0.8851 on the ToN_IoT and SWaT datasets, as well
and stability (i.e., memory of past normality patterns). Lastly, as 0.8474 and 0.6686 on WADI and GAS datasets, respectively.
we apply Adam optimizer for stochastic gradient descent [29], Moreover, RDSAD outperforms all baseline methods in terms
setting an initial learning rate of 10−3 to optimise the model of AUC metric with the highest values of 0.8112, 0.9006, 0.8555
parameters of both RDSAD (θ and φ) and the Bayesian network. and 0.7861 on ToN_IoT, SWaT, WADI, and GAS datasets,
 The initial average training time of our model for the ToN_IoT, respectively. These results highlight the overall effectiveness and
SWaT, WADI, and GAS datasets is approximately 52, 45, 68, robustness of RDSAD in various scenarios.
and 30 minutes, respectively, on an Intel Xeon E5-1650 CPU Even though LODA obtains the highest recall values across
with 32 GB RAM (Section V-C). Training times scale linearly the majority of datasets, it exhibits a notable low precision.
with data size, confirming computational efficiency for large Specifically, on the SWaT dataset, LODA achieves a recall
CPS deployments. score of 0.9860 but with the lowest precision at 0.1227. Similarly, it demonstrates the best recall values on ToN_IoT and
E. Evaluation Metrics WADI datasets, at 0.9840 and 0.9649, respectively, but these are
 contrasted with low corresponding precision scores of 0.3897
 The performance of RDSAD and benchmark methods is and 0.0575. This is attributed to the inherent limitation of
evaluated using precision, recall, F-score, and the Area Under the LODA, where the employed random projection fails to preserve
Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC). Preci- the accurate pairwise distances of the original space. As a
sion = (T PT+FP
 P ) represents the proportion of correctly detected result, LODA may not provide precise outlier estimation due to
anomalies among all predicted anomalies. Recall = (T PT+F P
 N) this constraint. LATTICE demonstrates moderate performance,
is the ratio of correctly detected anomalies to the total number achieving competitive F-scores (e.g., 0.7642 on WADI), but
of actual anomalies. F-score = 2 ∗ (Recall∗P recision)
 Recall+P recision calculates its imbalance between precision and recall, particularly on
the harmonic mean of precision and recall [3]. The term TP ToN_IoT and GAS datasets, reveals constraints in handling
represents the number of true-positives predictions, and FP diverse anomaly patterns. Similar insight was observed in other
refers to false-positives whereas FN denotes the number of methods. For example, KitNet has a recall of 0.9248 and 0.6520
false-negatives predictions. AUC-ROC measures the ability of with low precision of 0.2836 and 0.2795 on SWaT and GAS
the model to distinguish true anomalies from normal data at datasets, respectively. DeepSVD scores 0.8026 in a recall but
various thresholds. Higher AUC-ROC values indicate better with a precision of 0.2757 on the SWaT datasets. Similarly,
overall performance, with 1 being perfect and 0.5 representing DAGMM obtains a recall of 0.8749 with the second-lowest
random chance [3]. precision of 0.2125 On the SWaT datasets. Moreover, HS-Tree
1076 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE IV
COMPARISON OF PRECISION, RECALL, F-SCORE, AND AUC METRICS FOR RDSAD AND BASELINE METHODS ON THE BENCHMARK DATASETS, PRESENTED WITH
 ± STANDARD DEVIATION

shows similar fluctuations in precision and recall on SWaT and RDSAD exhibits a minimal disparity between precision and
GAS datasets. These findings indicate that these methods can recall, indicating its superior robustness compared to other methsuccessfully detect a significant proportion of abnormal obser- ods. It shows a balanced performance in all evaluation metrics,
vations. However, their low precision suggests that many of the highlighting its ability to effectively identify anomalies while
detected observations are incorrect, resulting in a high number simultaneously minimising false positives and false negatives.
of false positives. This limitation might stem from the failure This close alignment between the metrics signifies that our
of these methods to adapt and update their internal structures to model excels in its ability to strike a balance, thereby ensuring
capture the evolving patterns in the streaming data, leading to a robust deviation detection performance. RDSAD is designed
higher number of false positives and lower precision. with a Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) that enables it to
 In contrast, while some methods have high precision, they dynamically adapt and update its internal structures in real time,
often show relatively low recall scores. For example, LSTM-ED effectively capturing the evolving patterns in the streaming data.
demonstrates a precision value of 0.6445, yet it has a low recall of This adaptability allows it to maintain a balance between de-
0.2970 on the ToN_IoT dataset. DeepSVD and Online-RNN-AD tecting anomalies and minimising false positives. Furthermore,
have precision values of 0.5005 and 0.4900 with low recall scores RDSAD leverages a deep state-space model and incorporates a
of 0.1944 and 0.1257 on the ToN_IoT dataset. Furthermore, t-student distribution, which can effectively consider uncertainty
Beta-VAE, LSTM-VAE and LSTM-ED show good precision and capture the underlying patterns hidden within the noisy data.
values and have relatively low recall scores on the SWaT dataset.
This arises because these methods accurately identify only a
limited number of abnormal observations. However, they fail to B. Scalability
detect most abnormal instances, leading to a low recall rate. This This section presents the scalability of RDSAD and various
reduced performance may be attributed to the inability of these streaming methods in terms of runtime performance across varymethods to accurately identify certain anomalies and their lack ing sample sizes and dimensions. To conduct these experiments,
of handling uncertainties inherent in the data streams, which the DataStream module was utilised in scikit-multiflow [48] to
further contribute to the lower recall rate. Finally, SDOstream generate synthetic datasets. The sample size experiments were
achieves an F-score of 0.5107 on ToN_IoT and 0.7289 on conducted on four synthetic datasets, each consisting of 100
SWaT, indicating reasonable detection capabilities, particularly dimensions and varying sample sizes of 1000, 5000, 25000, and
in streaming data contexts. However, RDSAD consistently out- 125000. Similarly, the scale-up experiments were performed on
performs SDOstream and other streaming methods, highlighting four synthetic datasets with a fixed sample size of 500, while the
RDSAD’s ability to handle real-time adaptive scenarios robustly. dimensions varied in a range of 1000, 5000, 25000, and 125000.
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1077

 TABLE V
 TRAINING TIME AND ESTIMATED MEMORY USAGE ON SWAT DATASET

Fig. 4. Runtime in relation to: (a) various sample sizes and (b) a different
number of dimensions.

 Fig. 4 illustrates the runtime associated with the sample
and dimension experiments. The overall results illustrate that
RDSAD consistently demonstrates linear and proportional increases in runtime in relation to both sample size and dimension. Regarding sample size experiments, RDSAD demonstrates
superior runtime efficiency across various sample sizes compared to other streaming methods, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a).
Online-RNN-AD exhibits the second-best runtime performance. Fig. 5. Retraining effect on RDSAD’s performance.
HS-Tree and KitNet exhibit moderate runtime performances,
with SDOstream closely following LODA due to their similar
underlying approach. STORM experiences the worst runtime
due to the computational burden of processing larger sample methods to represent a diversity of architectural approaches, insizes. The increased number of data points necessitates exten- cluding graph neural networks (GDN), reinforcement learningsive distance calculations and detection operations, leading to a based models (ADT), online learning (KitNET, SDOstream),
notable increase in computational time. For the scale-up exper- and hybrid deep generative models (DAGMM, LSTM-VAE).
iments, the runtime performance of RDSAD and the streaming We measure the average training time (in seconds) and esmethods is depicted in Fig. 4(b). Notably, all methods, except timate memory usage (in megabytes) using PyTorch’s built-in
for LODA, demonstrate competitive runtimes between 1000 and memory profiler, evaluated on the SWaT dataset.
25000. This enhanced efficiency can be attributed to integrating As shown in Table V, RDSAD achieves competitive training
dimensionality reduction within these methods, contributing time (45 s) with moderate memory requirements (750 MB),
to faster runtime execution. Both STROM and RDSAD have outperforming many deep learning-based approaches (e.g.,
a slight increase in runtime as the dimensions extend from DAGMM and LSTM-VAE) while maintaining higher detection
25000 to 125000, while the remaining methods demonstrate performance. Unlike methods that rely on large encoder-decoder
consistent and stable performance. In contrast, LODA has the architectures, RDSAD uses a compact generative model with
worst runtime among the other methods. As the dimensions of adaptive update mechanisms that minimize retraining and rethe data increase, LODA’s computational complexity escalates duce memory pressure. While streaming baselines (KitNET,
due to the generation of random projections and the computation SDOstream) are faster and they have lower memory usage, this is
of density estimation histograms for each projection, resulting justified by RDSAD’s advanced features (e.g., uncertainty modin higher computational costs. eling, concept drift adaptation) that offer an effective balance
 Our empirical scalability evaluations (Fig. 4) clearly indicate between runtime efficiency and detection robustness.
the feasibility and practicality of deploying RDSAD in realworld industrial CPS scenarios involving varying data com- D. The Effect of Robust Update Decision
plexities and sizes. Specifically, RDSAD demonstrated linear
 This section discusses the influence of the proposed robust
computational complexity, ensuring practical scalability with
 update decision on the overall accuracy of RDSAD using SWaT
larger datasets and higher dimensional data streams.
 and WADI datasets, as they are widely used in security research.
 Three update scenarios are considered: (1) without any update,
C. Computational Cost Analysis (2) with a regular update, and (3) with a proposed robust update
 In addition to detection accuracy, the practical deployment decision. The objective is to evaluate how these update methods
of anomaly detection models in cyber-physical systems (CPSs) affect the overall performance of RDSAD. Fig. 5 presents the
requires efficiency in terms of training time and memory usage. results for both datasets. The robust update decision consistently
This section provides a comparative analysis of the computa- surpasses the performance of the other two scenarios. This can
tional cost of RDSAD against a subset of representative static be attributed to its ability to selectively decline updates during
and streaming baseline methods. Particularity, we selected six potential anomalies, preventing their negative influence on the
1078 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 6. AUC performance under varying contamination and noise levels on
SWaT dataset.
 Fig. 7. Impact of various components of RDSAD.

model and mitigating self-poisoning. Thus, it plays an indispensable role in countering the effects of anomalies, enhancing instead of student-t distribution. This evaluation allows for a
RDSAD’s overall performance significantly. comprehensive understanding of the individual contributions of
 these components to the performance of RDSAD.
E. Robustness Under Extreme Conditions Fig. 7 depicts the comparative performance of RDSAD and
 To evaluate the robustness of RDSAD under extreme scenar- its variants. The integration of each component into RDSAD
ios, we conducted two additional experiments: (I) contamination significantly enhances the overall performance. In particular,
with anomaly samples and (II) additive Gaussian noise injection, RDSAD is slightly better than RDSAD-v1, which is based on
as depicted in Fig. 6. RNNs. Compared to a regular RNN, RDSAD leverages TCN
 1) Anomaly Contamination: We injected varying levels of that utilises dilated convolutions, allowing for a larger receptive
abnormal data into the training set of the SWaT dataset at field and capturing information from a broader temporal context.
contamination rates of 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20%. As il- This enables TCNs to model complex temporal relationships and
lustrated in Fig. 6(a), RDSAD maintains a high AUC and dependencies more effectively than regular RNNs. Moreover,
shows minimal performance degradation compared to other RDSAD outperforms RDSAD-v2 because a basic GRU cannot
streaming methods. Methods like STORM and LODA degrade capture the continuous evolution dynamics of latent states within
rapidly (AUC drops to 0.59 and 0.40, respectively). RDSAD’s evolving data streams. Furthermore, RDSAD exhibits superior
Shift-aware Model Adaptation (SMA) mitigates self-poisoning performance compared to RDSAD-v3, which lacks an adaptive
by selectively updating the model only during confirmed nor- regularisation term. The absence of this term in RDSAD-v3
mality shifts, preserving detection accuracy. This highlights its leads to catastrophic forgetting, losing past knowledge during
robustness in self-supervised settings where perfect separation updates. This highlights the importance of the adaptive term
between normal and abnormal data may not be feasible. in RDSAD, as it preserves knowledge and contributes to its
 2) Gaussian Noise Injection. We injected additive Gaussian improved performance. Finally, RDSAD achieves better results
noise into SWaT sensor readings as it is very common in sensor than RDSAD-v4 with Normal distribution. This suggests that inmeasurements, using zero-mean noise with varying standard de- troducing a heavy-tailed distribution can enhance the robustness
viation σ ∈ [0.0, 0.05]. Fig. 6(b) shows that RDSAD maintains of the overall performance.
stable performance (AUC = 0.8782 at σ = 0.05), degrading
by only 2.5% from baseline. This robustness of RDSAD is G. Parameter Sensitivity
attributed to its probabilistic modeling and dynamic adaptation This section investigates the performance of RDSAD with
features. Nonetheless, KitNet and SDOstream suffer significant respect to variations in the dimension of latent z-space, window
drops (AUC declines by 5–7%) due to their reliance on static length, and shift factor. The goal is to examine how these
feature assumptions. parameters impact the effectiveness of RDSAD on the selected
 datasets. The F-score of RDSAD is examined while varying the
F. Ablation Study
 latent z-space dimension within a range of {2, 32}, as depicted in
 To assess the impact of the main components of RDSAD on its Fig. 8(a). It is observed that the results consistently demonstrate
overall performance, an ablation study was conducted by remov- that the highest F-score is achieved when the dimension of z is
ing one component at a time. This resulted in the creation of four set to 4 for all datasets, and the performance stabilises beyond
distinct variants of RDSAD, namely: RDSAD-v1, RDSAD-v2, this dimension. Consequently, a dimension of 4 is selected for
RDSAD-v3 and RDSAD-v4. In the first variant, RDSAD-v1, the z-space representation. To evaluate the influence of winthe TCN component was omitted and replaced with a regular dow length, we conducted experiments using different window
RNN. The second variant, RDSAD-v2, replaces the GRU-flow lengths, specifically T = [50, 100, 150, 200, 250]. Fig. 8(b) ilwith a basic GRU. In RDSAD-v3, the regularisation term in lustrates the results corresponding to these five different window
(23) was removed from the configuration of RDSAD. Lastly, lengths. RDSAD demonstrates a good performance with a winin RDSAD-v4, a Normal distribution is employed as emission dow length of T = 100 for both the SWaT and WADI datasets.
ALSAEDI et al.: RDSAD: ROBUST THREAT DETECTION IN EVOLVING DATA STREAMS VIA ADAPTIVE LATENT DYNAMICS 1079

 be effectively modeled in the latent space. In highly stochastic or weakly structured systems, this assumption may not
 hold. Furthermore, we recognise potential challenges associated
 with directly deploying deep-learning-based methods such as
 RDSAD on low-power edge devices commonly used in CPS
 deployments. To practically address this challenge, future research directions could include lightweight model design and
 compression methods (e.g., pruning, quantization, or knowledge distillation) to streamline RDSAD for resource-constrained
 environments. Furthermore, while RDSAD’s SMA mechanism
 effectively mitigates self-poisoning and catastrophic forgetting
 under standard anomaly scenarios, it currently lacks protection
 against adversarial attacks. In particular, adversaries may craft
 subtle input perturbations to manipulate deviation scores or
 trigger misleading shift detections, resulting in false negatives
 or unnecessary model updates. Addressing this vulnerability
 is a critical direction for future work. We plan to investigate
 robust adversarial training strategies tailored for unsupervised
 streaming contexts, including resilience to gradient-based at-
Fig. 8. Parameter sensitivity of RDSAD. tacks (e.g., FGSM, PGD) and consistency enforcement in latent
 space representations. Additionally, we plan to investigate more
 realistic mechanisms for simulating normality shifts, such as
Similarly, it achieves satisfactory results with a window length synthetically inducing gradual changes in the statistical properof T = 150 for the ToN_IoT dataset and T = 50 for the GAS ties of normal data (e.g., mean or variance drift) or introducing
dataset. Overall, the fine-tuning of the window length aligns controlled latent space perturbations that mimic domain evoluwith the specific monitoring requirements of the user and the tion over time. To support reproducibility and future research,
application. Lastly, we studied the sensitivity of the shift factor we intend to publicly release the implementation of RDSAD,
κ, experimenting with various values ranging from very small to along with the evaluation scripts, upon publication. Finally,
larger, as shown in Fig. 8(c). A small shift factor is undesirable, as we aim to evaluate RDSAD on additional CPS domains such
it corresponds to a low number of required instances that must be as power grids and autonomous systems to further assess its
observed before declaring a change, making the model prone to generalizability.
detecting changes even with insignificant variations. Conversely,
the results demonstrate stable and effective performance as the
shift factor κ grows to moderate and large values, representing REFERENCES
a higher number of required instances. These values ensure
 [1] H. Kayan, M. Nunes, O. Rana, P. Burnap, and C. Perera, “Cybersecurity of
that significant changes are detected with greater confidence industrial cyber-physical systems: A review,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54,
while avoiding excessive false positives triggered by transient no. 11s, pp. 1–35, 2022.
or insignificant variations. [2] J. Giraldo et al., “A survey of physics-based attack detection in cyberphysical systems,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 51, no. 4, 2018, Art. no. 76.
 [3] A. Alsaedi, Z. Tari, R. Mahmud, N. Moustafa, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
 “USMD: UnSupervised misbehaviour detection for multi-sensor data,”
 VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 724–739,
 Jan./Feb. 2023.
 This paper has introduced RDSAD, an unsupervised, ro- [4] D. U. Case, “Analysis of the cyber attack on the ukrainian power grid,”
bust, and adaptive anomaly-based intrusion detection method Electricity Inf. Sharing Anal. Center, vol. 388, no. 1–29, 2016, Art. no. 3.
 [5] The Florida water plant attack signals a new era of digital
for evolving complex CPS data streams. RDSAD integrates warfare. Accessed: Apr. 20, 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
two innovative components: Dynamic Deviation Recognition //www.darktrace.com/en/blog/the-florida-water-plant-attack-signals-
(DDR) for seamlessly capturing underlying system dynamics a-new-era-of-digital-warfare-its-time-to-fight-back/
 [6] M. Ike, K. Phan, K. Sadoski, R. Valme, and W. Lee, “SCAPHY: Detecting
and detecting attack patterns, and Shift-aware Model Adapta- modern ICS attacks by correlating behaviors in SCADA and physical,” in
tion for robust and adaptive model updates to accommodate Proc. 2023 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2023, pp. 20–37.
changing system behaviours. Our experimental results across [7] Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Cheng, G. Peng, and D. Yao, “Deep learning-based
 anomaly detection in cyber-physical systems: Progress and opportunities,”
four benchmark datasets demonstrated that RDSAD achieves ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1–36, 2021.
superior performance and an efficient runtime than state-of- [8] M. Fraccaro, S. K. Sønderby, U. Paquet, and O. Winther, “Sequential
the-art methods. This performance across various datasets il- neural models with stochastic layers,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 2207–2215.
lustrates the versatility and robustness of RDSAD, marking [9] J. Chung, K. Kastner, L. Dinh, K. Goel, A. C. Courville, and Y. Bengio,
it as a promising solution for various dynamic applications. “A recurrent latent variable model for sequential data,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Nevertheless, we acknowledge that there is room for further Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 2980–2988.
 [10] Y. Song, J. Lu, H. Lu, and G. Zhang, “Learning data streams with changing
improvement. RDSAD’s performance depends on the assump- distributions and temporal dependency,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
tion that the underlying distribution of normal behavior can Syst., vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 3952–3965, Aug. 2023.
1080 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[11] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under [38] R. Kurle, B. Cseke, A. Klushyn, P. Van Der Smagt, and S. Günnemann,
 concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12, “Continual learning with Bayesian neural networks for non-stationary
 pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019. data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 1–13.
[12] D. Han et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Normality shift [39] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
 detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in Proc. 30th Annu. Netw. Distrib. multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 4027–
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–13. 4035.
[13] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [40] X. Yang, E. Howley, and M. Schukat, “ADT: Time series anomaly detec-
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402. tion for cyber-physical systems via deep reinforcement learning,” Comput.
[14] I. Higgins et al., “beta-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a con- Secur., vol. 141, 2024, Art. no. 103825.
 strained variational framework,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representa- [41] Q. Xu, S. Ali, and T. Yue, “Digital twin-based anomaly detection with
 tions, 2017, pp. 1–12. curriculum learning in cyber-physical systems,” ACM Trans. Softw. Eng.
[15] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsu- Methodol., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1–32, 2023.
 pervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, [42] A. Hartl, F. Iglesias, and T. Zseby, “SDOstream: Low-density models
 2018, pp. 1–19. for streaming outlier detection,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Artif. Neural Netw.
[16] P. Malhotra et al., “LSTM-based encoder-decoder for multi-sensor Comput. Intell. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 661–666.
 anomaly detection,” 2016 arXiv:1607.00148. [43] F. Zenke, B. Poole, and S. Ganguli, “Continual learning through synaptic
[17] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector intelligence,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2017, pp. 3987–3995.
 for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” [44] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar, “TON_IoT
 IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of IoT and IIoT for data-driven
[18] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detection intrusion detection systems,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 165130–165150,
 in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. 2020.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017, pp. 1067–1075. [45] J. Goh, S. Adepu, K. N. Junejo, and A. Mathur, “A dataset to support
[19] M. Du, Z. Chen, C. Liu, R. Oak, and D. Song, “Lifelong anomaly detection research in the design of secure water treatment systems,” in Proc. Int.
 through unlearning,” in Proc. 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Conf. Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur., Springer, 2016, pp. 88–99.
 Secur., 2019, pp. 1283–1297. [46] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “WADI: A water distribution
[20] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,”
 in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988. in Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
[21] F. Angiulli and F. Fassetti, “Detecting distance-based outliers in streams of pp. 25–28.
 data,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2007, pp. 811–820. [47] A. Vergara, S. Vembu, T. Ayhan, M. A. Ryan, M. L. Homer, and R. Huerta,
[22] S. C. Tan, K. M. Ting, and T. F. Liu, “Fast anomaly detection for streaming “Chemical gas sensor drift compensation using classifier ensembles,”
 data,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2011, pp. 1511–1516. Sensors Actuators B: Chem., vol. 166, pp. 320–329, 2012.
[23] S. Saurav et al., “Online anomaly detection with concept drift adaptation [48] Scikit multiflow, “A machine learning package for streaming data in
 using recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. ACM India Joint Int. Conf. Data Python,” Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://scikit-multiflow.github.
 Sci. Manage. Data, 2018, pp. 78–87. io/
[24] T. Pevnỳ, “Loda: Lightweight on-line detector of anomalies,” Mach.
 Learn., vol. 102, pp. 275–304, 2016.
[25] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Abdullah Alsaedi received the PhD degree from
 Symp. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15. RMIT University, Melbourne, in 2024, with a spe-
[26] M. Delange et al., “A continual learning survey: Defying forgetting in cialization in cybersecurity, focusing on network sysclassification tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 7, tems. He is an assistant professor with the College
 pp. 3366–3385, Jul. 2022. of Computer Science and Engineering, Taibah Uni-
[27] F. Barbero, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Transcending versity, Saudi Arabia. His research interests include
 TRANSCEND: Revisiting malware classification in the presence of con- cyber-physical systems (CPSs) cybersecurity, artificept drift,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 805–823. cial intelligence, machine learning, and network se-
[28] L. Li, J. Yan, Q. Wen, Y. Jin, and X. Yang, “Learning robust deep state curity.
 space for unsupervised anomaly detection in contaminated time-series,”
 IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 6058–6072, Jun. 2023.
[29] M. D. Hoffman, D. M. Blei, C. Wang, and J. Paisley, “Stochastic variational
 inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 1303–1347, 2013.
[30] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in Proc. Zahir Tari is a full professor with Distributed Sys-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2014, pp. 1–14. tems, RMIT University (Australia) and the research
[31] M. Biloš, J. Sommer, S. S. Rangapuram, T. Januschowski, and S. Günne- director with the RMIT Cyber Security Centre (CCmann, “Neural Flows: Efficient alternative to neural ODEs,” in Proc. Int. SRI). His main expertise is in the areas of system’s
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 21325–21337. performance (e.g., P2P, cloud, edge, IoT) as well as
[32] L. Tao, L. Feng, J. Yi, S.-J. Huang, and S. Chen, “Better safe than sorry: system’s security (e.g., SCADA, smart grid, cloud,
 Preventing delusive adversaries with adversarial training,” in Proc. Int. IoT). He is an associated editor of the ACM Com-
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 16209–16225. puting Surveys and was an associate editor of the
[33] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic con- IEEE Transactions on Computers (TC) and IEEE
 volutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, arXiv: Transactions on Parallel.
 1803.01271.
[34] A. Soule, K. Salamatian, and N. Taft, “Combining filtering and statistical
 methods for anomaly detection,” in Proc. 5th ACM SIGCOMM Conf.
 Internet Meas., 2005, pp. 31–31.
[35] D. Sejdinovic, B. Sriperumbudur, A. Gretton, and K. Fukumizu, “Equiva- Redowan Mahmud received the PhD degree from
 lence of distance-based and RKHS-based statistics in hypothesis testing,” the School of Computing and Information Systems,
 Ann. Statist., vol. 41, pp. 2263–2291, 2013. University of Melbourne (Australia), in 2020. He is
[36] A. Alsaedi, N. Sohrabi, R. Mahmud, and Z. Tari, “RADAR: Reactive currently working as a lecturer (computing discipline)
 concept drift management with robust variational inference for evolving with the School of Electrical Engineering, Computing
 IoT data streams,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1995– and Mathematical Sciences, Curtin University. His
 2007. research interests include Internet of Things, fog and
[37] T. Broderick, N. Boyd, A. Wibisono, A. C. Wilson, and M. I. Jordan, edge computing.
 “Streaming variational Bayes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., 2013, pp. 1727–1735.