872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

REAPER: Real-Time Detection of Malicious Traffic
 via Deep Time-Series Embedding Analysis
 Dan Tang , Boru Liu , Zheng Qin , Associate Member, IEEE, Wei Liang , Keqin Li , Fellow, IEEE,
 and Wenqiang Jin , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Existing malicious traffic detection methods face analyzing data. They can effectively identify complex patterns
challenges in achieving real-time detection in high-bandwidth existing in network flows, enabling the accurate identification
networks, suffer from information loss due to conventional of malicious patterns [4], [5], [6]. However, the majority of
discrete statistical feature extraction, and remain vulnerable to
evasion by short-flow-based malicious traffic resembling benign ML-based detection systems in current research, e.g., [7] and
behavior. To this end, we present REAPER, a high-performance [8], utilize existing labeled datasets for supervised learning,
system for real-time detection of malicious traffic at the network limiting their ability to detect only known attacks. In contrast,
flow level, built on Intel DPDK. REAPER leverages an IP-trie to only a few detection approaches, e.g., [9], [10], and [11], use
dynamically aggregate short flows in real time, exposing hidden ML-based outlier analysis in unsupervised manners. While
sending patterns of malicious traffic. It leverages a deep timeseries embedding analysis (DTEA) method, which uses the RNN these approaches have the potential to detect zero-day attacks,
algorithm to directly convert network flow data into embed- they still employ traditional statistical feature extraction that
dings, followed by outlier analysis on the embeddings using an exhibits significant information loss, thereby reducing their
unsupervised variational autoencoder (VAE) algorithm, capable effectiveness in distinguishing among numerous network flows
of detecting zero-day attacks. Experiments show REAPER out- [12].
performs the baseline, especially for encrypted malware traffic,
achieves an average AUC of 0.9429 and EER of 0.0348 under Furthermore, traditional detection systems [13], [14] utievolving cyber attack patterns, and supports up to 5 Gbps traffic lizing end-to-end solutions cannot detect ongoing line-speed
throughput, with scalability to higher rates. traffic in real time, especially within high-bandwidth networks,
 Index Terms—Deep learning, deep time-series embedding anal- e.g., within backbone networks. Aiming for real-time detection
ysis, malicious traffic detection, variational autoencoder. requirements [15], programmable data plane (PDP) as a novel
 networking paradigm, provides in-network solutions for real-
 I. I NTRODUCTION time malicious traffic detection. Concretely, these solutions
 are mainly developed by Programming Protocol-Independent
T RADITIONAL malicious traffic detection solutions (e.g.,
 signature identification [1], [2], [3], etc.), leverage configured prior rules to perform feature analysis on the network
 Packet Processors (P4) [16] or Intel data plane development
 kit (Intel DPDK).
 P4-based in-network solutions [17], [18] are deployed on the
traffic. However, prior rules-based solutions are not extensible
 network devices integrating the P4 target hardware, e.g., Tofino
and robust. They rely on manual feature engineering to update
 ASIC and SmartNIC, etc. However, due to the limitations
prior rules (signature libraries, etc.) and cannot detect zero-day
 of both P4 primitives and hardware resources [19], [20],
attacks.
 P4 cannot highly support developing sophisticated ML-based
 Since Machine Learning (ML) methods, especially Deep
 general detection systems against malicious traffic, even if
learning (DL), possess powerful capabilities in modeling and
 there are studies about the P4-based in-network ML infer-
 Received 25 June 2024; revised 5 February 2025 and 18 August 2025; ence [21], [22]. In practice, P4 is mainly oriented toward
accepted 14 September 2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ET- developing lightweight systems that address specific tasks, like
WORKING Editor Y. Liu. Date of publication 3 October 2025; date of current
version 2 January 2026. This work was supported in part by the National DDoS attack detection [23], [24], and DNS security defense
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62472153 and in part [25]. Besides, P4 target hardware can be the accelerator for
by Hunan Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant sampling fine-grained traffic statistics [26].
2025JJ50350. (Corresponding author: Wenqiang Jin.)
 Dan Tang, Zheng Qin, and Wenqiang Jin are with the College of Cyber Subsequently, Intel DPDK-based in-network solutions [27]
Science and Technology, Hunan University (HNU), Changsha 410082, China are deployed on x86-based platforms powered by CPUs,
(e-mail: Dtang@hnu.edu.cn; zqin@hnu.edu.cn; wqjin@hnu.edu.cn).
 Boru Liu is with the College of Computer Science and Electronic Engie.g., software-defined middleboxes. Intel DPDK utilizes the
neering (CSEE), Hunan University (HNU), Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: userspace I/O (UIO) kernel module to bind NIC ports to
liuboru@hnu.edu.cn). the poll mode driver (PMD) running in userspace, thereby
 Wei Liang is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan masking kernel interrupts triggered by arrival packets. Addi-
University of Science and Technology (HNUST), Xiangtan 411199, China
(e-mail: wliang@hnust.edu.cn). tionally, Intel DPDK employs hugepages as memory pools to
 Keqin Li is with the Department of Computer Science, The State University cache large volumes of arrival packets, reducing the overhead
of New York, New Paltz, NY 12561 USA, and also with Hunan University,
Changsha 410082, China (e-mail: lik@newpaltz.edu).
 associated with memory page switching during packet access.
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3610853 Developers can leverage the Intel DPDK API, wrapped as a
 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 873

C library, to mirror arrival packets from the memory pool beyond traditional cyber attack traffic datasets and collect 14
and process them efficiently. Therefore, Intel DPDK exhibits sets of encrypted malware traffic, including ransomware and
the capacity to provide in-network solutions for achieving adware traffic. Additionally, we mix various cyber attack traffic
real-time malicious traffic detection driven by ML. However, datasets to examine REAPER’s ability to adapt to evolving
existing Intel DPDK-based in-network solutions [12] only cyber attack patterns. The experimental results indicate that
detect individual network flows by extracting statistical fea- REAPER outperforms the baselines, particularly in detecting
tures, which can be evade by the disguised malicious traffic. encrypted malware traffic. Moreover, REAPER maintains an
 To this end, we propose REAPER, a real-time, robust mali- average AUC of 0.9429 and an average EER of 0.0348, even
cious traffic detection system prototyped with Intel DPDK. It when faced with evolving cyber attack patterns.
uses network flows as detection units and adopts DL-based Furthermore, we measure REAPER’s throughput on our
methods to robustly identify malicious traffic. testbed using 3 different traffic loads. The throughput for
 Real-time Collection for Network Flow Data. We enable parsing packets and updating the flow table reaches up to
the UIO for NIC ports so that REAPER can online extract 9.5 Gbps. The throughput for dynamically aggregating short
per-packet features from the packets mirrored from NIC ports. flows reaches 4.5 Gbps, while the throughput for performing
We use a flow table to assemble the per-packet features into network flow detection reaches 5 Gbps. Besides, the system’s
network flow data. Specifically, each table entry is indexed runtime memory footprint is 4.1 GB.
by a network flow and stores a record containing both bidi- Overall, our paper has five main contributions:
rectional and unidirectional data for the network flow. When • We propose REAPER, a real-time, robust malicious
a network flow is completed, we evict it from the flow table traffic detection system that leverages deep learning (DL)-
while collecting the corresponding network flow record. based methods to identify malicious traffic in units of
 Dynamic Aggregation for Short Flows. We analyzes network flows.
the composition of backbone network traffic and observes • We develop the IP-Trie to perform dynamic aggregation
that short flows contain significantly limited information. on short flows and propose efficient algorithms for main-
When performing detection on individual network flows, short taining the IP-Trie in real-time.
flows lack sufficient distinguishability, which can lead to the • We propose the deep time-series embedding analysis
confusion of malicious short flows with benign ones. This (DTEA) method for robustly analyze network flow data.
enables malicious traffic, such as encrypted malware traffic, to • We utilize Intel DPDK to prototype REAPER, capable of
evade detection by manipulating large botnets to send volumes handling high-bandwidth traffic.
of short flows. To address this challenge, we dynamically • We evaluate the detection performance of REAPER on
aggregate short flows, amplifying the analytical granularity to 20 groups of different malicious traffic datasets, and also
robustly identify the sending patterns associated with mali- measure its throughput and runtime overhead.
cious traffic. Specifically, we have developed an IP prefix The remaining content is organized as follows: Sectree (IP-Trie) for REAPER to dynamically aggregate short tion II recommends the threat model and design goals of
flows into aggregated flows based on their IP prefixes, and we REAPER. Section III demonstrates the top-level design of
propose efficient algorithms for runtime IP-Trie maintenance. REAPER. Section IV expands the design details of REAPER.
 Deep Time-series Embedding Analysis. We propose the Section V presents the implementation of REAPER and all
Deep Time-series Embedding Analysis (DTEA) method for conducted experiments. Additionally, Section VI reviews the
REAPER. Unlike traditional discrete statistical feature extrac- related work, Section VII presents the limitation and discustion, the DTEA method directly converts time-series-shaped sion of REAPER, as well as Section VIII summarizes this
network flow data into the continuous embeddings using the paper.
RNN algorithm, thereby preserving comprehensive information from the original data. Additionally, the DTEA method
 II. T HREAT M ODELING AND D ESIGN G OALS
uses an unsupervised variational autoencoder (VAE) algorithm
to perform outlier analysis on the embeddings to identify A. Threat Modeling
malicious network flows. The VAE overcomes two key limita- First, we implement REAPER as a plug-and-play virtutions exhibited by traditional autoencoders (AE) [28], [29]: (I) alization function module on a software-defined middlebox.
Deterministic modeling of the latent space lacks generalization REAPER is isolated from basic functions such as routing.
ability. (II) The deterministic latent representation must be Therefore, it does not interfere with ongoing traffic.
decoded during outlier analysis, which introduces additional Second, we highlight that REAPER has no prior knowledge
computational overhead in real-time detection. In contrast, the about any attacks, its knowledge is derived only from the real-
VAE algorithm encodes data into an uncertain latent repre- world traffic, which is recognized as benign. As a result, it can
sentation, and its uncertainty can directly indicate whether the detect zero-day attacks with unknown patterns.
data is an outlier, without the need for decoding. Third, for resource exhaustion attacks, its traffic consists
 Evaluation. We conduct comprehensive experiments to of extensive short flows, which can easily be confused with
thoroughly evaluate REAPER. benign traffic. These short flows are exploited to request the
 We gather a total of 20 distinct malicious traffic datasets to resources of victim servers until they are exhausted. However,
assess the detection performance of REAPER. To further eval- REAPER can dynamically aggregate short flows, effectively
uate the robustness of REAPER’s detection capabilities, we go countering resource exhaustion attacks.
874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 1. The Overview of REAPER.

 TABLE I evade detection, e.g., low-rate port flooding [31] and botnet
 L IST OF ACRONYMS manipulation. Additionally, to analyze the network flow data,
 REAPER departs from the traditional approach of extracting
 discrete statistical features. Instead, it employs the DTEA
 method to directly transform the network flow data into
 continuous embeddings, preserving the original information of
 the network flows. Besides, the DTEA method leverages the
 VAE algorithm to perform outlier analysis on the embeddings,
 enabling malicious traffic detection in an unsupervised manner.
 Fig. 1 illustrates the top-level design of REAPER, which
 Furthermore, REAPER is oriented toward detecting malicomprises four key modules: 1) Parser, 2) Assembler, 3)
cious traffic but does not take specific mitigation strategies.
 Aggregator, and 4) Detector.
To further enhance its capabilities, we can integrate existing
 Parser. This module monitors the RX queues of NIC
solutions for mitigating malicious traffic [30], to further disports, mirroring the arrival packets and extracting their percard identified malicious traffic or limit its rate.
 packet features, including the header information (e.g., IP, port,
 protocol, length, flags, etc.), and the NIC port metadata (e.g.,
B. Design Goals arrival timestamp, etc.). The extracted per-packet features are
 Robust Detection. The malicious traffic detection system orderly stored in a ring queue. The ring queue design will be
we developed should have high accuracy to identify malicious discussed in Section IV-A.
traffic and strong generalization ability to adapt evolving cyber Assembler. This module retrieves the per-packet features
attack patterns, and the system should possess capacity to from the ring queue. It maintains a flow table that assembles
counter covert malicious traffic. the per-packet features into network flow records based on
 Real-time & High Throughput. The system needs to be the flow ID, i.e., the five-tuple hash key: <{[SrcIP, SrcPort],
deployed in high-bandwidth network scenarios in real-time and [DstIP, DstPort]}symmetric , protocol>, where [SrcIP, SrcPort]
requires high processing throughput. and [DstIP, DstPort] are symmetric hash key elements. Each
 table entry maps to a network flow record that caches both
 III. OVERVIEW OF R EAPER bidirectional and unidirectional flow data for corresponding
 Table I lists the main acronyms in this paper. In this network flow. Once the data of a network flow is fully
section, we present the design overview of REAPER, a sys- collected, its record will be enqueued into the short/long-flow
tem designed to detect malicious traffic at the granularity queue. The details of the flow table design and network flow
of network flows. Based on insights into network traffic classification will be presented in Section IV-B.
composition, REAPER adopts distinct strategies for handling Aggregator. This module dequeues short flow records from
long and short flows. In particular, REAPER dynamically the short-flow queue and inserts the unidirectional flow data
aggregates short flows based on IP prefixes, thereby amplifying from the records into the leaf nodes of an IP prefix tree (IPthe analytical granularity to aggregated flows at the network Trie), based on the SrcIP of unidirectional flows. The inserted
segment level. This approach improves its capability to detect flow data is incorporated into the aggregated flow record at
malicious network flows that use camouflage techniques to the leaf nodes. When the aggregation process is enabled, the
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 875

 TABLE II abstracts a packet into the following key information: 1)
 L IST OF S YMBOLS U SED IN D ESIGN D ETAIL Src/DstIP, Src/DstPort, and protocol, which associate a packet
 with a network flow; 2) flags from the protocol header, such as
 the SYN and ACK flags in the TCP header, whose sequence
 can represent the communication pattern of a network flow; 3)
 packet length, whose sequence can reflect traffic volume of a
 network flow; and 4) packet arrival timestamp, which is used
 to compute arrival intervals. The sequence of arrival interval
 can be used to analyze the periodicity within a network flow.
 Ring Queue. We utilize a ring queue to store extracted perpacket features. Concretely, we allocate an array memory of
 size RQ SIZE for the ring queue, referred to as ArrMem. We
 use sloti to indicate ith slot of ArrMem. Each slot holds a
 single per-packet feature. Besides, we adopt pointer variables,
 namely ptrbegin and ptrend , to index the slots for enqueuing
 and dequeuing operations, respectively. Since ArrMem is
 structured as a ring, both ptrbegin and ptrend are taken modulo
 RQ SIZE after each enqueuing or dequeuing operation.
 Concretely, we perform enqueuing operation immediately
 after each per-packet feature is extracted. Therefore, this
 operation only need to enqueue the newest per-packet feature
 in the slotptrend and update ptrend with:
 ptrend = (ptrend + 1) mod RQ SIZE (1)
 Besides, we dequeues FETCH NUM number of per-packet
 features each time in the following Assembler. We consider the
 situation when the dequeuing operation is across the boundary
 of the first and last slots, that is:
module iteratively merges sibling leaf nodes whose aggregated
 ptrend < ptrbegin , ptrbegin + FETCH NUM > RQ SIZE
flow record length is below a specified threshold. The cached
 (2)
aggregated flow record of these nodes is then combined and
stored in their parent node. The aggregation process terminates
once the height of the current IP-Trie reaches the minimum Under this situation, we take dequeuing operation on a set of
value. Finally, the aggregated flow records of the leaf nodes slots, i.e., {sloti | i ∈ I0 }, where I0 is:
are saved into the aggregated-flow queue. Details of the
aggregation process will be discussed in Section IV-C. I0 = {i | [ptrbegin , RQ SIZE)
 Detector. This module fetch long flow records from ∪ [0, FETCH NUM − ptrbegin )} (3)
the long-flow queue and aggregated flow records from the
aggregated-flow queue. It preprocesses the network flow data Without this situation, we directly dequeue another set of slots,
from these records through the following steps: 1) converting i.e., {sloti | i ∈ I1 }, where I1 is:
arrival timestamps into arrival intervals, 2) normalizing the I1 = {i | [ptrbegin , ptrbegin + FETCH NUM)} (4)
data, and 3) applying a sliding window technique. Subsequently, this module employs the DTEA method, which first Additionally, we update the ptrbegin with:
transforms the preprocessed network flow data into embed- ptrbegin = (ptrbegin + FETCH NUM) mod RQ SIZE (5)
dings and then inputs these embeddings into a VAE network
for inference, determining whether the related network flows
are benign or malicious. The details of the DTEA method will B. Assembler Design
be elaborated in Section IV-D. In this module, we assemble the per-packet features
 dequeued from the ring queue into network flow data using
 IV. D ESIGN D ETAIL a flow table. Each entry in the table is a key-value pair
 corresponding to a specific network flow, where the key is the
 In this section, we expand on the details of the four key
 flow ID defined as the five-tuple hash key: <[SrcIP, SrcPort],
modules included in REAPER. The symbols used in this
 [DstIP, DstPort]symmetric , protocol>, and the value is the
section are summarized in Table II.
 associated network flow record.
 Each network flow record maintains both bidirectional
A. Parser Design and unidirectional flow data. Here, unidirectional flow data
 In this module, we sequentially extract per-packet features involves the forward flow data (packets from [SrcIP, SrcPort]
from packets mirrored from NIC ports. Each per-packet feature to [DstIP, DstPort]) and backward flow data (packets in the
876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 than 1% of the total network bandwidth, we further investigate
 the distribution of long and short flows across the six datasets
 discussed earlier, as shown in Fig. 3.We find that the PDF
 curve of short flows closely aligns with the PDF curve of all
 flows, indicating that short flows constitute the vast majority
 of network traffic. Meanwhile, the CDF curve of packet
 count reveals that long flows, despite their negligible number,
Fig. 2. TIME OUT configuration exploration. account for at least half of the total packets. These findings
 highlight the extreme imbalance in the information carried by
 short and long flows, which leads us to adopt distinct analysis
 strategies for each.
 For long flows, which contain sufficient information, we
 only preserve the bidirectional flow data in their records, which
 subsequently output to the Detector for analysis. In contrast,
 short flows are numerous, and each of them carry limited
 information, making it easier to confuse malicious short flows
 with benign ones. For example, attackers can control a host to
 launch low-rate port flooding or even conduct botnet manipulation to send lots of malicious short flows but seemly benign
 ones at a five-tuple network flow level. To address this, we use
 traffic sending patterns as the basis for detection, aggregating
 the data from short flows to amplify the analytical granularity.
Fig. 3. Flow length distributions of WIDE backbone network traffic datasets.
 This increases the amount of information contained in each
 analysis unit, thereby improving the effectiveness of malicious
opposite direction). Each per-packet feature first hits a table network traffic identification, as detailed in Section IV-C.
entry and then triggers an update of both the bidirectional and Additionally, we observe that there is a clear boundary
unidirectional flow data in the corresponding flow record. between the distributions of long and short flows, which
 Notably, before being cached in an entry, each per-packet allows us to use the LONG TH threshold for efficient flow
feature is preserved as a 3D vector containing only the packet classification. As shown in Fig. 3, different datasets have
length, packet arrival timestamp, and a composite flag field. different LONG TH values.
This flag field includes the protocol, flags from the protocol Flow Table Snapshot. Each flow table snapshot contains
header (e.g., ACK), and a 1-bit indicator denoting whether the all the flow IDs of network flows, which survived in the
packet belongs to the forward or backward flow. To facilitate flow table at a certain moment. The flow table takes a snaphigh-concurrency access, we adopt a hash table where each shot each INSPECT INTERVAL period, while the Assembler
entry is protected by an independent lock, enabling efficient module scans the snapshot to assist in evicting completed
flow table access. network flows from the flow table and enqueueing their data
 Flow Completion. The flow table utilizes a timeout mech- in the short/long-flow queue. Traditional snapshot methods
anism to determine when a network flow has completed. If involve locking the entire flow table at the end of each
no packets arrive for a network flow within the TIME OUT INSPECT INTERVAL period and copying its entire content,
period, it is considered complete. To select an appropriate which interrupts the runtime Assembler module and incurs
TIME OUT value, we analyze the real-world benign traffic significant copying overhead each time. To achieve more
datasets. Specifically, we use six WIDE backbone network efficient snapshot operation, we adapt the concept of move
traffic datasets collected on October 1, 5, 9, 13, 17, and 21, semantics from C++11 to eliminate copying and dynamically
2024. They are all daily traces captured at the transit link and generate snapshots during each INSPECT INTERVAL period.
the BBIX link of WIDE backbone network. We use the first As shown in Fig. 4, we maintain four sets: Sethist , Sethist
 next ,
109 packets in each dataset for analysis.As shown in fig. 2, Setlast , and Setnext , all sets are empty initially. During an
a larger TIME OUT value results in a smaller re-established INSPECT INTERVAL period, the flow table adds the flow
flow proportion and a decreased average frequency of flow IDs of newly arrival network flows to Setnext . When the
re-establishment. However, it also leads to an increase in the INSPECT INTERVAL period ends, we move the contents of
average number of active flows in the flow table, requiring Setnext to Setlast , and Setnext naturally becomes an empty set.
more runtime memory allocation. As a trade-off, we observe At this moment, the snapshot of the flow table is described by
that re-established flow proportion across the six datasets drops Setlast . The Assembler scans this snapshot, evicting complete
below 1% for the first time when TIME OUT is set to 16s. network flows and adding the flow IDs of incomplete network
Therefore, we select 16s as the final value for TIME OUT. flows to Sethist
 next . Once the scanning is complete, we move
 the contents of Sethist next to Set
 hist
 , and Sethist
 next naturally
 Network Flow Classification. Based on the definition of becomes an empty set. Finally, the flow table snapshot can
long flows [32], which are network flows that occupy more be represented as a combination of Sethist and Setlast .
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 877

 bits of the binary string, the unidirectional flow data is merged
 into the aggregated flow record of a leaf node.
 During the IP-Trie insertion, we dynamically maintain two
 right
 sets of leaf nodes, i.e., Setleft
 leaf and Setleaf . We store isolated
 left and right leaf nodes in Setleaf and Setright
 left
 leaf , respectively.
 For sibling leaf nodes that appear in pairs, only the left
 leaf node is retained in Setleft leaf , as the right leaf node can
 be accessed through their common parent node. This design
 allows us to access all leaf nodes in both sets simultaneously,
 enabling parallel execution of the following dynamic aggregation. Specifically, when a unidirectional flow is inserted into a
 left leaf node, we add this leaf node to Setleft leaf while removing
 its sibling right leaf node from Setright leaf . If the flow is inserted
 into a right leaf node that has no sibling left leaf node, we
Fig. 4. Flow table snapshot. insert this leaf node into Setright
 leaf .
 Additionally, we define MIN IP PREFIX LEN as the minimum IP prefix length for dynamic aggregation. That is,
 when the height of current IP-Trie is MIN IP PREFIX LEN,
 dynamic aggregation will stop. After this, we employ a hash
 table to map all paths from the root node to those at a depth
 of MIN IP PREFIX LEN, which avoids the unnecessary creation and maintenance of the nodes on these paths.
 Dynamic Aggregation. We initially create 3 auxiliary sets,
 namely Setnext,all
 leaf , Setnext,left
 leaf , and Setnext,right
 leaf . Once the
 dynamic aggregation begins, we iteratively execute the folright
 lowing process until both Setleft leaf and Setleaf are empty:
 • Step 1: We concurrently access all leaf nodes in Setleft leaf
Fig. 5. The IP-Trie insertion and dynamic aggregation process with and Setright
 leaf , where the i
 th
 leaf node is denoted as nileaf
MIN IP PREFIX LEN Set to 30 as an example. and the length of aggregated flow record cached in nileaf
 is denoted as nileaf → len. If nileaf belongs to Setleft leaf , it
C. Aggregator Design proceeds to Step 1.1; if it belongs to Setright leaf , it proceeds
 to Step 1.2.
 In this module, to detect malicious traffic that exploits • Step 1.1: Determine whether nileaf has a sibling right leaf
short flows for concealment, we approach the detection from node, denoted as ni,sibl
 leaf . If it does not, proceed to Step
the perspective of traffic sending patterns. Specifically, we 1.2. Otherwise, check the condition:
dynamically aggregate the unidirectional flows, including both
forward and backward flows, within all short flows using the nileaf → len < AGGR MAX || ni,sibl
 leaf → len
SrcIP prefix to form aggregated flows. Based on this, we per- < AGGR MAX (6)
form detection on the aggregated flows, which contains more
comprehensive information, at a coarser analytical granularity. If the condition holds, the aggregated flow records of nileaf
 i,sibl
 We create a IP prefix tree (IP-Trie) to perform the dynamic and nleaf will be merged into their common parent node,
aggregation on the unidirectional flows within all short flows. which will then be added as a new leaf node to Setnext,all
 leaf .
 i,sibl
For each short flow record, we extract its unidirectional flow Otherwise, both nileaf and nleaf are fully aggregated, their
data. The binary string of the SrcIP from the unidirectional aggregated flow records will be added to the aggregatedflow is used as the matching string for the IP-Trie inser- flow queue. Proceed to Step 2.
tion. Subsequently, the unidirectional flow data is merged • Step 1.2: If the depth of nileaf is MIN IP PREFIX LEN,
into the aggregated flow record at the matched leaf node. the aggregation for nileaf terminates, and its aggregated
When the number of inserted unidirectional flows reaches flow record is added to the aggregated-flow queue. Oth-
AGGR CYCLE, we enable dynamic aggregation on the leaf erwise, proceed to Step 1.3.
nodes to obtain aggregated flow records with different IP prefix • Step 1.3: Check the condition:
lengths. The following content details the processes of the IP- nileaf → len < AGGR MAX (7)
Trie insertion and dynamic aggregation. An example of these
processes is presented in Fig. 5. If the condition is met, the aggregated flow record of
 IP-Trie Insertion. When inserting a unidirectional flow into nileaf is moved to its parent node, and the parent node is
the IP-Trie, we perform a path match based on the binary string added as a new leaf node to Setnext,all
 leaf . Otherwise, the
of its SrcIP. Starting from the root node, if the current matched aggregation for nileaf is finished, and its aggregated flow
bit is 0, the path extends to the left child node; if the bit is record is added to the aggregated-flow queue. Proceed to
1, the path extends to the right child node. After matching all Step 2.
878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 • Step 2: After synchronizing the aggregation execution of
 all leaf nodes up to this step, concurrently access all nodes
 in Setnext,all
 leaf , where the ith leaf node is denoted as nileaf 00 .
 If nleaf 00 is a left leaf node, it is added to Setnext,left
 i
 leaf . If
 nileaf 00 is a right leaf node that has no sibling node, it is
 added to Setnext,right
 leaf . Proceed to Step 3.
 • Step 3: Move the contents of Setnext,left
 leaf and Setnext,right
 leaf
 right
 to Setleftleaf and Setleaf , respectively. Then clear the auxiliary sets.
 Fig. 6. The structure of GRU RNN-based VAE network.

D. Detector Design
 latent representation, i.e., the probability distribution repre-
 In this module, we fetch network flow records from the sentation. Specially, its uncertainty can be directly used for
aggr/long-flow queue and apply the DTEA method for mali- robust outlier analysis under inference mode. When this subcious traffic detection. We use MTS ∈ RL×3 to represent the network performs forward propagation, MTS is first serially
network flow data from a record with the length of L, and fed into the GRU cell including NUM LAYER stacked Kwe employ mi ∈ R1×3 to represent the ith per-packet feature dimensional hidden layers. mi and the historical hidden state
that contains 3 columns of packet information, including the hi−1 are utilized to calculate the GRU cell variables at the
packet arrival timestamp (mits ), packet legnth (milen ), and flags ith time step, including the update gate ui , reset gate ri and
(miflags ). Consequently, MTS is denoted as a multivariate time candidate hidden state ĥi :
series and mi is denoted as the ith vector along the time
 ui = σ Wu · hi−1 , mi , ri = σ Wr · hi−1 , mi
    
dimension of MTS: (11)
 i
  
MTS = m0 , . . . , mi , . . . , mL−1 , mi = mits , milen , miflags
    ĥi = tanh Wh · ri hi−1 , m (12)
 (8) Then, hi (the hidden state of the ith time step) is updated by:
 PreProcessing. We indicate the number of collected MTS hi = (1 − ui ) hi−1 + ui ĥi (13)
is M and use MTSi to represent the ith MTS. For MTSi , we
perform 3 steps of preprocessing on it: The final hidden state hL−1 is used as an embedding, contain-
 • Step 1: We sort all per-packet features in MTSi in ing the overall information of MTS.
 ascending order based on their packet arrival timestamp To ensure the smoothness and continuity of the RNN-VAE
 using the merge sort algorithm. Then, we convert their latent space, we model the uncertain latent representation
 packet arrival timestamps into arrival intervals: as a diagonal log-normal distribution with a dimension of
 LATENT DIM. We indicate this distribution as q (s | MTS),
 1:L−1
 m1:L
 ts = mts − m0:L−2
 ts , m0ts = 0 (9) and it has two parameters consisting of the mean µ and the
 • Step 2: We perform the min-max normalization on MTSi . variance σ 2 , where µi and σ 2 i are the values of µ and σ 2 in
 • Step 3: Using the sliding window technique, we segment the ith dimension respectively:
 MTSi into multiple overlapping blocks, the jth block µ = g0 (hL−1 ) = (µ0 , . . . , µi , . . . , µLATENT DIM−1 ) (14)
 is denoted as MTSij . These blocks collectively form
 σ 2 = g1 (hL−1 ) = σ 2 0 , . . . , σ 2 i , . . . , σ 2 LATENT DIM−1
 
 an input batch for the RNN-VAE network, denoted as
 (15)
 Batchi :
  
 Li
  To determine the parameters of q (s | MTS), the two
 j·SL:(j+1)·SL
 Batchi = MTSij = MTSi | j ∈ 0, d e FCLs (g0 and g1 ) separately transform hL−1 into µ
 SL 2
 (10) and σ . To this end, the variational network samples
 a vector s with a dimension of LATENT DIM, i.e.,
 Here, Li is the length of MTSi , the sliding window size s = (s0 , . . . , si , . . . , sLATENT DIM−1 ), from q (s | MTS) and
 is SL, and the step size by which the window moves delivers it to the generative network.
 forward along the time dimension of MTSi is Stride. Generative Network. The generative network only con-
 DTEA Method. This method integrates RNN and VAE tains a GRU cell for seq2seq task. This sub-network aims
algorithms to construct an RNN-VAE network for inferring to generate the MTS ˆ from s and ensure that MTS ˆ closely
whether a network flow is benign or malicious. Specifically, resembles MTS. In the forward propagation, s is repeated
the RNN is built using the GRU cell, which is for the for L times and serially fed into the GRU cell which is
transformation between MTS (i.e., the network flow data) and stacked with NUM LAYER K-dimensional hidden layers.
the embedding. The RNN-VAE network consists of two sub- For the ith time step, the current hidden state hi is outnetworks: the variational network and the generative network, put and linearly transformed to m̂i ∈ R1×N by the dense
 matrix Q ∈ R K2 ×N
 m̂i is the th ˆ
as shown in Fig. 6.  0 , where  i element in MTS
 ˆ i
 Variational Network. The variational network consists of and MTS = m̂ , . . . , m̂ , . . . , m̂ L−1
 . We use q (MTS | s) to
the GRU cell and the fully connected layers (FCL). For each represent the probability of reproducing the original MTS by
MTS, this sub-network transforms the MTS as the uncertain s, i.e., the similarity between MTS and MTS. ˆ
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 879

 TABLE III
 Training Mode. We only use the MTS derived from the
 H YPER -PARAMETER S ETTINGS FOR REAPER
network flows considered benign for training. The RNN-VAE
network is trained by optimizing the evidence lower bound
(ELBO), where p(s) is the prior distribution of s:
 ELBO = Eq (s | MTS) [ log [p (MTS | s)]
 + log [p (s)] − log [q (s | MTS)] ] (16)
Note that p (s) is set to the standard log-normal distribution.
The first term of ELBO is measured by the mean square error
between MTS and MTS. ˆ And next two terms of ELBO are
calculated by the Monte Carlo integration leveraging samples
from q (s | MTS). Beside, since the back propagation of the
network cannot flow through the uncertainty nodes, we apply
the reparameterization trick for sampling s from q (s | MTS),
where  is the random noise sampled from standard normal
distribution and used to maintain the randomness of s:
s = µ +  exp σ 2 /2 = (s0 , . . . , si , . . . , sLATENT DIM−1 )
 

 (17)
 Inference Mode & Outlier Analysis. The RNN-VAE
network performs the outlier analysis in the inference mode.
Since the optimization goal of ELBO is to make q (s | MTS)
approach the prior distribution p (s), the similarity between 3) Can REAPER run in high-bandwidth network scenarios?
q (s | MTS) and p (s) can reflect whether a network flow (Section V-F)
related to the input MTS is an outlier distinguished from
the training benign network flows. We compute KL loss to
measure the similarity between q (s | MTS) and p (s), where A. Implementation
µ and σ 2 are the parameters of q (s | MTS): We utilize C/C++ with GCC 9.4.0 to prototype REAPER
 LATENT
 XDIM−1 with Intel DPDK [33]. We adopt the PcapPlusPlus library
 1 + σ 2 i − µ2i − exp σ 2 i
 
KL loss (MTS) = 22.11 to call the APIs of Intel DPDK 19.11.14 LTS as C++
 i=0 wrappers. Overall, we consume more than 4000 lines of codes.
 (18) We assign each module a group of logical cores on the CPU
 In the inference mode, a network flow is classified as mali- to execute their respective worker threads in parallel. Each
cious if its KL loss exceeds a threshold, i.e., KL LOSS TH. worker thread is an instance of the pcpp::DpdkWorkerThread
 th
We recommend defining this threshold using the x percentile class and exclusively occupies a logical core, meaning that
of the computed KL loss values, denoted as Px . The initial the number of worker threads of each module is equal to the
value of KL LOSS TH is set to the Px of all KL loss values number of logical cores allocated to it.
observed during training. We have summarized all the hyper-parameters in REAPER
 To enable adaptive threshold tuning throughout REAPER’s and provided recommended values in Table III.
runtime, we adopt the exponentially weighted moving per- Parser Impl. We mount the NIC ports to the UIO driver,
centile (EWMP) to dynamically adjust KL LOSS TH. Specif- thereby bypassing kernel interrupts and directly managing NIC
ically, we maintain a sliding window that stores the most recent ports with userspace mode. Based on this, each parser worker
100 computed KL loss values. Each time a new KL loss value thread handles respective RX queues of NIC ports and calls
is obtained, the window is updated accordingly, and a local the APIs of Intel DPDK 19.11.14 LTS to continuously extract
 t
Px , denoted as Px , is computed to update the KL LOSS TH: the packets arriving at the RX queue.
 Additionally, we implement the ring queue in the Parser
 KL LOSS TH = α · Ptx + KL LOSS TH · (1 − α) (19) module as an array to store per-packet features. We use the
 std::memcpy ( ) API in the C standard library to implement
 V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION the dequeuing operation in batch.
 In this section, we evaluate the detection performance of Assembler Impl. We implement the flow table in the
REAPER by 20 groups malicious traffic and we measure its Assembler module using the tbb::concurrent hash map conthroughput and runtime overhead. The experimental results tainer provided by oneTBB 2022.0.0. Each table entry has its
will answer the following questions: own independent lock, allowing the assembler worker threads
 1) Does REAPER have stronger detection performance to update the flow table with high concurrency after fetching
 compared to the baselines? (Section V-D) the per-packet features from the ring queue in the Parser mod-
 2) Does REAPER exhibit the robustness to detect ule. Additionally, We also utilize the tbb::parallel for each ( )
 encrypted malware traffic that is easily confused with and tbb::parallel invoke ( ) APIs to orchestrate the assembler
 benign traffic? (Section V-E) worker threads for parallel scanning of the flow table snapshot.
880 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

The flow IDs of the incomplete network flows are then towards each network flow identified by <SrcIP, DstIP,
placed into Sethist
 next , which is implemented by the concurrency- SrcPort, DstPort, protocol>. Then, the counts of the
supported tbb::concurrent unordered set container. distribution buckets are treated as extracted features to
 Aggregator Impl. We achieve the mapping between the describe a network flow compactly. We build FlowLens
path and the node at depth MIN IP PREFIX LEN in the IP- by its open source code [36] and incorporate with the
Trie through the tbb::concurrent hash map container. These K-means algorithm to analyze its extracted features,
nodes are evenly distributed to multiple aggregator worker resulting in unsupervised malicious traffic detection.
threads for management. As a result, the worker threads are Testbed. The REAPER and Whisper prototypes are impleindependently responsible for maintaining distinct sets of non- mented using Intel DPDK, and deployed on a testbed server
overlapping subtrees, where the root of each subtree is a compromising Ubuntu 20.04 operating system (Linux 5.4.0),
node at depth MIN IP PREFIX LEN in the IP-Trie. This one Intel Xeon E5-2680 v4 CPU (32GB RAM, 14 physical
design enables the parallel execution of IP-Trie insertion. cores, and 28 logical cores), as well as one Intel I210 NIC
Beside, we employ the tbb::concurrent hash map container (1000 Mbps, one port with 4 RX queues, and Intel DPDK
 right
to implement the Setleft
 leaf and Setleaf . During the leaf node supported). We allocate 1024 huge pages, each 2MB in size,
dynamic aggregation, we call the tbb::parallel for each ( ) and use the IGB UIO kernel module to enable userspace I/O
and tbb::parallel invoke ( ) APIs to arrange the aggregator for the Intel DPDK runtime environment. In particular, receive
worker threads for parallel access to the leaf nodes in each side scaling (RSS) is enabled to achieve load balancing across
aggregation iteration. the 4 RX queues. Additionally, we connect another the same
 Detector Impl. In training mode, once the training data server to the testbed server via a 1000 Mbps network cable
has been fully collected, the Detector module invokes a script and utilize it to generate traffic for testbed server. Concretely,
written in PyTorch 2.0.1 and Python 3.8.0 to train the RNN- we leverage Tcpreplay tool with the ‘-K’ flag to replay traffic
VAE network model using a GPU. In inference mode, the datasets at their original rates.
Detector module loads the trained RNN-VAE network model The FlowLens prototype is deployed on a software P4
via LibTorch C++ 2.0.1, performing real-time parallel infer- switch, i.e., Behavioral Model v2, running on the testbed
ence for network flows by multiple detector worker threads. server. Traffic datasets are also replayed using Tcpreplay and
 Others. We use the std:::move ( ) API, introduced in injected into the switch port. As for Kitsune, which is unable
C++11, to adopt move semantics for transferring set contents, to handle high-bandwidth traffic in real time, we prototype it
thereby eliminating deep copies. Network flow queues, i.e., by a Python script and evaluate it on the testbed server offline.
short-flow, long-flow, and aggregated-flow queues, are imple- The configuration of the REAPER prototype is as follows.
mented using tbb::concurrent queue from oneTBB 2022.0.0, The main thread occupies a single logical core. The Parser
ensuring efficient and thread-safe inter-module communica- module is allocated 4 logical cores, while the Assembler
tion. module is assigned 8 logical cores, with 4 dedicated to
 updating the flow table and the remaining 4 responsible for
 scanning flow table snapshots and performing flow table evic-
B. Experiment Setup
 tion. The Aggregator module is allocated 8 logical cores, with
 Baselines. We establish three baselines, which all adopt 4 dedicated to the IP-Trie insertion and the other 4 handling
unsupervised methods, for evaluating the improvement the dynamic aggregation of IP-Trie leaf nodes. Finally, the
brought by REAPER: Detector module is assigned 6 logical cores to execute MTS
 • Whisper. Whisper [12] is a lightweight cluster-based preprocessing and inference. In total, REAPER occupies 27
 detection method prototyped by Intel DPDK. It divides logical cores out of 28 available logical cores. In particular,
 the traffic into network flows based on SrcIP and uses dis- REAPER exhibits the scalability, as it can flexibly increase the
 crete Fourier transform to extract network flow features. number of assigned logical cores in each module to achieve
 Finally, outlier analysis is performed using the K-means higher performance, with support from more powerful CPUs.
 clustering method. We build on its original open source Traffic Dataset. It is important to first declare that the
 code [34] and only tune its hyper-parameters to obtain payload of all traffic datasets has been truncated to ensure
 acceptable performance. that, when using a 1000 Mbps network cable, the traffic can
 • Kitsune. Kitsune [29] is an autoencoder-based detection be replayed at the original rate of the dataset using Tcpreplay.
 method. It accumulates stateful statistical features at four We used six different WIDE backbone network traffic
 different scales: <SrcMac, SrcIP>, < SrcIP >, <SrcIP, datasets as background benign traffic, which are collected on
 DstIP>, and <SrcPort, DstPort>. When a packet arrives, 2024.10.01, 2024.10.05, 2024.10.09, 2024.10.13, 2024.10.17,
 all statistical features related to the packet will be used for and 2024.10.21, respectively.
 per-packet inference using integrated autoencoders. Since In the detection performance evaluation, we use the first
 it cannot handle high-bandwidth traffic, we use its open 30% of packets from the benign background traffic dataset
 source offline implementation [35] with built-in hyper- to train the detection models, including the RNN-VAE netparameteters. work in REAPER, the K-means model in Whisper, and the
 • FlowLens. FlowLens [26] is a compact traffic feature autoencoders in Kitsune. Additionally, these first 30% of
 extraction method deployed by P4 switches. It collects the packets were also utilized to determine the LONG TH hyperdistributions of both packet lengths and arrival intervals parameter for REAPER. Subsequently, the remaining 70%
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 881

Fig. 7. AUC and EER measurement of REAPER on Cyber attacks with different configurations for RNN-VAE network Hyper-parameters.

of packets, along with the malicious traffic dataset will be Metrics. We adopt four metrics: 1) the area under ROC
replayed together using Tcpreplay to evaluate the detection curve (AUC); 2) the true positive rate (TPR); 3) the false
performance of both REAPER and baselines. positive rate (FPR); 4) the equal error rate (EER). All metrics
 Overall, the traffic dataset configurations for evaluating are computed based on the per-flow scores (i.e., KL loss
detection performance across different types of malicious values) produced by the RNN-VAE network inference.
traffic are listed in Table IV. We select 20 groups of malicious
traffic datasets, covering cyber attacks and malware traffic,
where cyber attacks include flooding attacks and stealthy C. Hyper-Parameter Selection for RNN-VAE Nertwork
attacks:
 We investigate the impact of different RNN-VAE network hyper-parameters, specifically LATENT DIM and
 • Flooding Attacks. These attacks utilize flooding tech- LAYER NUM, on the detection performance of REAPER for
 niques to send high-volume traffic or large magnitude cyber attacks. The candidate values for LATENT DIM are 2,
 requests to overwhelm the victim network. We collect 4, and 8, while those for LAYER NUM are 1, 2, and 3. The
 four types of flooding attack traffic from the Kitsune number of training iterations is limited to 50. As illustrated in
 dataset [29] and the CIC-DDoS2019 dataset [37]. These Fig. 7, we present REAPER’s detection performance for each
 attacks include SrcPort flooding (Fuzz Scan), link flood- cyber attack across 9 hyper-parameter combinations.
 ing (UDP DoS attacks), request flooding (SSDP DoS When NUM LAYER is set to 1, increasing LATENT DIM
 attacks and SSL Renegotiation DoS attacks). enhances REAPER’s detection performance for Fuzz Scan and
 • Steathy Attacks. These attacks intermittently send mali- SSL DoS, whereas the performance for other cyber attacks
 cious traffic to stealthily exploit vulnerabilities in network fluctuates only slightly, with minimal change.
 protocols, causing the target network to experience denial When LATENT DIM is set to 2, increasing the value of
 of service. We implement a specific type of stealthy NUM LAYER improves REAPER’s detection performance
 attack, namely Low-rate DoS (LDoS) attacks [38], [39], for most cyber attacks, except for Fuzz Scan and SSDP
 which send periodic burst video traffic that triggers DoS. The detection performance for these two attacks even
 momentary network congestion. This causes the actual obliviously declines, which contrasts with the effects observed
 bandwidth usage of the victim network to be forced down when increasing LATENT DIM while keeping NUM LAYER
 due to the response of congestion control algorithms fixed. This is because increasing NUM LAYER results in a
 (e.g., CUBIC [40]). We launch LDoS attacks with pulse greater increase in the model’s parameter count compared to
 periods of 0.2s and 0.5s in a real-world WAN topology increasing LATENT DIM. With a limited number of training
 simulated using Mininet [41], and collect the resulting iterations, the RNN-VAE network is more difficult to converge.
 attack traffic as two datasets, referred to as LDoS 0.2 In short, both increasing NUM LAYER and LATENT DIM
 and LDoS 0.5, respectively. The detailed properties of improve REAPER’s detection performance. However, when
 the topology (number of switching nodes, link delays, the required number of training iterations is insufficient, the
 etc.) are from the Topology Zoo dataset [42]. RNN-VAE network model struggles to converge, and fur-
 • Malware Traffic. Malware traffic is crafted by attackers ther increasing NUM LAYER or LATENT DIM can have
 and carries malicious software that compromises the host. the opposite effect. The selection of RNN-VAE network
 Owing to its low rate, it can be confused with benign hyper-parameters is therefore a trade-off between REAPER’s
 traffic to evade detection. To demonstrate the robustness detection performance and the model’s training time.
 of REAPER, we further use Malware traffic for additional Additionally, as shown in Fig. 8, we measure the inferevaluation. We collect 14 types of Malware traffic from ence latency of the RNN-VAE network model across the
 the CIC-AndMal2017 dataset [43], covering Ransomware 9 hyper-parameter combinations. As expected, increasing
 traffic and Adware traffic. NUM LAYER significantly increases the model’s parameter
882 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE IV
 T HE C ONFIGURATIONS OF T RAFFIC DATASETS FOR D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

 TABLE V
 D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE M EASUREMENT OF REAPER AND BASELINES ON C YBER ATTACKS

Fig. 8. Measurement of RNN-VAE network inference latency.

count, which in turn raises this latency, while increasing
LATENT DIM has a negligible effect on this latency.

 Fig. 9. ROC curves when detecting cyber attacks.
D. Detection Performance
 As shown in Table V, we present the best detection metrics low FPR and high TPR when detecting the Fuzz Scan traffic
of REAPER and the baselines for cyber attacks. REAPER and LDoS traffic, respectively.
outperforms the baselines in most metrics for detecting 6 These posterior detection metrics indicate that the scores
types of cyber attacks. For the SSDP DoS, although Whisper (i.e., KL, loss values) produced during REAPER’s runtime
achieves a comparable TPR to REAPER, all other metrics effectively distinguish between benign and malicious traffic,
of Whisper are lower than those of REAPER. For the Fuzz demonstrating REAPER’s strong overall detection perfor-
Scan, Kitsune achieves the best AUC (0.9957), slightly higher mance. In real-world deployments, configuring the threshold
than REAPER, but REAPER achieves the best TPR (0.9999). (i.e., KL LOSS TH) during REAPER’s runtime is essential.
In the case of LDoS 0.2/0.5 that consists mainly of long We further enable it with EWMP-based adaptive tuning to
flows, FlowLens shows the best AUC (0.9999). However, for assess REAPER’s detection performance in terms of TPR and
attacks primarily composed of short flows (e.g., SSDP DoS, FPR. We independently configure Px as P95 , P96 , P97 , P98 ,
UDP DoS, SSL DoS, and Fuzz Scan), REAPER significantly and P99 , each combined with a set of α values: 0.001, 0.005,
outperforms FlowLens across all metrics. 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5. As shown in Fig. 10, we
 As shown in Fig. 9, we present the ROC curves for report the FPR of REAPER under various combinations of Px
REAPER and the baselines in detecting cyber attacks. Both and α, considering only those combinations where REAPER
REAPER and Whisper achieve a balance of low FPR and achieves a TPR exceeding 0.9999. Smaller α can reduce false
high TPR across all 6 cyber attack detection tasks. However, positives (FPs) in scenarios with frequent traffic fluctuations.
at the same TPR, REAPER maintains a lower FPR. In contrast, For example, the LDoS 0.5/0.2, which exhibits periodic burst
Kitsune and FlowLens are only able to achieve a balance of behavior, achieved the lowest FPR at α = 0.001, while UDP
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 883

 reductions compared to the optimal values listed in Table V.
 Nonetheless, REAPER maintains an average AUC of 0.9429
 and an average EER of 0.0348, demonstrating its robustness
 in handling evolving cyber attack patterns.

 F. Throughput and Memory Footprint
 Throughput. We utilize 3 traffic loads to measure the
 throughput of REAPER, namely the WIDE backbone network
 traffic datasets from 2024.10.01, 2024.10.13, and 2024.10.17.
 Tcpreplay is utilized to replay the traffic loads, with the
 ‘-t’ flag employed to maximize the replay rate, enabling us to
 measure the peak throughput of REAPER. For each module
 of REAPER, we perform 30 throughput measurements.
 As shown in Fig. 13, for the Parser module, the packet
 parse throughput under the 3 traffic loads is significantly concentrated around 8 Gbps, 7 Gbps, and 9.5 Gbps, respectively.
 While the flow table update throughput of the Assembler
Fig. 10. Impact of different percentile and α settings on REAPER’s FPR module under the 3 traffic loads is distributed around 8 Gbps,
when enabling EWMP-based adaptive threshold tuning. 5.5 Gbps, and 9.5 Gbps, respectively.
 Compared to packet parse throughput, the distribution of
DoS, which causes traffic surges, attained the lowest FPR at flow table update throughput exhibits a greater variance.
α = 0.005. In contrast, moderately larger α can better identify Despite setting independent locks for each flow table entry,
malicious traffic and mitigate FPs in stable traffic scenarios. concurrent access to the same entry still causes the flow table
For instance, both SSL DoS and SSDP DoS rely on request update throughput to decrease at certain measurement points,
flooding, which causes slight traffic fluctuations and achieves leading to wider range fluctuations in the measurement results.
the lowest FPR at α = 0.01 ∼ 0.02. Nevertheless, the Parser and Assembler modules still exhibit
 similar peak throughput, both reaching up to approximately
 10 Gbps, although the throughput of the Assembler module
E. Robustness of Detection shows fluctuations with wider range.
 To further evaluate the robustness of REAPER in detecting For the Aggregator and Detector modules, which are
malicious traffic, we conduct evaluation from: 1) malware computation-intensive, the number of logical cores allocated to
traffic detection, and 2) hybrid cyber attack traffic detection. them directly determines their maximum achievable through-
 Malware Traffic Detection. We first use encrypted malware put. To explore the impact of increasing the number of
traffic to evaluate the robustness of REAPER’s malicious traf- allocated logical cores on the throughput of both modules, we
fic detection. As shown in Fig. 11, the results demonstrate that strategically reallocate the total of 14 logical cores originally
REAPER has acceptable detection performance on encrypted assigned to them (8 for the Aggregator and 6 for the Detector).
malware traffic, with an average AUC of 0.9538, an average Specifically, we investigate the throughput of the Detector
EER of 0.1156, an average TPR of 0.8989, and an average FPR module when allocated 12, 10, 8, 6, 4, and 2 logical cores,
of 0.0908. The malware traffic is generated by infected bots meanwhile, we explore the throughput of Aggregator module
sending extensive short flows, which can easily be confused when allocated 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 logical cores. We measure
with benign traffic. However, REAPER can effectively detect the throughput of each sub-step in both the Aggregator and
encrypted malware traffic by dynamically aggregating short Detector modules. The sub-steps in the Aggregator module
flows and identifying the traffic sending patterns of infected include IP-Trie insertion and IP-Trie leaf node aggregation,
bots. On the other hand, the average AUC of both Whisper while those of the Detector module include MTS preprocessand Kitsune is close to 0.5, indicating that they struggle to ing and RNN-VAE network inference.
identify encrypted malware traffic. As shown in Fig. 15, Fig. 14, Fig. 16, and Fig. 17, under
 Hybrid Cyber Attack Traffic Detection. To explore the the 3 traffic loads, the throughput of each sub-step in the
impact of evolving cyber attack patterns on REAPER’s detec- Aggregator and Detector modules is positively correlated with
tion performance, we mix the 6 cyber attack traffic datasets and the number of allocated logical cores. Specifically, as for the
replay them alongside the benign background traffic dataset Aggregator module, with 12 assigned logical cores, the IPto measure REAPER’s detection performance. Similarly, we Trie insertion throughput reaches a maximum of 10 Gbps, as
use the first 30% of the packets from each benign background shown in Fig. 14(c), while the IP-Trie leaf node aggregation
traffic dataset to train the RNN-VAE network model, while the throughput peaks at 4.5 Gbps, as shown in Fig. 15(c). As for
remaining 70% are replayed alongside the hybrid cyber attack the Detector module, with 12 assigned logical cores, the MTS
traffic dataset. After mixing the cyber attack traffic datasets, as preprocessing throughput reaches a maximum of 225 Gbps,
shown in Fig. 12, the results indicates that REAPER’s AUC as shown in Fig. 16(b), and the RNN-VAE network inference
and EER in detecting 6 types of cyber attacks exhibit slight throughput peaks at 5 Gbps, as shown in Fig. 17(c).
884 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 11. Detection performance measurement of REAPER and baselines on Malware traffic (The Dotted Lines represent the metric mean values).

 Fig. 15. IP-Trie leaf aggregation throughput in the aggregator module with
 varying numbers of assigned logical cores.

Fig. 12. Detection performance measurement of REAPER on hybrid cyber
attacks under different background benign traffic (The Dotted Lines Represent
the Metric Mean Values).
 Fig. 16. MTS preprocessing throughput in the detector module with varying
 numbers of assigned logical cores.

 Fig. 17. RNN-VAE network inference throughput in the detector module with
 varying numbers of assigned logical cores.
Fig. 13. Throughput of REAPER for packet parse and flow table update.

 Fig. 18. Memory footprint measurement of REAPER.
Fig. 14. IP-Trie insertion throughput in the Aggregator module with varying
numbers of assigned logical cores.
 REAPER’s runtime memory footprint. As shown in Fig.
 Therefore, REAPER possesses the potential to handle high- 18, under all 3 traffic loads, the runtime memory footprint
bandwidth throughput traffic, with the scalability to allocate ultimately converges to around 4.1 GB.
more logical cores to each module on more powerful CPUs.
 Runtime Memory Footprint. We use Tcpreplay to VI. R ELATED W ORK
replay the WIDE 2024.10.01, WIDE 2024.10.13, and WIDE We categorize existing network anomaly detection work
2024.10.17 traffic loads at their original rates to measure into three major types based on detection units: 1) log-based,
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 885

 TABLE VI
 kernel for feature extraction. HyperVision [27] and the work
 R ELATED W ORK R EVIEW
 in [54] represent flows as bidirectional graphs with sockets
 as vertices. The former uses subgraph structures and edge
 features for clustering, while the latter employs the Dynamic
 Line Graph Neural Network (DLGNN). Graph2vec+RF [55]
 also treats flows as bidirectional graphs, encoding packet
 lengths as vertices. However, constructing interaction graphs
 for network flows generates significant overhead, and the
 interaction graphs of numerous network flows are highly
 dense. Subgraph decomposition is an NP-complete problem,
 and its solution exhibits high time complexity.

 VII. L IMITATION AND D ISCUSSION
 A. Inherent Challenges of Unsupervised Methods
 Unsupervised methods are inherently challenged by evolving cyber attack patterns and potential FPs. However,
 REAPER, which employs unsupervised RNN-VAE model
 trained on benign real-world traffic datasets, still achieves a
 strong average AUC of 0.9538 against evolving cyber attack
 patterns (Section V-E). To address potential FPs, inspired by
 pVoxel [56], which finds that benign network flows misclassified as FPs often lie sparsely in feature space, we propose
 analyzing sparsity in the VAE’s latent space representations to
 mitigate majority of FPs.

2) network flow-based, and 3) interaction graph-based. The B. Threshold-Based Classification of Long and Short Flows
comparison of existing work is shown in Table VI. REAPER classifies network flows based on a threshold
 Log-based. CoToRu [44] converts normal log-derived LONG TH. If attackers learn this value, they can evade
behaviors into a state transition table for real-time anomaly detection by manipulating short flows to slightly exceed
detection via Zeek, anomalous behavior is identified when the LONG TH, avoiding aggregation. To address this, we prostate transition fails to reach a termination state. Paradise [45] pose: 1) Periodically updating LONG TH with new training
detects APT attacks through online causal provenance analysis traffic datasets. 2) Using ML algorithms to learn a nonlinear
using NFV. RETSINA [11] applies meta-learning to identify classifier for distinguishing long and short flows.
zero-day vulnerabilities from limited HTTP logs. The work
in [10] proposes the federated PCA to unsupervisedly analyze C. Investigation of Adaptive Smoothing Parameter in EWMP
anomalous network behaviors in logs across multiple parties.
Mlog [46] represents logs as semantic vectors via transformers, The smoothing parameter α in EWMP controls the evoand detects anomalies using LSTM and CNN. However, lution of KL LOSS TH, thereby influencing REAPER’s
log-based methods require protecting the logs from tamper- runtime detection performance. We recommend two strateing, and the log cache needs to occupy significant storage gies for adaptively tuning α in response to varying traffic
space. conditions. 1) Variance-based. EWMP uses a sliding window
 Network Flow-based. SketchLib [47] designs efficient to track recent KL loss values. A higher variance within the
sketch structures in P4 switches for detecting DDoS attacks. window indicates greater volatility, prompting the use of a
PLUTO [48] and Horuseye [17] deploy XGBoost and iForest- smaller α to ensure smoother updates. Conversely, a lower
based models on P4 switches for per-flow anomaly detection. variance allows for a larger α to improve responsiveness. 2)
The work in [9] applies autoencoder-based models for anomaly Reinforcement Learning-based. The adjustment of α could be
detection on SDN switches. Whisper [12], built on Intel formulated as a reinforcement learning optimization problem,
DPDK, uses DFT for flow feature extraction and K-means where the agent observes the distribution of KL loss within
for clustering. Kitsune [29] introduces KitNet, an ensem- the sliding window and the runtime trend of FPR, and selects
ble of autoencoders, for flow-based anomaly detection, later the optimal α to maximize detection performance.
enhanced in [49]. H2ID [50] and the works in [51], [52] further
explore ML-based anomaly detection at the flow level. How- VIII. C ONCLUSION
ever, these network flow-based methods analyze individual In this paper, we propose REAPER, a high-performance
network flows, making it difficult to detect covert malicious system for real-time detection of malicious traffic at the
traffic. network flow level. Noting the limited information in short
 Interaction Graph-based. Nadege [53] models network flows and their low distinguishability, which causes benign and
flows as hierarchical graphs and introduces a novel graph malicious short flows to be easily confused, we develop the
886 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

IP-Trie to dynamically aggregate short flows based on their IP [15] K. Sood, M. R. Nosouhi, D. D. N. Nguyen, F. Jiang, M. Chowdhury, and
prefixes into more informative aggregated flows. Additionally, R. Doss, “Intrusion detection scheme with dimensionality reduction in
 next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
instead of traditional statistical feature extraction, we propose pp. 965–979, 2023.
the DTEA method for detecting network flow data, which uses [16] P. Bosshart et al., “p4: Programming protocol-independent packet
RNN to directly convert network flow data into embeddings, processors,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 44, no. 3,
 pp. 87–95, Jul. 2014.
followed by outlier analysis on the embeddings using VAE. [17] Y. Dong et al., “HorusEye: A realtime IoT malicious traffic detection
 We prototype REAPER using Intel DPDK, evaluation framework using programmable switches,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur.
Results show REAPER outperforms baselines and can handle Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2023, pp. 571–588.
 [18] V. Shrivastav, “Programmable multi-dimensional table filters for line
high-bandwidth traffic. rate network functions,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conf., Aug. 2022,
 In future work, we will focus on optimizing concurrent pp. 649–662.
access to critical sections in REAPER, such as the flow table [19] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
 intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
in the Assembler module, to enhance system stability. We also 2023, pp. 6203–6220.
plan to investigate the impact of deploying REAPER on more [20] C. Zheng and N. Zilberman, “Planter: Seeding trees within switches,”
powerful CPUs, with the goal of evaluating how an increased in Proc. SIGCOMM Poster Demo Sessions, Aug. 2021, pp. 12–14.
 [21] A. T. J. Akem, M. Gucciardo, and M. Fiore, “Flowrest: Practical flownumber of logical cores affects its overall throughput. In level inference in programmable switches with random forests,” in Proc.
addition, we intend to integrate REAPER with advanced IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2023, pp. 1–10.
lifelong learning techniques [57] to strengthen its long-term [22] T. Swamy, A. Rucker, M. Shahbaz, I. Gaur, and K. Olukotun, “Taurus: A
 data plane architecture for per-packet ML,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf.
robustness against evolving malicious traffic. Architect. Support Program. Lang. Oper. Syst., 2022, pp. 1099–1114.
 [23] H. Zhou, S. Hong, Y. Liu, X. Luo, W. Li, and G. Gu, “Mew:
 Enabling large-scale and dynamic link-flooding defenses on programmable switches,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), May
 R EFERENCES 2023, pp. 1625–1639.
 [24] A. G. Alcoz, M. Strohmeier, V. Lenders, and L. Vanbever, “Aggregate-
[1] Z. Liu et al., “Jaqen: A high-performance switch-native approach for based congestion control for pulse-wave DDoS defense,” in Proc. ACM
 detecting and mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with programmable SIGCOMM Conf., New York, NY, USA, 2022, pp. 693–706.
 switches,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3829–3846. [25] S. Gupta, D. Gosain, M. Kwon, and H. B. Acharya, “DeeP4R: Deep
[2] F. Erlacher and F. Dressler, “On high-speed flow-based intrusion detec- packet inspection in P4 using packet recirculation,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
 tion using snort-compatible signatures,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2023, pp. 1–10.
 Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 495–506, Jan. 2022. [26] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
[3] D. Tang, R. Dai, C. Zuo, J. Chen, K. Li, and Z. Qin, “A low-rate DoS and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
 attack mitigation scheme based on port and traffic state in SDN,” IEEE ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 Trans. Comput., vol. 74, no. 5, pp. 1758–1770, May 2025. Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
[4] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: [27] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
 A channel-level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
 2023. [28] K. Xu et al., “Self-supervised learning malware traffic classification
[5] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN: based on masked autoencoder,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 10,
 Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for net- pp. 17330–17340, May 2024.
 work intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, [29] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 pp. 1156–1167, 2023. ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[6] Y. Liang, Q. Wang, K. Xiong, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, and D. Zeng, “Robust
 [30] Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, H. Chen, F. Zhang, Z. Song, and Z. Li, “Effective DDoS
 detection of malicious URLs with self-paced wide & deep learning,”
 mitigation via ML-driven in-network traffic shaping,” IEEE Trans.
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 717–730,
 Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4271–4289, Jul. 2024.
 Mar. 2022.
 [31] D. Tang, R. Dai, Y. Yan, K. Li, W. Liang, and Z. Qin, “When SDN
[7] H. Kim, C. Hahn, H. J. Kim, Y. Shin, and J. Hur, “Deep learningmeets low-rate threats: A survey of attacks and countermeasures in
 based detection for multiple cache side-channel attacks,” IEEE Trans.
 programmable networks,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1–32,
 Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 1672–1686, 2023.
 2024.
[8] M. Wichtlhuber et al., “IXP scrubber: Learning from blackholing traffic [32] C. Estan and G. Varghese, “New directions in traffic measurement and
 for ML-driven DDoS detection at scale,” in Proc. ACM SIGCOMM accounting: Focusing on the elephants, ignoring the mice,” ACM Trans.
 Conf., Aug. 2022, pp. 707–722. Comput. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 270–313, Aug. 2003.
[9] P. Zhang et al., “Real-time malicious traffic detection with online [33] B. Liu. (2025). Reaper Code Repository. [Online]. Available: https://
 isolation forest over SD-WAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, github.com/lbr711/REAPER
 vol. 18, pp. 2076–2090, 2023. [34] C. Fu. (2021). Whipser Code Repository. [Online]. Available: https://
[10] T.-A. Nguyen, J. He, L. T. Le, W. Bao, and N. H. Tran, “Federated PCA github.com/fuchuanpu/Whisper
 on Grassmann manifold for anomaly detection in IoT networks,” in Proc. [35] Y. Mirsky. (2018). Kisune Code Repository. [Online]. Available: https://
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2023, pp. 1–10. github.com/ymirsky/KitNET-py
[11] P. Li et al., “Learning from limited heterogeneous training data: Meta- [36] D. Barradas. (2021). Flowlens Code Repository. [Online]. Available:
 learning for unsupervised zero-day web attack detection across web https://github.com/dmbb/FlowLens
 domains,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. [37] CIC-DDoS2019. (2019). CIC-DDoS2019. [Online]. Available: https://
 2023, pp. 1020–1034. www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/index.html
[12] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic [38] D. Tang, S. Wang, B. Liu, W. Jin, and J. Zhang, “GASF-IPP: Detection
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. and mitigation of LDoS attack in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Services Comput.,
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446. vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3373–3384, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[13] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted traffic detec- [39] D. Tang, Y. Yan, S. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Qin, “Performance and
 tion towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans. Dependable features: Mitigating the low-rate TCP-targeted DoS attack via SDN,”
 Secure Comput., pp. 1–18, 2023. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 428–444, Jan. 2022.
[14] D. Tang, Y. Yan, C. Gao, W. Liang, and W. Jin, “LtRFT: Mitigate the [40] S. Ha, I. Rhee, and L. Xu, “CUBIC: A new TCP-friendly highlow-rate data plane DDoS attack with learning-to-rank enabled flow speed TCP variant,” ACM SIGOPS Operating Syst. Rev., vol. 42, no. 5,
 tables,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 3143–3157, pp. 64–74, Jul. 2008.
 2023. [41] Mininet.(2010). Mininet. [Online]. Available: http://mininet.org/
TANG et al.: REAPER: REAL-TIME DETECTION OF MALICIOUS TRAFFIC VIA DTEA 887

[42] (2012). The Internet Topology Zoo. [Online]. Available: http:// Boru Liu received the B.S. degree from the College
 www.topology-zoo.org/index.html of Computer Science and Electronic Engineer-
[43] CIC-AndMal2017. (2017). CIC-AndMal2017. [Online]. Available: ing (CSEE), Hunan University (HNU), Changsha,
 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/index.html China, where he is currently pursuing the M.S.
[44] H. C. Tan, C. Cheh, and B. Chen, “CoToRu: Automatic generation degree. He is a Senior with CSEE, HNU. He is
 of network intrusion detection rules from code,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. majoring in computer science and technology, and
 Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May 2022, pp. 720–729. his research focuses on network and information
[45] Y. Wu et al., “Paradise: Real-time, generalized, and distributed security.
 provenance-based intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure
 Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1624–1640, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[46] Y. Fu, K. Liang, and J. Xu, “MLog: Mogrifier LSTM-based log anomaly
 detection approach using semantic representation,” IEEE Trans. Services
 Comput., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3537–3549, Sep./Oct. 2023.
[47] H. Namkung, Z. Liu, D. Kim, V. Sekar, and P. Steenkiste, “SketchLib: Zheng Qin (Associate Member, IEEE) received the
 Enabling efficient sketch-based monitoring on programmable switches,” Ph.D. degree in computer software and theory from
 in Proc. 19th USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Design Implement. Chongqing University in 2001. He is currently a
 (NSDI), Mar. 2022, pp. 743–759. Professor with the College of Cyber Science and
[48] D. Tang, B. Liu, K. Li, S. Xiao, W. Liang, and J. Zhang, “PLUTO: Technology, Hunan University, China. He has accu-
 A robust LDoS attack defense system executing at line speed,” IEEE mulated rich experience in product development and
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2855–2872, May application services, such as in the areas of financial,
 2025. medical, military, and education sectors. His main
[49] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and research interests include computer networks and
 A. Pescapé, “Network anomaly detection methods in IoT environments information security, cloud computing, big data provia deep learning: A fair comparison of performance and robustness,” cessing, and software engineering. He is a member
 Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103167. of CCF and ACM.
[50] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A
 hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in IoT scenarios,” in
 Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Taiwan, Dec. 2020,
 pp. 1–7. Wei Liang received the Ph.D. degree in computer
[51] M. Verkerken et al., “A novel multi-stage approach for hierarchical science and technology from Hunan University in
 intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, 2013. He was a Post-Doctoral Scholar with Lehigh
 pp. 3915–3929, Sep. 2023. University, Bethlehem, PA, USA, from 2014 to
[52] R. Zhao et al., “A novel intrusion detection method based on lightweight 2016. He is currently a Professor with the School
 neural network for Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, of Computer Science and Engineering, Hunan Unino. 12, pp. 9960–9972, Jun. 2022. versity of Science and Technology. His research
[53] H. Lesfari and F. Giroire, “Nadege: When graph kernels meet network interests include blockchain security technology, netanomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFO- work security protection, embedded systems and
 COM), May 2022, pp. 2008–2017. hardware IP protection, fog computing, and security
[54] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic management in wireless sensor networks.
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 699–714,
 2023.
[55] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early
 and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE Keqin Li (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023. computer science from Tsinghua University in 1985
[56] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ML-based and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the
 malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,” University of Houston in 1990. He is currently a
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), 2023, SUNY Distinguished Professor at The State Unipp. 1005–1019. versity of New York and a National Distinguished
[57] F. Cerasuolo, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, and A. Pescapè, “Attack-adaptive Professor at Hunan University, China. He is an
 network intrusion detection systems for IoT networks through class AAAS Fellow, an AAIA Fellow, an ACIS Fellow,
 incremental learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 263, May 2025, Art. no. and an AIIA Fellow. He is a member of European
 111228. Academy of Sciences and Arts. He is a member of
 Academia Europaea. Since 2020, he has been among
 the world’s top few most influential scientists in parallel and distributed
 computing regarding single-year impact (ranked #2) and career-long impact
 (ranked #4) based on a composite indicator of the Scopus citation database.

 Dan Tang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. Wenqiang Jin (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degrees from the Huazhong University of Science degree from The University of Texas at Arlington,
 and Technology in 2014. He is currently an Asso- TX, USA, in 2021. He is currently a Professor
 ciate Professor with the College of Cyber Science with the College of Cyber Science and Technoland Technology, Hunan University (HNU). His ogy, Hunan University, China. His research interests
 research interests include network security, informa- include mobile security, the loT security, and ubiqtion security, and programmable networks. uitous computing.