IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026 5163

 Replica-Based Moving Target Defense Against
 Injection Attacks in Software-Defined Industrial
 Control Systems
 Xabier Etxezarreta , Federico Turrin , Iñaki Garitano , Mikel Iturbe , Urko Zurutuza ,
 and Mauro Conti , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Recent incidents have demonstrated the increasing water management, transportation, and more, including Critical
vulnerability of Industrial Control Systems (ICSs) to sophisticated Infrastructures (CIs) [1]. ICSs play a crucial role in automating
and targeted attacks orchestrated by adversaries with high mo- and optimizing complex industrial operations by controlling and
tivation, resources, and domain knowledge. Among these threats,
False Data Injection (FDI) attacks have emerged as one of the main managing physical processes, machinery, and equipment. These
security threats to ICSs, involving the deliberate manipulation or systems typically consist of a combination of hardware, softinjection of false data into the control system to deceive or disrupt ware, and network infrastructure. They are designed to collect
operations. FDI attacks pose a significant risk due to their high data from various sensors and devices in real time, analyze that
capacity of concealment and ability to evade intrusion detection
 data, and initiate control actions to maintain optimal operation
systems that rely on accurate ICS models. In this paper, we present
DEFCLON, a novel Software-Defined Networking (SDN)-based Mov- and safety within industrial facilities.
ing Target Defense (MTD) approach against FDI attacks. DEF- In the past, due to the critical nature of these systems, ICSs
CLON proactively replicates network packets across multiple net- were traditionally isolated from other networks, ensuring a high
work paths and adaptively selects a single path using a signaling level of security and stability [2]. However, with the advent of the
game model to reach the destination end-device. We demonstrate IT-OT (Information Technology-Operational Technology) conthe effectiveness of our approach through simulations, numerical
analysis, and experiments on ICS network traffic and topologies. vergence, the landscape has changed, giving rise to new threats
Experimental results show that DEFCLON is able to not only mitigate and challenges [3]. This convergence has brought numerous
the effects of FDI attacks, but also to introduce different levels of benefits, including increased efficiency, improved data analysis,
uncertainty without degrading network performance, significantly and enhanced decision-making capabilities. However, it has also
increasing the difficulty for adversaries to gather information and introduced vulnerabilities and exposed ICSs to new risks. As
launch attacks.
 ICSs become more connected to IT networks and the Internet,
 Index Terms—Moving target defense (MTD), industrial control they become more susceptible to malicious activities. Attackers
systems, software-defined networking (SDN), game theory, now have a broader attack surface to target, and a successful
injection attacks.
 breach of an ICS can have severe consequences, including oper-
 I. INTRODUCTION ational disruptions, financial losses, and even safety hazards.
 NDUSTRIAL Control System (ICS) refers to a category Among the significant threats to ICSs, False Data Injection
I of computerized systems used to monitor and control industrial processes in sectors such as manufacturing, energy,
 (FDI) attacks pose a particularly grave risk due to the growing
 connection to IT networks and the Internet. These attacks can
 involve malicious actors injecting false or manipulated data
 Received 26 March 2024; revised 15 October 2025; accepted 1 January 2026. into the ICS traffic transmitted from the network, potentially
Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version 12 May 2026. This resulting in severe consequences [4].
work was supported in part by R&D&I project under Grant PLEC2024-011222
and in part by the Spanish Government’s Ministry of Science, Innovation A major concern is the use of unencrypted industrial protocols
and Universities under Grant MICIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033. The work to transmit data. Industrial protocols such as Modbus, DNP3, and
of Xabier Etxezarreta, Iñaki Garitano, Mikel Iturbe, and Urko Zurutuza was OPC were originally designed for closed, isolated environments
supported in part by Research Group under Grant IT1870-26 and in part
by the Department of Science, Universities and Innovation of the Basque where security was not a primary concern. As a result, these
Government. (Corresponding author: Xabier Etxezarreta.) protocols often lack encryption and authentication mechanisms,
 Xabier Etxezarreta, Iñaki Garitano, Mikel Iturbe, and Urko Zurutuza are with making them highly vulnerable to interception and manipulation
Data Analytics and Cybersecurity (DANZ) research group, Electronics and
Computing Department, Mondragon University, 20500 Arrasate-Mondragon, by attackers. In addition, many ICSs operate in real time with
Spain (e-mail: xetxezarreta@mondragon.edu; igaritano@mondragon.edu; mi- strict latency constraints. For example, in power systems, IEC
turbe@mondragon.edu; uzurutuza@mondragon.edu). 61850 standards require fault isolation and protection services
 Federico Turrin is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Padova,
35121 Padua, Italy, and also with SpritzMatter srl, 35121 Padua, Italy (e-mail: to meet a latency limit of 3 ms. However, the implementation
federico.turrin@spritzmatter.com). of access control and cryptographic measures can introduce
 Mauro Conti is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Padova, significant delays that exceed these latency requirements and
35121 Padua, Italy, and also with Örebro University, 70182 Örebro, Sweden
(e-mail: mauro.conti@unipd.it). disable essential real-time ICS operations [5]. Recent studies
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3652652 of real-world ICS traffic over the Internet have reported the
 1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
5164 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

vulnerabilities of these systems [6], [7], highlighting a lack of their effectiveness in developing security solutions for ICS,
security features in their communications. particularly in the attack detection and response field [14],
 To address FDI attacks, researchers have employed fault [15], [16].
diagnosis and bad data detection techniques (e.g., least squares To this end, in this paper we propose DEFCLON, a novel
method [8] or Kalman filter [9]). However, most of these de- SDN-enabled MTD framework to mitigate the impact of FDI
tectors typically rely on an accurate ICS model, which affects attacks in ICS. Our focus is on creating proactive and adaptive
the precision and reliability of intrusion detection, allowing network configurations that effectively change and adapt the
an attacker that possesses knowledge of the ICS model to existing attack surface, making it more difficult for adversaries
design stealthy FDI attacks to evade these intrusion detection to perform FDI attacks. Building upon previous research on
systems [10]. In fact, one of the critical factors contributing to MTD, we propose a multi-layered MTD strategy that is centhe success of these attacks in ICS is the ability of attackers to trally implemented on top of the SDN controller. DEFCLON
gain extensive knowledge about the topology and architecture of proactively replicates industrial network packets across different
the targeted ICS during the reconnaissance phase. As adversaries network paths, reducing the ability to intercept network traffic
accumulate deeper knowledge about the targeted system, their and limiting the ability of adversaries to gather industrial process
capacity to launch progressively more sophisticated, stealthy and knowledge. Among the different paths, DEFCLON incorporates
impactful attacks escalates. an adaptive system based on a signaling game model [17], that
 To invalidate the knowledge-gathering and stealth capabilities ensures that paths exhibiting suspicious behavior are not selected
of attackers, Moving Target Defense (MTD) has been proposed for transmitting data to the destination end-device. Our results
to counter FDI attacks [11]. MTD is a dynamic security ap- demonstrate that DEFCLON effectively mitigates FDI attacks in
proach that aims to counteract the advantage gained by attackers ICS. It successfully prevents attack traffic from reaching the desthrough increasing system complexity and uncertainty. Rather tination device, even compared to a fully random/non-adaptive
than relying on the static nature of ICS, MTD introduces constant traffic replication strategy. In summary, the contributions of this
variability and unpredictability into the system’s characteris- paper are as follows:
tics, making it significantly more challenging for adversaries r We propose a novel SDN-enabled MTD framework to
to gather accurate information, hindering the attack design and mitigate FDI attacks. The framework replicates industrial
implementation process. Nonetheless, deciding how often to network packets from a selection of different paths ranapply MTD countermeasures poses a challenge in establishing domized over time. From the pool of selected paths to
a trade-off between defense performance and attack surface ex- transmit packets, we select a single path to transmit data
posure time. Longer intervals can result in an extended window to the destination end-device, reducing attacker’s ability to
of vulnerability, allowing attackers to carry out their malicious inject packets into the industrial process.
activities. Conversely, short intervals can result in an inefficient r To further enhance the effectiveness of the replication
allocation of defensive resources. process, we propose a signaling game model implemented
 Therefore, it is particularly important to design an MTD on top of the SDN controller. The game model analyzes
approach against FDI attacks that dynamically adapts the attack packets transmitting from each path in real-time without
surface to changing threat scenarios without the need for an relying on a specific ICS model and adaptively selects one
ICS model. The dynamic aspect of MTD adds an extra layer of path to send data to the intended destination device. This
complexity, requiring network orchestration technologies and adaptive approach ensures that paths displaying unusual or
tools to implement these types of defenses. Software-Defined suspicious behavior are not chosen for data forwarding.
Networking (SDN) has become a recurring technology in many r We employ a simulated SDN-enabled industrial test enresearch works that propose the use of MTD for network se- vironment to evaluate the proposed defense approach.
curity [12]. As defined in RFC 7426 [13], SDN is an approach Through thorough numerical analysis and evaluation of
to network programmability, meaning the ability to dynamically the results obtained, we demonstrate the effectiveness of
initialize, control, modify and manage network behavior through the proposed MTD framework in mitigating FDI attacks in
open interfaces. To achieve this, the control plane is separated ICS.
and centralized in an external entity called SDN controller, while The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
the data plane remains on the network devices, focusing on we provide a discussion of related work and in Section III, we
packet forwarding functionality. SDN introduces a number of define the threat model. Section IV describes DEFCLON treating
advanced capabilities, including dynamic network configura- its theoretical aspects. Then, we present the experimental setup
tion, centralized control, granular network traffic analysis, flex- and results in Sections V and VI. We discuss the limitations of
ible policy enforcement, automated intrusion response, contin- the proposed work in Section VII, and finally, we conclude this
uous monitoring and analysis, and real-time incident response. work on Section VIII.
These capabilities are difficult to achieve using traditional networking technologies, but they are essential for the development
of adaptive MTD. Currently, the integration of SDN in industrial II. RELATED WORK
environments is still in its early stages of development [14]. In this section, we discuss and provide an overview of ex-
However, SDNs have already been successfully implemented isting research and literature relevant to this work. First, we
in IT environments, and several studies have demonstrated present research efforts on different MTD techniques. Second,
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5165

 strategies. If the interval is too long in a proactive strategy, attackers have enough time to compromise the system. Conversely, if
 the interval is too short, MTD may be triggered unnecessarily,
 consuming defense resources. To overcome this, we propose
 a hybrid approach that combines shuffling and redundancybased MTD with proactive and adaptive MTD mutations using
 a signaling game model. This approach allows operations to
 adapt to both normal and threat scenarios, without relying on a
 completely random approach.
Fig. 1. Differences between proactive and adaptive MTD [18]. The blue
vertical lines represent a proactive MTD strategy that is triggered at fixed time B. Signaling Games in Cybersecurity
intervals, while the dashed orange vertical line represents an adaptive MTD
strategy that is triggered by an event. Game theory has emerged as a framework for understanding and analyzing strategic interactions between individuals or
 entities. It has found applications in various fields, and one
we provide insights into the applicability of signaling games for area where game theory has gained significant relevance is
attack mitigation. Finally, we analyze different MTD techniques cybersecurity [30], providing insights into the strategic decisions
proposed in the literature against FDI attacks. made by both attackers and defenders. One particular aspect
 of game theory that has proven valuable in this context is
A. Moving Target Defense Techniques signaling games. These games involve players who have incomplete information and strategically send signals to influence the
 The goal of MTD techniques is to enhance the security of
 behavior of others. In the field of attack mitigation, signaling
computer systems and networks by constantly changing their
 games provide a framework for modeling interactions between
attack surface and making them more challenging to exploit.
 attackers and defenders, where defenders do not know exactly
Different MTD techniques can be classified according to their
 whether the signal received comes from a legitimate user or an
operational area [18].
 attacker. Aydeger et al. [31] propose an adaptive SDN-enabled
 Shuffling-based MTD techniques employ dynamic randomapproach to mitigate DDoS attacks. Their method involves
ization of system configurations. This randomization process
 the randomization of network paths and employs a signaling
obfuscates the configurations, making it difficult for attackers to
 game model to make informed decisions on when and where
gather information during the reconnaissance phase. As a result,
 to apply this randomization. Priyadarsini et al. [32] present a
the attack surface is reduced, and the complexity of identifying
 framework for both mitigating and evaluating attacks targeting
and exploiting vulnerabilities is increased. Examples within this
 SDN controllers. Their approach uses a signaling game to model
category include IP address randomization [19], port number
 communications between switches and SDN controller. Signalrandomization [20], network path/route randomization [21], and
 ing games have also proven to be a valuable tool for integrating
packet header randomization [22]. Furthermore, several propos-
 Moving Target Defense (MTD) techniques with cyber deception
als have been proposed that combine multiple shuffling-based
 strategies. Zhou et al. [33] introduce an approach that comtechniques. For instance, authors in [23] propose a low-delay
 bines cyber deception with multiple MTD strategies, such as IP
approach involving IP, MAC, and port numbers randomization
 randomization, path randomization, and response time adaptato mitigate reconnaissance attacks in industrial networks.
 tion. Furthermore, they introduce a defender-led signaling game
 Diversity-based MTD refers to the provision of equivalent
 model, allowing for the proactive transmission of deceptive
services using different implementations, enhancing system resignals to attackers. This approach addresses the inherent inforsilience. Code diversity aims to divide a program into commation asymmetry in cyberattacks, giving defenders a strategic
ponents that can be executed in different execution environadvantage.
ments [24]. Software diversity techniques involve deploying alternative versions of web servers, applications, or virtual servers
to enhance network resilience [25]. Furthermore, programming C. MTD for FDI Attacks Mitigation
languages diversity helps to mitigate risks of SQL or code The effectiveness of FDI attacks in evading detection systems
injection attacks [26]. has been well established, and attackers with extensive knowl-
 Redundancy-based MTD involves deploying systems that of- edge of the parameters of the ICS model pose a significant threat.
fer the same functionality in order to enhance reliability and As a result, current MTD strategies for FDI attacks primarily
availability. As an example, authors in [27] propose network focus on limiting the attacker’s ability to gain an in-depth unsession redundancy in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) commu- derstanding of the system or detecting these threats by revealing
nications to combat traffic analysis attacks. attackers in MTD environments [34], [35].
 Hybrid MTD consists of combining shuffling, diversity and A prominent MTD strategy in power systems involves altering
redundancy-based MTD techniques [28], [29]. the physical layer using Distributed Flexible AC Transmission
 A major challenge in proactive MTD solutions is determining System (D-FACTS) devices [36], [37] to invalidate an attacker’s
the optimal timing for applying MTD countermeasures. Fig. 1 knowledge for launching stealthy FDI attacks. However, this
illustrates the difference between proactive and adaptive MTD approach has significant limitations, as its effectiveness depends
5166 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE I
 A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT MTD STRATEGIES AGAINST FDI ATTACKS

on strict topological conditions [36]. Due to these constraints and preventing paths with suspicious behavior from reaching the
the high infrastructure costs of D-FACTS, subsequent research destination and overcoming the challenge of defining an optihas focused on developing more cost-effective solutions by mal randomization frequency. Table I presents a comparative
minimizing the number of required devices and their operational analysis of different MTD strategies against FDI attacks in ICS.
expenses, while also analyzing the defense’s impact on system
stability [38].
 As an alternative to parameter perturbation, some researchers III. THREAT MODEL
have proposed topology switching as an MTD mechanism [39]. For our threat model, we consider an ICS network that is
This approach reconfigures the system topology, for instance centrally managed using an SDN controller. We define the
through busbar switching, leveraging existing spare busbars to attacker’s characteristics and the attack process as follows:
serve as a security measure without requiring extra investment. Attackers’ Capabilities: An attacker within an industrial net-
To manage the complexity of selecting optimal switching ac- work poses a significant threat to the integrity of industrial
tions, the defense process was modeled as a Markov Decision communications. The attacker’s potential capabilities are:
Process (MDP) and solved using Deep Reinforcement Learning r Eavesdropping: The attacker can intercept data packets
(DRL) to achieve fast and efficient decision-making suitable for transiting the network from any communication channel
large-scale systems. or path. This allows them to gather sensitive information
 For instance, in [40], a reactive and proactive MTD mech- or monitor system behavior. There are many techniques
anism is proposed that dynamically changes the controller, on how an attacker could eavesdrop data packets flowing
altering cyber-physical system parameters, making it difficult through the SDN network. Examples of such techniques
for attackers to perform reconnaissance in the system and to include ARP spoofing [44], attacks to the topology discovdetect compromised actuators and sensors. Similarly, the authors ery [45] or by physically connecting to the communication
in [41] propose a framework for detecting Stuxnet-like attacks link, all of them launched from the data plane without
and limiting adversary knowledge by actively perturbing sensor needing access to the SDN controller.
and control commands. To counter the emergence of adver- r Data Injection: The attacker can inject false data into the
sarial FDI attacks designed to bypass even advanced Machine network traffic, potentially manipulating control signals or
Learning (ML)-based detectors, other approaches deploy a pool disrupting system operations. Examples of an adversary’s
of diverse Deep Neural Network (DNN) models to reduce an actions may include random attacks, carefully designed
attack’s transferability, which was combined with physics-based attacks, reply attacks, stealthy attacks or packet corruption
perturbations to enhance detection accuracy [37]. Another strat- attacks, to name a few.
egy employs proactive data replication by integrating new IoT We also consider the following limitations or assumptions:
devices to duplicate control commands and sensor readings, r Attacker Localization: The attacker resides within the data
thereby limiting an attacker’s state estimation capabilities and plane, meaning they have access to the network traffic but
reducing the likelihood of compromised data reaching its desti- not directly to the control plane (SDN controller).
nation [42], [43]. r Network Redundancy: Our framework relies on the ex-
 However, existing approaches present several shortcomings, istence of network redundancy, a common feature in inas many depend on accurate system models which can be dustrial networks designed for high availability and fault
difficult to maintain and scale. Furthermore, proactive MTD tolerance. We assume there are at least two communication
strategies that rely on fixed randomization frequencies struggle paths between industrial devices. Ideally, these paths are
to adapt to evolving threats. To address these issues, we propose fully disjoint, meaning they share no common network
an SDN-enabled proactive and adaptive traffic replication frame- links or nodes. This configuration maximizes the effecwork to mitigate FDI attacks in the ICS domain. Our framework tiveness of our defense, as the compromise of one path
leverages the central management of SDN to distribute traffic does not affect another. In scenarios with overlapping
across multiple paths and, without relying on an ICS model, paths, where paths share a common segment or node, an
employs a signaling game to detect suspicious activity. This attacker compromising that segment could impact multiple
allows the system to adaptively manage the path selection pool, replicated streams simultaneously. While this reduces the
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5167

Fig. 2. Attack on control packets (1) and attack on sensor packets (2).

 available path diversity, the signaling game would identify
 all compromised paths as suspicious. As long as at least
 one uncompromised path to the destination exists, it can
 be selected for secure data delivery.
 r Partial Network Compromise: The attacker can compro- Fig. 3. DEFCLON architecture and components overview.
 mise multiple network paths simultaneously, but not the
 entire network at once. This reflects a scenario where
 attackers may gain access to specific segments/paths adaptive path selection algorithm, which uses a signaling game
 of the network, but face challenges achieving complete model to select which paths are safe to reach the destination
 control. device.
 FDI Attack Process: We adopt a threat model consistent with
established research on FDI attacks in control systems [5], [46],
[47]. This model presumes an attacker has achieved a Man-in- A. Architecture
the-Middle (MitM) position on a network communication path, In order to explain the proposed framework in detail, we
enabling them to eavesdrop on, intercept, and modify or inject provide an overview of the architecture and the main components
data packets in transit. The attacker’s goal is to manipulate the of DEFCLON. Fig. 3 presents the overall architecture which
physical process by sending false data to critical devices. As includes two main components: the proactive path activation
shown in Fig. 2, this can manifest as tampering with sensor and data replication, and the adaptive path selection component.
readings sent to a controller (yi (t) = yia (t)) or altering control These two components are centrally implemented in the SDN
commands sent to an actuator (ui (t) = uai (t)). By injecting controller. The southbound interface serves as the communicacarefully crafted false values, the attacker seeks to mislead the tion link between the SDN controller (control plane) and the
system’s control logic without being detected, potentially caus- forwarding devices in the network (data plane). It allows the
ing physical damage or operational failure. Our work directly controller to instruct the devices on handling network traffic
counters this threat by making it difficult for the attacker’s based on the defined policies and rules. DEFCLON uses Openinjected data to be the one selected for delivery to the end device. Flow [48] as southbound interface communication protocol.
We formalize the measured variables ui (t) and yi (t) as OpenFlow enables the controller to configure flow tables within
  the forwarding devices, facilitating the dynamic control over
   ui (t), yi (t) for t ∈ / Ta
 ui (t), yi (t) = (1) packet forwarding behavior.
 uai (t), yia (t) for t ∈ Ta The proactive path activation and data replication component
such that ui (t), yi (t) and uai (t), yia (t) correspond to the ith orig- is responsible for managing the data replication through difinal and modified/tampered packet at t ≤ 0 ≤ T respectively. T ferent paths of the network. Paths are randomized over time,
is the duration of the simulation, and Ta is the duration interval creating intermittent data forwarding on the paths and making
of the attack. it difficult for eavesdroppers to gather complete and continuous
 The attacker can decide whether to remain idle on the network information. This component performs the following three key
 functions:
or compromise the integrity of the industrial communication. r Network Discovery: Implements network discovery to
 identify hosts and links in the network. Hosts are discov-
IV. DEFCLON: AN SDN-ENABLED PROACTIVE AND ADAPTIVE
 ered through Address Resolution Protocol (ARP, RFC826)
 DATA REPLICATION FRAMEWORK messages and links are discovered through Link Layer
 In this section, we introduce the SDN-based data replication Discovery Protocol (LLDP, IEEE 802.1AB) messages. The
framework. First, we provide an overview of the proposed network is continuously monitored to identify changes and
defense architecture. Next, we introduce the proactive path to maintain an updated topology view. It is important to
activation and data replication mechanism, which plays a critical note that while automated discovery is used for converole in the proposed framework by distributing multiple copies nience, it is not a strict requirement. In environments where
of network packets over different paths. Finally, we present the protocols like ARP are restricted, the network topology
5168 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Fig. 5. ICS data replication with an ALL type OpenFlow group.

 reaching the target device, thanks to our adaptive path selection
 mechanism. More details on these two components are provided
 in Sections IV-B and IV-C.

 B. Proactive Path Activation and Data Replication
 DEFCLON utilizes a multi-layered defense strategy. It begins
Fig. 4. Proactive and adaptive components of DEFCLON. The proactive com- with an initial layer that randomly replicates industrial network
ponent consists of replicating data from a subset of network paths that are ran- traffic across disjointed communication paths within the netdomized over time. The adaptive component consists of modeling the behavior work. During a predetermined time interval, the SDN controller
of each path with a signaling game model to dynamically forward or drop the
paths. selects a random subset of available paths from the network
 topology to replicate data from the source to the destination
 device. Once the interval ends, a different and randomly selected
 graph can be manually configured and provided to the group of paths takes over the data transmission. By adopting this
 SDN controller. DEFCLON’s core defense mechanisms only approach, if an attacker manages to compromise one of the paths,
 require an updated network graph and are independent of their access to network traffic becomes intermittent, restricting
 the discovery method used. their ability to acquire new and continuous information.
 r Data Replication: Selects a group of paths, performs copies Data replication is implemented using a utility called Openof the original ICS data and sends each copy from selected Flow groups. OpenFlow groups are a utility within the Openpaths. This module is also the responsible for changing the Flow protocol (available since version 1.1) designed to facilitate
 path selection over time. data replication and distribution in an SDN environment. These
 r Multipath forwarding: Manages forwarding rules in the groups are particularly useful for tasks such as multicast and
 network that send the replicated data from the source to data replication. By specifying a set of actions within a group
 the intended destination from the set of paths selected by (also known as buckets), administrators can ensure that certain
 the Data Replication module. packets are replicated and forwarded to multiple destinations
 The adaptive path selection component is the responsible for simultaneously. This is crucial for applications where data needs
monitoring the behavior of each path using the signaling game to be distributed to multiple recipients or where redundancy is
model and selecting a single path to send data to the destination necessary. As defined by the OpenFlow protocol specification,
end-device. To achieve this, this component assigns a status there are many types of OpenFlow groups. In our particular
to each path: forward or drop status. On the one hand, paths case, we use the “ALL group”, which takes any received packet
in forward state are eligible to be selected to send data to the as input and duplicates the packet to be operated independently
destination end-device. From the set of paths in forward state, a by each group of actions (buckets). The buckets within the group
single path is randomly selected to reach the destination device. are configured to forward data packets to its corresponding path.
On the other hand, paths in drop state are not eligible to reach The internals of and OpenFlow group (ALL type) is presented
the destination end-device. The status of each path is updated in in Fig. 5.
real-time using a signaling game model. The OpenFlow group responsible for data replication operates
 Fig. 4 provides a visual representation of the different layers within the initial forwarding device, where it intercepts all
of defense in DEFCLON. An eavesdropper that intercepts network data transmitted by the source ICS device. Subsequently, this
packets in a path gathers intermittent data caused by the proactive group distributes multiple copies of the data packets along the
path activation and data replication. Meanwhile, an attacker designated paths established within the group. Additionally, we
attempting FDI attacks on a path will face significant obstacles in include an extra bucket in the group to mirror each packet to
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5169

Fig. 6. Extensive form representation of the signaling game G.

the SDN controller. This allows the controller to store historical TABLE II
 NOTATION TABLE
communication packets, which the signaling game model can
later utilize to identify suspicious activities within each path.
This technique, commonly known as port mirroring or Switched
Port Analyzer (SPAN), is a common practice in industrial environments for performing packet monitoring or analysis (NISTR
8219 [49]).
 This data replication strategy is particularly synergistic with
ICS design principles. Industrial networks commonly feature
path redundancy to ensure fault tolerance and high availability.
DEFCLON leverages this existing architectural feature for security. By proactively replicating traffic across these redundant
paths, we introduce uncertainty for an adversary without altering the fundamental network topology or the high-availability
requirements of the control process.

C. Adaptive Path Selection
 the status each time the node mirrors a packet from a path to the
 The second layer of defense in DEFCLON is the adaptive path controller.
selection, which ensures that only a single, non-compromised The adaptive path selection component randomly selects a
path delivers data to the destination device. This is achieved in single path from the set of paths in forward state to send data
two steps. First, a filtering mechanism determines which paths to the destination device, and discards paths in drop state from
are suitable for data forwarding. It uses a signaling game model the selection pool. Each path is continuously and individually
to continuously monitor and assign a status of forward or drop to monitored by a signaling game model, which adaptively updates
each active path. Second, from the filtered set of paths currently the path’s state (drop or forward) in real-time.
in the forward state, a single path is selected randomly to transmit In the following, we first provide an overview of the signaling
its packet to the destination. This ensures that even among trusted game model by defining players, messages, and action sets.
paths, the final selection remains unpredictable. Next, we define the belief model and the payoff functions of
 As data flowing from different network paths generate uncer- both players. Finally, we analyze the game processes between
tainty, and we have incomplete information if a specific path players, and explore optimal strategies by calculating the Perfect
is operated by an attacker or not, we propose a signaling game Bayesian Nash Equilibria (PBNE) [50] in the game.
model to help select the optimal status for each path (drop or 1) Game Overview: The proposed signaling game model,
forward). The model is an attacker-led multi-stage signaling represented in Fig. 6, constitutes a non-cooperative game where
game in which the defender monitors each path individually each path is considered as an individual sender that could be a
and updates the status of each path every time a packet is legitimate or an attacker. An attacker, who has gained access to
forwarded. At the last exit node, where the different paths a communication path, could tamper industrial network packets
converge and a single path is selected to send data to the to misguide the control algorithm or inject corrupted network
destination device, the node mirrors the packets received from packets to generate errors in the communication. The notations
each path to the SDN controller using the OpenFlow protocol, used in this paper are summarized in Table II, and the necessary
which triggers the execution of the signaling game in each definitions in this game model are listed as follows.
path, updating their status. The SDN controller maintains one Players: The interaction between the sender (S) and receiver
signaling game per path and communication direction, updating (R) constitutes a non-cooperative game, where the attacker
5170 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

assumes the role of the sender, and the defender receives the This belief initialization can be adjusted if the defender has
messages in the form of replicated packets. The defender applies knowledge of whether some communication paths are more
MTD by replicating traffic through different paths in the network vulnerable to attack, by setting a higher initial belief if this is
and selecting a single path to reach the destination device. Due the case.
to the inability to distinguish between a legitimate user and Dynamic belief: The dynamic belief of a given path is crucial
an attacker, the defender must rely on the information in the for evaluating the expected payoffs for both players. This dypaths to decide. The signaling game G is played individually for namic belief, denoted by θn (t), is recalculated at each step (i.e.,
each path regardless of the sender type δ ∈ Δ = {0, 1}, where t > 0) as the game is played. The (3) describes how a player’s
δ = 0 is considered a legitimate user whereas δ = 1 represents dynamic belief is computed, which involves two weighted facan attacker. tors that are combined to produce a score. Since the weights are
 Messages: Signaling game G is considered a multistage game normalized values, the sum of the two weights is w1 + w2 = 1
where the sender sends a set of possible messages m ∈ M = (i.e., 100% ).
{0, 1} and the defender receives these signals to take the corre-
 θn (t) = θn (t − 1) ∗ ω1 + ψ(r, rn ) ∗ ω2 , n ∈ N, t > 0. (3)
sponding action. Various messages can be formed from different
configurations, and they have the ability to influence the de- The first factor represents a paths’s prior belief θn (t − 1),
fender’s viewpoint on whether a path is under attack or not. Since weighted by w1 . When evaluating a client’s behavior, it is
the space of possible messages is large, the game focuses on two important to consider their history of suspicious or legitimate
specific messages: whether the actual replicated packet differs actions. This is because a single deviation from their typical
from the originally forwarded packet or not. Based on this, behavior cannot completely negate the previously observed and
message m = 1 indicates that the path is suspicious, whereas learned patterns. In other words, the client’s current action
m = 0 represents that the path is under normal operation. cannot completely override the belief in their historical behavior.
 For example, a player δ = 1 (attacker) may choose to remain Therefore, to evaluate their overall performance, the prior belief
idle on the network without modifying packets (m = 0), or to is essential to take into account the sender’s previously observed
attack by modifying or corrupting packets in transit (m = 1). behavior.
Similarly, a path under normal operation δ = 0 (legitimate) The second factor of the dynamic belief function measures the
may transmit packets correctly (m = 0), or packets may be dissimilarity between a given packet rn and the original packet
accidentally corrupted (m = 1) in transit due to electromagnetic r previously mirrored from the initial node and stored in the
interferences, physical medium issues, signal attenuation, noise, SDN controller. In the context of ICS, the dissimilarity metric,
congestion, jitter, or hardware/software malfunctions, to name denoted by ψ(r, rn ), is especially powerful. Unlike IT networks,
a few. which have highly variable traffic, ICS communications are
 Actions: After receiving a message m ∈ M from the sender, often deterministic and cyclical (e.g., periodic sensor polling).
the defender selects an action for the path by choosing a ∈ A = Therefore, a deviation captured by this metric is a strong indi-
{0, 1}. Action a = 0 denotes that the path can be selected to be cator of manipulation. The dissimilarity metric is binary and is
forwarded to the destination, while a = 1 signifies that the path weighted by a parameter w2 , where ψ(r, rn ) is set to 0 if the
must be dropped. packets are identical and 1 otherwise.
 2) Belief Model: In signaling game G, the defender cannot 3) Payoff Model: In the following, we define the payoff
determine whether the traffic comes from a legitimate user or an model considering all possible strategy profiles and different
attacker. Consequently, the defender monitors the signals from player types. Let μP (δ, m, a) represent the payoff function of
each path and uses that information to form a belief function player P , where P ∈ {S, R}. Both players aim to maximize
(θ) concerning the sender’s identity on each observation. The their payoffs, maintaining a balance between gain and cost.
defender has a belief per path, i.e., if the traffic of a commu- Receiver: If the defender chooses the drop strategy (i.e., a =
nication is replicated from five paths, the defender will have 1) in response to a suspicious packet sent by an attacker (i.e.,
five different beliefs for that communication, one per path. The δ = 1), the defender effectively defends the target system. Let’s
belief values range between 0 and 1, 0 representing that no sign consider N as the total number of available paths, Nf as the
of suspicious activity has been detected. The belief function number of paths in the forward state, and Nd as the number of
comprises two parts: the initial belief that is calculated statically paths in the drop state.
at the beginning of the game at t = 0 and the dynamic belief The receiver’s numerical gain for defending against an atfunction used to update the belief each time the defender receives tacker who plays suspiciously can be quantified using the paa mirrored packet from a path at t > 0. rameter gd = 1 − NNd . A higher value of Nd results in a lower
 Initial belief: At the beginning, there is no information about gain from dropping, while a lower value of Nd results in a
any of the paths, and the same level of suspicion is applied to all higher gain. Dropping a path also has a cost to the defender,
of them. Thus, at step t = 0, the defender assumes that each path as it reduces the size of the path selection pool. This cost is
is legitimate and free from any form of attack. The initial belief denoted by the parameter cd = NNd , which represents the ratio
for each path at t = 0 is initialized and calculated as follows: of paths in the drop state to the total number of available paths,
 N . A higher value of Nd increases the cost of dropping another
 path, while a lower value of Nd decreases the cost. Therefore,
 θn (0) = 0, n ∈ N. (2) whenever the defender decides to drop a path, it will incur a
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5171

cost of cd . Critically, the cost of dropping a path (cd ) lies in the r Condition 2: For all message types m ∈ M , receiver’s
reduction of path diversity, which may weaken the industrial strategy εR must maximize his expected payoff given the
network’s resilience and reliability, particularly in real-time belief θ(δ|m) about which sender type sends m, such that
control operations. 
 It is important to note that the defender only gets the gain for εR ∈ max θ(δ|m)μR (δ, m, a). (5)
 m∈M
dropping a path (gd ) if the player type is δ = 1 and the signal δ∈Δ

is m = 1. This gain from correctly dropping a compromised r Condition 3: The sender’s (legitimate or attacker) strategy
path (gd ) translates directly to the prevention of physical process εS must maximize his payoff given the defender’s action
disruption or equipment damage. a ∈ A, such that
 The defender’s numerical gain for selecting forward in a path
when the received signal is m = 0 can be expressed as the εS ∈ max μS (δ, m, a). (6)
 m∈M
 N
parameter gf = 1 − Nf . This gain is influenced by the value r Condition 4: If there is a type δ that satisfies senders
of Nf , where a higher value of Nf corresponds to a lower
 strategy m∗ ∈ M , the defender’s belief about the sender
gain, while a lower value of Nf corresponds to a higher gain.
 type corresponding to message m must follow the Bayes
Functionally, the gain from forwarding a legitimate packet (gf )
 rule so that
represents maintaining the operational integrity and stability
of the physical process. The defender will only gain gf when p(δ)
 θ(δ|m) =  . (7)
players δ = 0 and δ = 1 send signal m = 0. If a legitimate δ∈Δ∗ p(δ)
sender δ = 0 plays suspicious m = 1 (i.e., packet corruption
 where Δ∗ refers to the set of senders that sent m∗ and p(δ)
during transmission) and the defender plays a = 0, the defender
 indicates the prior probability of sender being type δ.
action will not result in any gain, as it may generate a delay in the
 Definition 1: A PBNE in a signaling game is a pair of
network due to the retransmission carried out by the transport
 strategies εS (m|δ) and εR (a|m), and a belief θn (t) that satisfies
layer protocol (i.e., if TCP is used).
 conditions 1-4.
 Sender: The attacker’s main goal is to deliver the
 In a signaling game, there can be multiple PBNE, which
spoofed/tampered packets to the target device. The attacker’s
 are sets of stable strategies against deviations by either player.
gain (ga ) is achieved only if their malicious packet is selected
 These PBNEs can be divided into two categories: separatto reach the end-device, allowing them to directly influence the
 ing equilibrium and pooling equilibrium. In a pooling equiphysical process. Because of this, the attacker gets a significant
 librium, the sender uses the same signal for multiple types
gain ga by sending a signal m = 1, and the defender decides to
 εS (m|0) = εS (m|1), and the receiver chooses the same action
apply the action a = 0. However, being active on the network
 regardless of the signal received. In a separating equilibrium,
costs the attacker ca . Thus, the attacker incurs a cost of ca every
 on the other hand, the sender uses a particular signal to convey
time a signal is sent, and gains ga only when the signal is m = 1
 information about their type to the receiver, and the receiver
and the defender chooses a = 0. This tradeoff between gain and
 uses this information to choose the appropriate action. In a
cost characterizes the attacker’s strategy in the network, while
 separating equilibrium, the sender’s signal is different for each
our defense aims to make this payoff difficult to achieve.
 type εS (m|0) = εS (m|1).
 4) Signaling Game Analysis: In games with complete infor-
 In order to identify the existing equilibrium profiles in the sigmation or non-Bayesian games, a strategy profile is said to be
 naling game G, the conditions that lead to pooling or separating
a Nash Equilibrium (NE) if every strategy in that profile is the
 equilibriums are examined next. The values of the payoffs may
best response to every other strategy. In such games, each player
 vary depending on the network topology or number of paths
knows the rules of the game and has complete information about
 available in a communication between two devices, requiring to
the other players, strategies, and payoffs. However, in Bayesian
 determine the existence of different equilibrium profiles in the
games, players have incomplete information and uncertainty
 game.
about the other players types, which affects their expected
 Theorem 1: There is a pooling equilibrium ∀θ on m = 1 in
payoffs. In these games, players aim to maximize their expected
 the signaling game G.
payoffs given their beliefs about the other players. Therefore, a
 Proof: Suppose both sender types follow the same strategy
strategy profile in a Bayesian game is a PBNE if every players’
 m = 1. In this scenario, the defender’s belief about the sender
strategy is the best response to their beliefs about the other
 type is determined following Bayes rule. The defender’s explayers strategies and types, and the beliefs are consistent with
 pected payoff μR∗ for playing a = 0 based on its belief θ is
Bayes rule. PBNE is a refinement of NE that takes into account
 represented by the following equation:
players incomplete information and the resulting uncertainty
in their decision-making. The conditions for a PBNE are the a=0 = θ(−ga ) + (1 − θ)(0).
 μR∗ (8)
following:
 r Condition 1: After observing a message m from the sender, Similarly, the following equation represents defender’s exthe receiver must have a belief θ(δ|m) about the sender that pected payoff μR∗ for playing a = 1:
 satisfies μR∗
 a=1 = θ(gd − cd ) + (1 − θ)(−cd ). (9)
 
 θ(δ|m) = 1 and θ(δ|m) ≥ 0. (4) By comparing the expected payoffs of the defender for each
 δ∈Δ of the action sets mentioned above, a belief threshold, denoted as
5172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

θ∗ , can be formulated by performing μR∗
 a=0 = μa=1 calculation,
 R∗
 Algorithm 1: Adaptive Path Status Selection Algorithm.
obtaining the following result:
 cd
 θ∗ = . (10)
 gd + ga
 Assuming that θ∗ ≥ 0, the following two cases represent a
dominant strategy for the defender in this pooling equilibrium:
 r θ ≥ θ∗ = cd . Action a = 1 dominates a = 0 when obgd +ga
 taining a signal m = 1 and the condition θ ≥ θ∗ is satisfied.
 This can be verified by comparing expected payoffs defined
 in (8) and (9). Taking into account the possible deviations of
 the sender, it can be observed that both sender types have
 no incentives to deviate. The attacker and the legitimate
 user will obtain the same payoffs in both message types,
 −ca and 0 respectively.
 r θ ≤ θ∗ = cd . Action a = 0 dominates a = 1 when obgd +ga
 taining a signal m = 1 and the condition θ ≤ θ∗ is satisfied.
 Similar to the previous case, incentives of the senders for
 deviating from m = 1 must be checked when the defender
 plays a = 0 in the pooling equilibrium. As observed in the
 payoffs, neither type of sender has any incentive to deviate
 from its strategy. In the case of the attacker, the payoff will
 drop from ga − ca to −ca , while the payoff of a legitimate
 user will remain 0.
 Theorem 2: There is no pooling equilibrium ∀θ at m = 0 in
the signaling game G.
 Proof: Following a pooling strategy in message m = 0,
defender’s best response is a = 0, obtaining a payoff of gf with
both sender types. Hence, deviations from the sender should be Fig. 7. The adaptive path status decision-making process in DEFCLON.
taken into account considering receivers optimal response in this
pooling strategy. As a legitimate user (i.e., sender type δ = 0
) obtains 0in all strategy profiles, let only consider attackers scenario, senders have no incentive to deviate from their
δ = 1 possible deviations from the equilibrium. If it deviates strategy.
from m = 0 to m = 1, the attacker will increase its payoff from Theorem 4: There is no separating equilibrium on {(δ =
−ca to ga − ca when the defender plays a = 0. Because of this, 0, m = 1), (δ = 1, m = 0)} in the signaling game G.
there is no pooling equilibrium at ∀θ on m = 0. Proof: Consider a separating strategy where player δ = 0
 Theorem 3: There are two separating equilibriums on {(δ = plays m = 1 and player δ = 1 plays m = 0. In this case, the
0, m = 0, a = 0), (δ = 1, m = 1, a = 1)} and {(δ = 0, m = best response of the defender to a sender δ = 1 playing m = 0
0, a = 0), (δ = 1, m = 1, a = 0)} in the signaling game G. and a player type δ = 0 playing m = 1 is a = 0. Focusing on
 Proof: Let’s suppose a separating strategy where player sender type δ = 1 possible deviations, we can conclude that there
type δ = 0 sends m = 0 and player type δ = 1 sends m = 1. is not a separating equilibrium in this scenario. If the sender
Best response of the defender for sender type δ = 1 sending type δ = 1 deviates by playing m = 1 instead of m = 0 and
m = 1 can be obtained by comparing gd − cd and −ga payoffs, the defender responds to that message with a = 0, the payoff of
resulting in: the sender type δ = 1 will be increased from −ca to ga − ca .
 Because of this, there is no separating equilibrium on {(δ =
 gd∗ = cd − ga . (11) 0, m = 1), (δ = 1, m = 0)}.
 Theorems 1 to 4 represent all possible PBNE in the proposed
Payoffs comparison leads to the following two scenarios:
 r gd ≥ g ∗ = cd − ga . The best response for the defender is signaling game G. The process of adaptively monitoring and
 d
 updating the status of the paths is represented in Algorithm 1 and
 a = 1 when player δ = 1 plays m = 1 and a = 0 when
 Fig. 7, which details the decision logic and process for assigning
 player δ = 0 plays m = 0. Checking possible sender strata forward or drop status to an individual path.
 egy deviations, both δ = 0 and δ = 1 will not have incentives to deviate as they will obtain the same payoff, 0 and
 −ca respectively. V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
 r gd ≤ g ∗ = cd − ga . In this scenario, the best response In this section, we present the experimental setup for validatd
 for the defender, when player δ = 1 plays m = 1 and ing DEFCLON: the physical process, the network topologies, and
 player δ = 0 plays m = 0, is a = 0. Same as the previous the FDI attack implementation process.
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5173

 PLC1 is tasked with monitoring the water level data received
 from sensor S_WL1 and comparing it against these thresholds.
 Based on this comparison, it determines whether to open or close
 actuator A_P1. Additionally, PLC1 communicates with PLC2 to
 obtain sensor data from S_FR2 and with PLC3 to acquire readings from sensor S_WL2. By comparing these sensor readings
 against predefined thresholds, PLC1 determines the appropriate
 state for actuator A_P2 (open or close).
 PLC3 is responsible for managing the water level data from
Fig. 8. First stage of the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed implemen- sensor S_WL2, which measures the water level in TANK 2. The
tation in MiniCPS. primary goal here is to prevent tank overflow by comparing the
 sensor reading with the HH threshold. In the event that the water
 TABLE III level exceeds the maximum capacity of 1200 mm (HH), PLC3
 SENSORS AND ACTUATORS FUNCTION, MEASUREMENTS AND STATUS opens actuator A_P3 to reduce the risk of overflow and tries to
 reduce the water level until it reaches the H threshold.
 The simulation starts with an initial water level of 800 mm
 in TANK 1 and 400 mm in TANK 2. Since the water level in
 TANK 2 is below the threshold L (500 mm), the control process
 starts with the stabilization phase by opening actuator A_P2,
 and sending water from TANK 1 to TANK 2 in order to reach
 the water level indicated by threshold H (800 mm). The system
 is considered stabilized when both water tanks reach a water
 TABLE IV level of 800 mm (indicated by the H threshold). When the water
 WATER TANKS LEVELS CONTROL LOGIC THRESHOLDS level in TANK 1 falls below the L threshold (500 mm), PLC1
 opens actuator A_P1 until the water level reaches the H threshold
 (800 mm).
 The PLCs communicate using the Ethernet/IP protocol, which
 facilitates the exchange of information to control and manage
 the water treatment process.
A. Physical Process
 B. Industrial Control Network Topology
 The experimental evaluation is conducted within MiniCPS 1
framework, a platform for cyber-physical system simulation and We conducted the experiments in mesh and ring topologies,
testing introduced by Antonioli et al. in their work [51]. This each consisting of 6 nodes (Fig. 9). These network architectures
framework includes the simulation of the first of the six stages are widely used and readily available for industrial applications,
of the Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) system [52], which is as evidenced by technical documentation and reports from varwidely used for research and experimentation in the area of ICS ious industrial equipment vendors [53], [54], [55].
security. A mesh topology (Fig. 9(a)) is a network design where each
 The first stage of the SWaT testbed, illustrated in Fig. 8, device in the network is interconnected to every other device,
involves two water tanks, TANK 1 and TANK 2, two flow creating a redundant and highly fault-tolerant system. Within the
rate sensors (S_FR1, S_FR2), two water level sensors (S_WL1, mesh network, each device serves as a node, and it communicates
S_WL2), and three actuators (A_P1, A_P2, A_P3). These ac- directly with all other devices in the network. This redundancy
tuators are responsible for regulating the water flow, ensuring allows for data to flow through multiple paths, ensuring that even
it progresses to the subsequent stages of the treatment process. if one link or device fails, communication can continue through
Table III provides a detailed breakdown of the sensors and actua- alternative routes. The mesh topology is suitable for applicators, including their functions, measurements, and status-related tions such as process control, where real-time data exchange is
information. essential.
 The control process depends on predefined water level thresh- In contrast to the mesh topology, a ring topology (Fig. 9(b))
olds, which are listed in Table IV. The primary objective of the involves connecting devices in a circular arrangement, where
control logic is to maintain the water level within the specified each device is connected to precisely two others, forming a
high (H) and low (L) thresholds in both TANK 1 and TANK 2, closed loop. One advantage of the ring topology is that it is
ensuring that it remains within an optimal range. Furthermore, relatively simple to set up and manage compared to the mesh
there is an overflow threshold, denoted as HH, which represent topology, as there are fewer connections to configure. However,
the upper maximum limit of the water level. it is less fault-tolerant; if one device or connection in the ring
 fails, it can disrupt the entire network.
 Furthermore, it is worth noting that in one of the experiments,
 1 Available at https://github.com/scy-phy/minicps we extended the number of nodes beyond the default 6 to
5174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 in the next section. In one of the experiments, we test different
 weight values in the belief model and analyze the evolution under
 different configurations.

 C. FDI Attack Implementation
 Following the threat model described in Section III, we designed the attack with the goal of degrading performance, misleading the control algorithm, and causing damage to physical
 industrial equipment. The manipulated variable corresponds to
 the sensor S_WL2, which measures the water level in TANK 2.
 In this attack, we assume that the attacker gains access to a communication path between PLC1 and PLC3 and tampers S_WL2
 sensor reading data requested by PLC1 to PLC3, changing the
 water level value to 0.4 meters, below the optimal level defined
 by the threshold L setting. In response, PLC1 opens actuator
 A_P2, sending water from TANK 1 to TANK 2 and eventually
 increasing the water level in TANK 2 until it reaches the overflow
 threshold.

 VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
 In this section, we first investigate the proactive path activation and adaptive path selection probabilities of DEFCLON
 in Sections VI-A and VI-B. We then test DEFCLON on the
 SWaT testbed in Section VI-C, and compare it to the closest
 works in the literature to highlight its ability to mitigate FDI
 attacks in industrial environments. In Section VI-D, we study
 the behavior of the belief model with different configurations
 and demonstrate the ability of the model to adapt to different
Fig. 9. Industrial control network topologies used in the experimentation: A scenarios. Finally, in Section VI-E we examine the end-to-end
mesh network topology (a) and a ring network topology (b).
 performance impact of DEFCLON in networks with different size.

introduce scalability and variation into the assessment. This A. Estimating Proactive Path Activation Probabilities
allowed us to observe how the implementation of DEFCLON The proactive path activation aims to create uncertainty for ataffects network performance, providing valuable insights into tackers by preventing them from consistently accessing network
its suitability for different industrial network sizes. traffic and gathering information to construct effective attacks.
 On top of these two network topologies, we implemented Considering the scenario where an attacker breaches a single
DEFCLON on a single SDN controller powered by Ryu.2 To ensure communication path, the probability of network traffic being
efficient data transmission throughout the network, we con-   using n!
 transmitted through the attacker’s path is calculated comstructed the network topology using Open vSwitch3 switches. binatorics. The binomial coefficient, denoted as nk = k!(n−k)! ,
The entire network, including the SDN controller, was deployed represents the number of ways to choose k elements from a
on a single server powered by Ubuntu 22.04, which featured an set of n elements, regardless of their order. In DEFCLON, given
Intel Xeon E5-2630 processor and 32 GB of RAM. the availability of N paths to transmit data, the total number of
 We define the quantitative measures for the parameters of the combinations without repetition Ct can be computed as
signaling game G for the path status decision-making as follows.
 N  
 
To simplify the analysis, we stabilize the attacker’s numerical N
gain and loss, ga and ca , respectively, as a normalized value Ct (N ) = . (12)
 k
 k=1
of 1. We dynamically compute the remaining game parameters
(gf , gd , cd ) as described in Section IV-C3 each time the game is Next, we calculate the number of combinations for a single
played. Additionally, we set the weights in the belief model for path (Cp ) as
running the experiments to w1 = 0.9 and w2 = 0.1. With these
 N 
  
values, we achieve a good trade-off between past interactions N −1
and current information sensitivity, as shown in our experiments Cp (N ) = . (13)
 k−1
 k=1

 2 Available at https://github.com/faucetsdn/ryu Assuming that all paths have the same probability, the prob-
 3 Available at https://www.openvswitch.org/ ability associated with activating a particular path to transmit
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5175

Fig. 10. Path activation (Ap ) and path selection (Sp ) probabilities under
different number of available paths.

data, denoted by Ap , is expressed by the following equation:
 Cp (N )
 Ap (N ) = . (14)
 Ct (N )
 Information-gathering is limited by DEFCLON: A random
subset of paths to transmit data are periodically triggered by
DEFCLON, creating intermittent data transfers. This dynamic
behavior thwarts attackers with access to these paths, limiting
their ability to collect information. As the number of available
paths grows towards infinity (N → ∞), the probability of a path
being activated to transmit data approaches 50% . Consequently,
there is a 50% chance on N → ∞ that a path will not transmit
network traffic at any given time. We illustrate this trend in
Fig. 10(a).

B. Estimating Adaptive Path Selection Probabilities
 Fig. 11. Water level deviation under different network topologies and MTD
 Given a pool of N available paths, all of which are in a forward implementation strategies.
state, we can determine the probability of selecting a particular
path to forward data to the destination device using the following
calculation. Assuming an equal probability of selecting any a presence on a network path and initiates an attack on the
single path for this task, the selection probability (Sp ) can be path currently selected for data delivery to the end device.
expressed as This approach enables us to measure the effectiveness of the
 N signaling-game-based response in mitigating an ongoing attack.
 (Nk−1
 −1
 )
 1 For this, we executed the DEFCLON framework on the initial
 Sp (N ) = Ap (N ) k=1 k
 = . (15)
 Cp (N ) N stage of the SWaT testbed, as detailed in Section V-A. Fig. 11
 illustrates the temporal evolution of two water tank levels,
 DEFCLON introduces uncertainty in path selection: As the
 namely TANK 1 and TANK 2, across three scenarios: (1) Wanumber of available paths (N ) approaches infinity (N → ∞),
 ter level deviation without the use of MTD or any defense
the probability of selecting a particular path to forward data to
 mechanism. (2) Water level deviation with the random traffic
the target device converges to 0% . Consequently, as the number
 replication MTD strategy proposed in [43] and [42]. (3) Water
of paths increases, the probability of a path being selected to
 level deviation with our proactive and adaptive traffic replication
forward traffic to the destination device decreases. This signif-
 MTD framework DEFCLON.
icantly reduces the probability of adversaries to perform FDI
 For each scenario, we conducted a total of 20 simulations,
attacks on a path selected to reach the destination device. This
 using two different network topologies: mesh and ring, as distrend is illustrated in Fig. 10(b).
 cussed in Section V-B. We performed 10 simulations for each
 topology type. The solid lines represent the mean water level
C. Mitigating FDI Attacks in the SWaT Testbed across the 10 trials for each configuration, while the shaded area
 In Sections VI-A and VI-B, we demonstrated that the proac- around each line in Fig. 11(c) indicates the standard deviation.
tive components of DEFCLON inherently limit an attacker’s The small standard deviation observed across all trials indicates
opportunities, showing that an adversary faces significant un- a high degree of consistency and reproducibility of DEFCLON.
certainty and a low probability of success by default. In this In each simulation run, we allowed an initial 2-minute winsection, we evaluate DEFCLON’s effectiveness under a worst-case dow for the control logic to stabilize the process, ensuring a
scenario. We simulate a scenario in which an adversary has water level of approximately 0.8 meters in both tanks. After
5176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE V
 COMPARISON OF DEFCLON WITH OTHER DATA REPLICATION STRATEGIES AGAINST FDI ATTACKS

this initialization period, a simulated adversary starts with the A_P2 in the next cycle (indicated by a vertical green dashed line),
FDI attack, following the procedure outlined in Section V-C. effectively limiting the deviation in water levels compared to the
The moment at which the testbed is actively attacked is indi- random MTD strategy. Table V summarizes the main differences
cated by a vertical dashed red line. During these experiments, between the random MTD strategies (MTD-IDR and DMTDR),
we assume the worst-case scenario where the attacker starts and our adaptive MTD proposal DEFCLON.
the FDI attack in the path selected to reach the destination DEFCLON is topology-agnostic: The fact that DEFCLON perend-device. forms well on different network topologies ascertains the va-
 Examining Fig. 11(a), which illustrates the impact of the FDI lidity of our claim about the applicability of our method to a
attack in the absence of any defense mechanism, we observe the wide range of topologies. This versatility and adaptability of
following sequence of events: DEFCLON in addressing FDI attacks on various ICS network
 r At minute 2, when the attacker initiates the attack by tam- topologies is attributed to the inherent advantages provided by
 pering S_WL2 sensor reading packets requested to PLC3, SDN. SDN introduce an abstraction layer between the data
 PLC1 responds by opening the A_P2 actuator. This action plane and the control plane, allowing for enhanced flexibility
 results in the transfer of water from TANK 1 to TANK 2, and control in any network topology design. As shown in
 causing an increase in the water level in TANK 2 and a Fig. 11, DEFCLON is able to respond to FDI attacks on different
 corresponding decrease in TANK 1 water level. ICS network topologies that had actual impact on the physical
 r When the water level in TANK 2 reaches 1.2 meters, PLC3 process.
 opens A_P3 to prevent an overflow. As a result, the water
 level stabilizes at 1.2 meters (threshold HH), as the rate at
 D. Experimenting With the Belief Model
 which water leaves A_P3 and enters the tank matches.
 r A similar phenomenon occurs in TANK 1. When PLC1 The belief model plays a crucial role in the decision-making
 activates the A_P2 actuator to transfer water to TANK 2, process and equilibrium calculation within the signaling game G.
 TANK 1 water level decreases until it reaches the threshold This study introduces a belief model composed of two factors,
 value (L) of 0.5 meters. each weighted by w1 and w2 respectively (3). By fine-tuning
 r In response to this decrease, PLC1 opens the A_P1 actuator these weights, we can observe diverse trajectories in the evoluin an attempt to stabilize the water level at 0.8 meters. The tion of the belief values.
 reason TANK 1 water level stabilizes at 0.5 meters after The belief model evolution is adaptable: To visualize difthe attack is due to the fact that the rate of water flowing ferent evolutions of the belief model, Fig. 12 represents three
 from A_P2 matches the rate at which water enters from scenarios with different weight values. In order to capture this
 A_P1. evolution, we conducted an attack in a path, spanning a duration
 DEFCLON outperforms random MTD strategies: The compari- of 2 minutes. The weight w1 represents the model’s memory,
son presented in Fig. 11 demonstrates that DEFCLON significantly which gives precedence to the path’s historical behavior. A
outperforms both the MTD-IDR [42] and DMTDR [43] random higher value of w1 makes the system more conservative. It
MTD strategies. In the case of the random traffic replication will be slower to drop a historically reliable path based on a
MTD strategy shown in Fig. 11(b), when the attack initiates at single suspicious packet. On the other hand, the weight w2
minute 2, the water level changes in the tanks remain identical represents how reactive the model is to immediate evidence.
to the scenario without MTD. However, when the randomness A higher w2 value makes the system highly sensitive, causing
of this strategy replaces the path under attack, at minute 4 in the belief value to spike rapidly when the first anomalous
our simulations (indicated by a blue dashed vertical line), the packet is detected. While this allows for near-instantaneous
control logic attempts to stabilize both tank’s water levels at detection, it also increases the risk of misclassifying benign
0.8 meters. Conversely, when observing Fig. 11(c), it becomes packet corruption as a malicious attack. Therefore, the choice of
evident that DEFCLON’s adaptive path selection strategy, based on these parameters represents a trade-off between detection speed
the signaling game model G, is far more effective in mitigating and stability. For example, a configuration with w1 = 0.1 and
the attack compared to the random MTD strategy. Thanks to the w2 = 0.9 is highly sensitive and suitable for environments where
signaling game, the attacked path is rapidly replaced shortly after even minor deviations are critical and network-induced errors
the attack begins (indicated by a vertical blue dashed line). As are rare. The configuration with w1 = 0.9 and w2 = 0.1 is more
soon as the attacked path is replaced, PLC1 closes the actuator cautious and is suitable for environments with potential network
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5177

 TABLE VI
 ROUND TRIP TIME (RTT) OF NETWORK PACKETS UNDER NORMAL OPERATION WITHOUT MTD AND DEFCLON OPERATION

 just as in a normal network operation without MTD, DEFCLON
 does not introduce any delay or performance degradation in the
 communications, regardless of the path length and the topology
 type.

 VII. LIMITATIONS AND DISCUSSION
 Controller scalability and computational load: A key consideration for DEFCLON is the computational load on the SDN
 controller, which handles real-time path monitoring and gametheoretic calculations. The system is designed to limit this burden inherently. First, the signaling game’s calculations are computationally lightweight, involving simple arithmetic rather than
 resource-intensive algorithms. Second, these calculations are
 triggered only upon a packet’s arrival at the final node before the
 destination, not at every hop in the network core, which significantly reduces the frequency of controller interactions. Despite
 this efficiency, a single, centralized controller could still become
 a performance bottleneck in large-scale or high-traffic industrial
 settings. For such scenarios, established SDN patterns offer clear
 scalability paths. A distributed controller architecture [56], [57]
Fig. 12. Belief value evolution in a path under attack with different weight can share the monitoring and calculation load across multiple
values. instances, enhancing performance and resilience. Additionally,
 incorporating a stateful data plane [58] could offload computanoise, where the system must be confident before dropping tional tasks to the network devices themselves, further reducing
a path. controller overhead.
 Optimal path number selection: Refers to the challenge of
 determining the ideal number of paths to use in a network.
E. Measuring Network Performance Degradation The existing work assumes a fixed number of available paths
 To assess the impact of DEFCLON on network performance, we without considering the dynamic nature of network conditions
conducted a comprehensive analysis of Round Trip Time (RTT), and requirements. This limitation can result in either underutiinvolving the transmission of 400 ICMP traces along various lization of resources or insufficient redundancy. Determining the
network paths, each with different distances or switch hops. optimal path number requires a comprehensive analysis of var-
Our performance experiments encompassed both mesh and ring ious factors such as network size, traffic load, desired resilience
topologies. Table VI presents RTT measurements, including level, and attack patterns. Future research in this area will focus
averages, minimums, maximums, and standard deviations. We on developing adaptive algorithms that can dynamically adjust
provide these measurements for scenarios both with and without path numbers to meet the evolving needs of modern industrial
MTD, demonstrating how DEFCLON affects RTT across different networks.
path lengths and network topologies compared to a normal Challenges of SDN adoption in ICS environments: While
network operation. SDN offers powerful capabilities for network management and
 DEFCLON does not degrade network performance: The com- security, its integration into ICS environments is still in its
parison conducted in Table VI indicates that DEFCLON does not early stages and presents several key challenges [14]. One
cause any additional performance degradation in terms of end- significant issue is real-time performance and latency; the septo-end latency compared to a normal network operation. The fact aration of the control and data planes in SDN can introduce
that with DEFCLON network packets are matched, processed, and unacceptable delays for time-sensitive industrial processes that
forwarded directly by rules installed in the forwarding devices, require millisecond-level precision. Moreover, a standard SDN
5178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

architecture with a single, centralized controller creates a single attack, thereby preventing malicious traffic from reaching its
point of failure, a critical risk in ICS, which demands high intended destination. (4) Our adaptable weighted belief model
availability and often necessitates a more complex, distributed, proves its versatility in addressing diverse scenarios and specific
and resilient architecture to ensure reliability. The challenge is needs. (5) The framework operates without introducing any
further compounded by the need to integrate SDN with legacy additional performance degradation compared to a standard
industrial network equipment and proprietary protocols that are network operation.
not compatible with standard SDN protocols like OpenFlow,
posing a major technical and logistical hurdle. Lastly, the security of the control plane is a major concern, as the centralized REFERENCES
SDN controller becomes a high-value target for attackers, and [1] K. Stouffer, M. Pease, C. Tang, T. Zimmerman, V. Pillitteri, and S.
a successful breach could give an adversary complete control Lightman, “Guide to operational technology (OT) security,” NIST Special
over the network. Securing the controller and its communication Publication 800–82 Rev. 3, 2023.
 [2] D. Bhamare, M. Zolanvari, A. Erbad, R. Jain, K. Khan, and N. Meskin,
channels is therefore a top priority, adding another layer of “Cybersecurity for industrial control systems: A survey,” Comput. Secomplexity to the overall system design. cur., vol. 89, 2020, Art. no. 101677. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 Impact of network noise and measurement errors: A key sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404819302172
 [3] M. Conti, D. Donadel, and F. Turrin, “A survey on industrial control system
assumption in our signaling game formulation is the complete testbeds and datasets for security research,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut.,
and accurate observation of messages, specifically the packet vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2248–2294, Fourth Quarter 2021.
dissimilarity metric ψ(r, rn ) used to identify suspicious activity [4] A. Ameli, A. Hooshyar, A. H. Yazdavar, E. F. El-Saadany, and A. Youssef,
 “Attack detection for load frequency control systems using stochastic
in each path. However, real-world ICS networks are subject unknown input estimators,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 13,
to noise from factors like electromagnetic interference, con- no. 10, pp. 2575–2590, Oct. 2018.
gestion, or hardware malfunctions, which can cause benign [5] A. Le, U. Roedig, and A. Rashid, “LASARUS: Lightweight attack surface
 reduction for legacy industrial control systems,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp.
packet corruption. Such an event could cause the system to Eng. Secure Softw. Syst., Cham, Springer International Publishing, 2017,
misinterpret a legitimate path (δ = 0) as sending a suspicious pp. 36–52.
signal (m = 1). This would incorrectly increase the path’s be- [6] M. Nawrocki, T. C. Schmidt, and M. Wählisch, “Uncovering vulnerable
 industrial control systems from the internet core,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP
lief value (θn (t)), potentially causing the defender to drop a Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–9.
healthy communication channel and incur a cost (cd ) by re- [7] G. Barbieri, M. Conti, N. O. Tippenhauer, and F. Turrin, “Assessing the
ducing path diversity. Our framework mitigates this through its use of insecure ICS protocols via IXP network traffic analysis,” in Proc.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw., 2021, pp. 1–9.
dynamic belief model. The model’s sensitivity is managed by [8] B. Li, G. Xiao, R. Lu, R. Deng, and H. Bao, “On feasibility and limitations
weights assigned to historical behavior (w1 ) and current packet of detecting false data injection attacks on power grid state estimation
dissimilarity (w2 ). By configuring a high weight for history using D-FACTS devices,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 2,
 pp. 854–864, Feb. 2020.
(e.g., w1 = 0.9, as used in our experiments), the defender’s [9] M. N. Kurt, Y. Yılmaz, and X. Wang, “Real-time detection of hybrid and
belief becomes more conservative and less reactive to isolated stealthy cyber-attacks in smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur.,
instances of packet corruption. The selection of these weights vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 498–513, Feb. 2019.
 [10] D. Huang, X. Shi, and W.-A. Zhang, “False data injection attack detection
creates an operational trade-off between the speed of attack de- for industrial control systems based on both time- and frequency-domain
tection and the system’s stability against non-malicious network analysis of sensor data,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 585–595,
noise. Jan. 2021.
 [11] B. Liu and H. Wu, “Optimal D-FACTS placement in moving target defense
 against false data injection attacks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 5,
 VIII. CONCLUSION pp. 4345–4357, Sep. 2020.
 [12] S. Sengupta, A. Chowdhary, A. Sabur, A. Alshamrani, D. Huang, and S.
 We present a multi-layered MTD defense framework that Kambhampati, “A survey of moving target defenses for network security,”
proactively and adaptively mitigates FDI attacks in the context IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1909–1941, 3rd Quart., 2020.
 [13] E. Haleplidis, K. Pentikousis, S. Denazis, J. H. Salim, D. Meyer, and
of SDN-based ICS. Leveraging SDN central management and O. Koufopavlou, “Software-defined networking (SDN): Layers and arglobal view capabilities, we replicate the industrial traffic from chitecture terminology,” RFC 7426, Jan. 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
different network paths, and in the last exit node, we select only //www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7426
 [14] X. Etxezarreta, I. Garitano, M. Iturbe, and U. Zurutuza, “Softwarea single path to be forwarded to the intended destination device. defined networking approaches for intrusion response in industrial con-
To comprehensively depict the interactions between attacker and trol systems: A survey,” Int. J. Crit. Infrastructure Protection, vol. 42,
defender, we propose a multi-stage signaling game to model the 2023, Art. no. 100615. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S1874548223000288
attack-defense process and evaluate the payoffs of both players. [15] S. Kim, Y. Eun, and K.-J. Park, “Stealthy sensor attack detection and real-
Furthermore, based on this game, we introduce an optimal path time performance recovery for resilient CPS,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat.,
status selection algorithm to include or exclude paths from the vol. 17, no. 11, pp. 7412–7422, Nov. 2021.
 [16] T. Cai, T. Jia, S. Adepu, Y. Li, and Z. Yang, “ADAM: An adaptive DDoS
selection pool for reaching the destination end-device. Our eval- attack mitigation scheme in software-defined cyber-physical system,”
uation results reveal the effectiveness of the proposed framework IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 7802–7813, Jun. 2023.
on multiple areas: (1) It reduces adversaries’ ability to intercept [17] M. Spence, “Job market signaling∗,” Quart. J. Econ., vol. 87, no. 3,
 pp. 355–374, 1973, doi: 10.2307/1882010.
network traffic by up to 50% . (2) It introduces uncertainty [18] J.-H. Cho et al., “Toward proactive, adaptive defense: A survey on moving
on path selection, making difficult for adversaries to inject target defense,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 709–745, 1st
malicious network packets into the industrial devices. (3) The Quart. 2020.
 [19] S.-Y. Chang, Y. Park, and B. B. Ashok Babu, “Fast IP hopping randomframework adaptively mitigates the impact of FDI attacks in ization to secure hop-by-hop access in SDN,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
different network topologies by rapidly replacing paths under Manag., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 308–320, Mar. 2019.
ETXEZARRETA et al.: REPLICA-BASED MTD AGAINST INJECTION ATTACKS IN SOFTWARE-DEFINED INDUSTRIAL 5179

[20] A. Chowdhary, A. Alshamrani, D. Huang, and H. Liang, “MTD [41] J. Tian, R. Tan, X. Guan, Z. Xu, and T. Liu, “Moving target defense
 analysis and evaluation framework in software defined network (ma- approach to detecting stuxnet-like attacks,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
 son),” in Proc. ACM Int. Workshop Secur. Softw. Defined Netw. vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 291–300, 2020.
 Netw. Function Virtualization, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 43–48, [42] J. A. Giraldo, M. El Hariri, and M. Parvania, “Moving target defense for
 doi: 10.1145/3180465.3180473. cyber–physical systems using IoT-enabled data replication,” IEEE Internet
[21] X. Xu, H. Hu, Y. Liu, J. Tan, H. Zhang, and H. Song, “Moving target Things J., vol. 9, no. 15, pp. 13223–13232, Aug. 2022.
 defense of routing randomization with deep reinforcement learning against [43] J. Giraldo, M. E. Hariri, and M. Parvania, “Decentralized moving target
 eavesdropping attack,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 373–387, defense for microgrid protection against false-data injection attacks,” IEEE
 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 3700–3710, Sep. 2022.
 pii/S2352864822000037 [44] F. Mvah, V. K. Tchendji, C. T. Djamegni, A. H. Anwar, D. K. Tosh,
[22] Y. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Yi, and J. Guo, “U-TRI: Unlinkability through random and C. Kamhoua, “Countering ARP spoofing attacks in software-defined
 identifier for SDN network,” in Proc. Workshop Moving Target Defense, networks using a game-theoretic approach,” Comput. Secur., vol. 139,
 New York, NY, USA, 2017, pp. 3–15, doi: 10.1145/3140549.3140554. 2024, Art. no. 103696. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
[23] X. Etxezarreta, I. Garitano, M. Iturbe, and U. Zurutuza, “Low delay com/science/article/pii/S0167404823006065
 network attributes randomization to proactively mitigate reconnaissance [45] S. Deng, W. Dai, X. Qing, and X. Gao, “Vulnerabilities in SDN topolattacks in industrial control systems,” Wireless Netw., vol. 30, pp. 5077– ogy discovery mechanism: Novel attacks and countermeasures,” IEEE
 5091, Jan. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s11276-022-03212-5. Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2541–2551,
[24] H. Koo, Y. Chen, L. Lu, V. P. Kemerlis, and M. Polychronakis, “Compiler- Jul./Aug. 2024.
 assisted code randomization,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2018, [46] M. Krotofil, J. Larsen, and D. Gollmann, “The process matters: Ensuring
 pp. 461–477. data veracity in cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. 10th ACM Symp. Inf.,
[25] Y. Huang and A. K. Ghosh, Introducing Diversity and Uncertainty Create Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 133–144,
 Moving Attack Surfaces for Web Services. New York, NY: Springer, 2011, doi: 10.1145/2714576.2714599.
 pp. 131–151, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-0977-9_8. [47] W. Aoudi, M. Iturbe, and M. Almgren, “Truth will out: Departure-based
[26] M. Taguinod, A. Doupé, Z. Zhao, and G.-J. Ahn, “Toward a moving process-level detection of stealthy attacks on control systems,” in Proc.
 target defense for web applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Inf. Reuse ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., New York, NY, USA, 2018,
 Integration, 2015, pp. 510–517. pp. 817–831, doi: 10.1145/3243734.3243781.
[27] Y. Li, R. Dai, and J. Zhang, “Morphing communications of cyber-physical [48] O. N. Foundation, Openflow switch specification, version 1.5.1,
 systems towards moving-target defense,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Com- (2015). [Online]. Available: https://opennetworking.org/wp-content/
 mun., 2014, pp. 592–598. uploads/2014/10/openflow-switch-v1.5.1.pdf
[28] H. Alavizadeh, D. S. Kim, and J. Jang-Jaccard, “Model-based eval- [49] J. McCarthy et al., “Securing manufacturing industrial control systems:
 uation of combinations of shuffle and diversity MTD techniques on Behavioral anomaly detection,” US Department of Commerce, National
 the cloud,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 111, pp. 507–522, Institute of Standards and Technology, 2020.
 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ [50] D. Fudenberg and J. Tirole, Game Theory. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT
 pii/S0167739X19315183 Press, 1991.
[29] H. Alavizadeh, S. Aref, D. S. Kim, and J. Jang-Jaccard, “Evaluating the [51] D. Antonioli and N. O. Tippenhauer, “MiniCPS: A toolkit for secusecurity and economic effects of moving target defense techniques on the rity research on CPS networks,” in Proc. 1st ACM Workshop Cybercloud,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1772–1788, Phys. Syst.-Secur. PrivaCy. New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 91–100,
 Fourth Quarter 2022. doi: 10.1145/2808705.2808715.
[30] J. Tan et al., “A survey: When moving target defense meets game theory,” [52] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed
 Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 48, 2023, Art. no. 100544. [Online]. Available: for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyberhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574013723000114 Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36.
[31] A. Aydeger, M. H. Manshaei, M. A. Rahman, and K. Akkaya, “Strate- [53] Siemens, “Setting up a mesh network based on RSTP,” Siemens, Tech.
 gic defense against stealthy link flooding attacks: A signaling game Rep. SCALANCE X., 2016.
 approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 751–764, [54] Siemens, “Setup of a ring topology based on MRPD,” Siemens, Tech. Rep.
 First Quarter 2021. SIMATIC S7-1500 / ET 200SP, 2017.
[32] M. Priyadarsini, P. Bera, S. K. Das, and M. A. Rahman, “A security en- [55] I. Cisco Systems, “High-availability seamless redundancy in the factory
 forcement framework for SDN controller using game theoretic approach,” network,” Cisco Systems, Inc., Tech. Rep., 2018.
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1500–1515, [56] Y. E. Oktian, S. Lee, H. Lee, and J. Lam, “Distributed SDN controller
 Mar./Apr. 2023. system: A survey on design choice,” Comput. Netw., vol. 121, pp. 100–111,
[33] Y. Zhou, G. Cheng, and S. Yu, “An SDN-enabled proactive defense frame- 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
 work for DDoS mitigation in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics pii/S1389128617301706
 Secur., vol. 16, pp. 5366–5380, 2021. [57] F. Bannour, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “Distributed SDN control: Survey,
[34] S. Lakshminarayana, E. V. Belmega, and H. V. Poor, “Moving-target taxonomy, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 20, no. 1,
 defense against cyber-physical attacks in power grids via game theory,” pp. 333–354, 1st Quart., 2018.
 IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 5244–5257, Nov. 2021. [58] X. Zhang, L. Cui, K. Wei, F. P. Tso, Y. Ji, and W. Jia, “A survey on
[35] J. Tian, R. Tan, X. Guan, and T. Liu, “Enhanced hidden moving tar- stateful data plane in software defined networks,” Comput. Netw., vol. 184,
 get defense in smart grids,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 2, 2021, Art. no. 107597. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 pp. 2208–2223, Mar. 2019. com/science/article/pii/S1389128620312305
[36] Z. Zhang, R. Deng, D. K. Y. Yau, P. Cheng, and J. Chen, “Analysis of
 moving target defense against false data injection attacks on power grid,”
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 15, pp. 2320–2335, 2020.
[37] Y. Chen, S. Lakshminarayana, and H. Vincent Poor, “Moving target
 defense against adversarial false data injection attacks in power grids,”
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 14, pp. 26315–26327, Jul. 2025.
[38] Z. Zhang, R. Deng, D. K. Y. Yau, P. Cheng, and M.-Y. Chow, “Security
 enhancement of power system state estimation with an effective and low- Xabier Etxezarreta received the PhD degree, in
 cost moving target defense,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 53, 2024 with a thesis on software-defined networking
 no. 5, pp. 3066–3081, May2023. approaches for intrusion response in industrial con-
[39] Q. Wang et al., “Topology switching-based moving target defense against trol systems. He is a researcher/lecturer and member
 false data injection attacks on a power system,” Int. J. Elect. Power Energy with the Data Analysis and Cybersecurity research
 Syst., vol. 163, 2024, Art. no. 110350. [Online]. Available: https://www. group, Mondragon Unibertsitatea. His research intersciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0142061524005738 ests include securing critical infrastructure, specifi-
[40] A. Kanellopoulos and K. G. Vamvoudakis, “A moving target defense con- cally through networking security and the developtrol framework for cyber-physical systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, ment of automated intrusion response strategies.
 vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 1029–1043, Mar. 2020.
5180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Federico Turrin received the PhD degree in brain, Urko Zurutuza received the PhD degree from Monmind, and computer science from the University of dragon Unibertsitatea, in 2008, in collaboration with
 Padua, in 2023, under the supervision of Prof. Mauro the Zürich IBM Research Lab. He is the principal
 Conti. In 2023 he was a post doc researcher with investigator with the Intelligent Systems for Industhe SPRITZ research group, University of Padua. trial Systems research group, and coordinator with
 Currently he serves as a cybersecurity engineer with the Data Analysis and Cybersecurity research team.
 SpritzMatter srl. His research interests include secu- His research interests revolve around applications
 rity of cyber-physical systems, specifically industrial of machine learning to real world problems, and
 control systems and vehicular systems, as well as specially network security. He has published more
 the development of anomaly and intrusion detection. than 25 articles in high impact journals, more than
 In 2022, he was a visiting researcher with SUTD in 44 publications in blind peer-reviewed conferences,
Singapore, under the guidance of Prof. Jianying Zhou and Prof. Tien Tuan Anh edited 3 books (2 of them as conference proceedings), and coauthored 9 book
Dinh. chapters. He serves as Program Committee member in conferences such as
 RAID, DIMVA or SECRYPT, and as Steering Committee member in RAID and
 DIMVA.

 Iñaki Garitano received the MSc degree in telecommunication engineering and the PhD degree in behavioral modeling for anomaly detection in industrial
 control systems. He is a researcher/lecturer with the
 Intelligent Systems for Industrial Systems research
 group, and member with the Data Analysis and Cy- Mauro Conti (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD debersecurity research area of Mondragon Unibertsi- gree from the Sapienza University of Rome, Italy,
 tatea. Before joining Mondragon Unibertsitatea in in 2009. He is a full professor with the University
 2015, he worked with Universitetssenteret på Kjeller of Padua, Italy. He is also a Wallenber-WASP guest
 (UNIK) as postdoctoral researcher. In addition, he is professor Örebro University. After his PhD, he was
 the CTO of the Basic Internet Foundation. His main a post-doc researcher with Vrije Universiteit Amsresearch interests include in the area of Cybersecurity applied to industrial terdam, The Netherlands. In 2011 he joined as asautomation and control systems and information and communication networks sistant [rofessor with the University of Padua, where
including Internet of Things, and application container technologies. He cur- he became a associate professor in 2015, and a full
rently participates in several European, national and regional level public funding professor in 2018. He has been visiting researcher
projects. with GMU, UCLA, UCI, TU Darmstadt, UF, and
 FIU. He has been awarded with a Marie Curie Fellowship (2012) by the
 European Commission, and with a Fellowship by the German DAAD (2013).
 His research is also funded by companies, including Cisco, Intel, and Huawei.
 Mikel Iturbe received the MSc degree in ICT security His main research interest is in the area of security and privacy. In this area, he
 from the Open University of Catalonia, Barcelona, published more than 550 papers in topmost international peer-reviewed journals
 Spain, in 2013, and the PhD degree from Mondragon and conferences. He is a editor-in-chief for IEEE Transactions on Information
 Unibertsitatea, Arrasate-Mondragón, Spain, in 2017, Forensics and Security, area editor-in-chief for IEEE Communications Surveys
 where he worked on data-driven intrusion detection in & Tutorials, and has been associate editor for several journals, including IEEE
 industrial networks. He is a lecturer and a researcher Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
 with Mondragon Unibertsitatea. He is currently part Secure Computing, IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
 of the Data Analysis and Cybersecurity Research and IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management. He was program
 Group. His main research interest is related to cy- chair for TRUST 2015, ICISS 2016, WiSec 2017, ACNS 2020, CANS 2021,
 bersecurity, primarily in the industrial sector. The CSS 2021, WiMob 2023 and ESORICS 2023, and general chair for SecureComm
 main lines he works on are industrial control system 2012, SACMAT 2013, NSS 2021 and ACNS 2022. He is fellow of the AAIA,
security, embedded security, and software security. He also works in exploring distinguished member of the ACM, and fellow of the Young Academy of Europe.
novel data-driven applications for cybersecurity.