6488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 Representation Learning for Tabular Data: A
 Comprehensive Survey
 Jun-Peng Jiang , Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qi-Le Zhou , and Han-Jia Ye

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Tabular data, structured as rows and columns, is
among the most prevalent data types in machine learning classification and regression applications. Models for learning from
tabular data have continuously evolved, with Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) recently demonstrating promising results through
their capability of representation learning. In this survey, we systematically introduce the field of tabular representation learning,
covering the background, challenges, and benchmarks, along with
the pros and cons of using DNNs. We organize existing methods into
three main categories according to their generalization capabilities:
specialized, transferable, and general models. Specialized models
focus on tasks where training and evaluation occur within the same
data distribution. We introduce a hierarchical taxonomy for specialized models based on the key aspects of tabular data—features, Fig. 1. A brief introduction to tabular data and associated learning tasks. Each
samples, and objectives—and delve into detailed strategies for row represents an instance and each column corresponds to an attribute or feature,
obtaining high-quality feature- and sample-level representations. which can be numerical or categorical. The most common tabular tasks are
Transferable models are pre-trained on one or more datasets and classification and regression as shown in the right side of the figure.
subsequently fine-tuned on downstream tasks, leveraging knowledge acquired from homogeneous or heterogeneous sources, or even such as finance [1], healthcare [2], education [3], recommencross-modalities such as vision and language. General models, also
known as tabular foundation models, extend this concept further, dation systems [4], and scientific research. In particular, AI
allowing direct application to downstream tasks without additional for scientific research (AI4science) has increasingly relied on
fine-tuning. We group these general models based on the strate- tabular data, as numerous prominent datasets—such as those
gies used to adapt across heterogeneous datasets. Additionally, from genomics [5], chemistry [6], and climate science [7],
we explore ensemble methods, which integrate the strengths of [8]—naturally adopt tabular forms.
multiple tabular models. Finally, we discuss representative extensions of tabular learning, including open-environment tabular ma- Tabular data inherently organizes information in a structured,
chine learning, multimodal learning with tabular data, and tabular table-like format. In this survey, we focus primarily on superunderstanding tasks. vised tabular machine learning tasks, specifically classification
 Index Terms—Tabular data, representation learning, deep
 and regression.
tabular learning, tabular foundation model. Beyond their structured organization, tabular datasets frequently include heterogeneous attributes [9], encompassing nu-
 I. INTRODUCTION merical, categorical, or mixed data types that may be dense or
 sparse. Additionally, many tabular datasets present quality chal-
 ABULAR data, characterized by structured rows and
T columns, is one of the most prevalent data formats in realworld machine learning applications, spanning diverse domains
 lenges, such as noisy measurements, missing values, outliers,
 inaccuracies [10], and privacy constraints [11], all of which
 complicate the modeling process. The most common supervised
 tabular tasks are classification and regression, where the goal is
 Received 3 June 2025; revised 6 December 2025; accepted 15 January 2026.
Date of publication 30 January 2026; date of current version 7 May 2026. to learn mappings from training data to discrete or continuous
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu targets, respectively. As illustrated in Fig. 1, each row represents
Province of China under Grant BK20250062, in part by the NSFC under Grant an instance (with its corresponding label), while each column
62376118 and Grant 62522605, and in part by the Collaborative Innovation
Center of Novel Software Technology and Industrialization. Recommended for corresponds to a specific attribute or feature [12]. Ideally, learned
acceptance by K.I. Kim. (Corresponding author: Han-Jia Ye.) mappings should generalize effectively, accurately predicting
 The authors are with the School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Uni- outcomes for new instances drawn from the same underlying
versity, and National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China (e-mail: jiangjp@lamda.nju.edu.cn; distribution.
liusy@lamda.nju.edu.cn; caihr@lamda.nju.edu.cn; zhouql@lamda.nju.edu.cn; Machine learning methods for tabular data have evolved
yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn). significantly over the years [13], [14], [15]. Recently, the rise
 More information can be found in the following repository: https://github.
com/LAMDA-Tabular/Tabular-Survey. of deep learning has profoundly impacted domains like com-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPAMI.2026.3657217 puter vision [16] and natural language processing [17], where
 0162-8828 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6489

Fig. 2. We organize existing tabular classification/regression methods into three categories according to their generalization capabilities: specialized (left),
transferable (middle), and general (right) models. Specialized models focus on tasks where training and evaluation occur within the same data distribution.
Transferable models are pre-trained on one or more datasets and subsequently fine-tuned on downstream tasks. General models, also known as tabular foundation
models, extend this concept further, allowing direct application to downstream tasks without additional fine-tuning. General models and transferable methods are
synergistic: transferable techniques facilitate the training of general models, which in turn serve as powerful pre-trained models for downstream fine-tuning.

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) extract semantic representa- methods align closely with classical supervised models, typitions directly from raw inputs [18], [19], [20]. These learned cally trained and evaluated on data drawn from the same distrirepresentations have not only improved generalization but have bution. In contrast, transferable methods leverage knowledge
also facilitated knowledge transfer across related tasks [21]. from models pre-trained on one or multiple source datasets,
The flexibility of DNNs in modeling feature interactions and subsequently fine-tuning these models on target datasets; the
learning hierarchical structures has inspired interest in adapting primary challenge here lies in addressing the heterogeneity
deep learning techniques to tabular data. between pre-trained sources and target tasks. The recently pro-
 Indeed, DNNs were applied to tabular data decades ago, posed general tabular methods—motivated by the remarkable
initially targeting dimensionality reduction and visualization “zero-shot” generalization abilities demonstrated by large lantasks [22], [23], [24], yet they typically struggled to match guage models (LLMs)—exhibit exceptional versatility. These
tree-based methods on standard classification and regression general models can directly apply to downstream tabular datasets
problems. Later advances in DNNs have led to significant without additional fine-tuning, achieving robust generalization
improvements across various tabular-related applications, such due to advanced pre-training strategies.
as click-through rate prediction [25], anomaly detection [26], Crucially, rather than viewing these categories as a strict
recommendation systems [27], and time series forecasting [28]. hierarchy, we emphasize the synergistic relationship between
Modern deep learning approaches, benefiting from better- transferable and general methods. On one hand, techniques
designed architectures, optimized training strategies, high- foundational to transferable models, such as self-supervised
quality representations, have revitalized DNN performance on learning and heterogeneous feature alignment, serve as essential
tabular data, often rivaling or surpassing traditional tree-based building blocks for constructing robust general models. On the
models [29], [30], [31]. Given the wide variety of approaches other hand, general models often function as powerful starting
emerging in deep tabular modeling, a systematic overview that points for transfer learning; fine-tuning a general model (e.g.,
revisits critical factors and current methodologies in representa- TabPFN variants [39], [40], [41]) on downstream tasks typition learning for tabular data becomes necessary. cally yields superior performance compared to zero-shot infer-
 This survey begins by introducing the background of tabular ence, effectively blurring the line between general and transferdata learning, highlighting the challenges involved and critically able approaches. Together with specialized methods, which reexamining the advantages and limitations of utilizing DNNs main dominant on large-scale, distribution-specific tasks, these
compared to classical—particularly tree-based—methods [32], paradigms form a complementary ecosystem, providing diverse
[33], [34], [35]. Given the observed instability of method perfor- tools tailored to different data scales and computational conmance across different tabular datasets, we also discuss compre- straints.
hensive strategies for dataset collection, evaluation, and analysis, For specialized methods, numerous designs have been proaiming to establish robust criteria for aggregating performance posed from diverse perspectives, and previous papers have often
metrics across multiple datasets [36], [37], [38]. categorized these methods based primarily on their architectural
 We broadly categorize deep tabular methods into three types: characteristics or behaviors. Existing taxonomies [42], for exspecialized methods, transferable methods, and general meth- ample, group specialized methods into feature-preprocessingods, distinguished by the scope of datasets on which they are based [29], [43], data-augmentation-based [44], [45], [46],
trained and deployed, as well as their corresponding general- [47], MLP variants [30], [48], specialized DNN architecization capabilities (illustrated in Fig. 2). Specialized tabular tures [49], [50], [51], [52], [53], [54], [55], [56], tree-mimic
6490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

approaches [57], [58], [59], token-based techniques [29], [60], tasks within a common representation framework [78], [88],
[61], [62], [63], regularization-driven methods [64], [65], and [89].
neighborhood-based strategies [31], [66], [67]. However, such Additionally, ensemble methods [39], [87], [90] are introcategorizations can appear scattered, making it difficult to con- duced, which improve the generalization ability based on the
nect the core ideas between methods in distinct groups. In con- strengths of multiple tabular models. By summarizing the state
trast, this survey introduces a hierarchical taxonomy based on the of the field and discussing extensions, we aim to guide future
key aspects of tabular data—features, samples, and objectives— research and applications in tabular representation learning.
providing a cohesive organizational framework. Our approach
emphasizes detailed strategies for obtaining high-quality rep- II. BACKGROUND
resentations at both feature- and sample-levels. This unified
 This section presents the (supervised) tabular machine learnperspective helps bridge core ideas across methods, facilitating task, including the notation of tabular data learning, the
ing clearer comparative discussions and potentially guiding the
 history of tabular data, the challenges of learning from tabular
design of more advanced tabular models.
 data, evaluation metrics, and tabular benchmarks.
 Instead of training a model from scratch on a single tabular dataset, transferable models leverage knowledge encoded
 A. Learning With Tabular Data
in a pre-trained model from another dataset, which can significantly enhance the training process, especially when data A supervised tabular dataset is formatted as N examples and d
or computational resources for the target task are limited. A features/attributes corresponding to N rows and d columns in the
major challenge in transferring knowledge across tabular tasks table. An instance xi ∈ Rd is depicted by its d feature values.
lies in the inherent heterogeneity between the source and tar- Assume xi,j as the j-th feature of instance xi , it could be a
get datasets, particularly differences in their feature and la- numerical (continuous) one xnum i,j ∈ R, like the temperature of
bel spaces. In this survey, we adopt a broad perspective on a region or the density of the object. xi can also be a categorical
transferable tabular models, categorizing methods based on the (discrete) value xcat
 i,j , like one of multiple colors, the location of
sources of their pre-trained knowledge. Specifically, we discuss a person, or even some textual descriptions of the instance. Each
models pre-trained on homogeneous tabular domains, such as instance is associated with a label yi , where yi ∈ {1, −1} in a biself-supervised methods with additional pre-training steps on nary classification task, yi ∈ [C] = {1, . . . , C} in a multi-class
the target dataset itself [68], [69]; models pre-trained across classification task, and yi ∈ R in a regression task. This survey
heterogeneous tabular domains [62], [70], [71]; and methods primarily focuses on standard classification and regression tasks
transferring knowledge from other modalities, such as vision- and does not specifically discuss ordinal regression [91].
based pre-trained models [72], [73]. Additionally, since incor- Given a tabular dataset D = {(xi , yi )}N i=1 , we aim to learn
porating attribute semantics (when available) is a common strat- a mapping f on D that maps xi to its label yi . In other words,
egy for bridging heterogeneous attribute spaces across tabular the model predicts xi with ŷi = f (xi ). The general objective
datasets [74], [75], [76], we also explore approaches leveraging learning f follows the structural risk minimization:
language models in the final category. In particular, we further 
 min (y, ŷi = f (xi )) + Ω(f ) . (1)
organize these language model-based strategies according to the f
 (xi ,yi )∈D
methods to extract knowledge and the types of language models
involved—ranging from small-scale language models to Large (·, ·) measures the discrepancy between the predicted label ŷi
Language Models (LLMs) [77], [78], [79]. and the true label yi , e.g., cross-entropy in classification and
 Inspired by recent advancements in foundation models from mean square error in regression. Ω(·) is the regularization on
vision and language domains [80], [81], general models— the model, which restricts the complexity of f . We expect the
also known as tabular foundation models—expand the con- learned f is able to extend its ability to unseen instances sampled
cept of transferable tabular models by enabling direct ap- from the same distribution as D.
plication to downstream tasks without additional fine-tuning. Tabular methods differ in their strategies to implement f .
This capability, commonly referred to as the model’s “zero- The “dummy” approach makes predictions based on training
shot” ability, significantly enhances the model’s usability across labels {yi }N i=1 directly, which outputs the major class in the
diverse tabular datasets. In contrast to transferable models, training set for classification and the average of all labels for
which primarily focus on bridging knowledge gaps between regression, respectively. In a C-class classification task, classource and target datasets, general models aim to construct sical parametric methods implement f with a linear mapping,
highly adaptive architectures capable of handling a wide ar- i.e., f (xi ) = W  xi + b, where the classifier W ∈ Rd×C and
ray of heterogeneous datasets simultaneously. We categorize b ∈ RC is the bias. With different loss functions, we can
these general models based on the strategies used to achieve implement Logistic Regression, SVM, or even AdaBoost. In
adaptiveness across diverse tabular tasks, specifically exam- contrast, non-parametric methods implement the prediction via
ining adaptations from both data-centric [82] and model- f (xi ) = f (xi , D), depending on the whole training set. For
centric perspectives [83], [84]. Furthermore, we discuss critical example, KNN searches neighbors in the training set D with
branches of general tabular models in detail: the TabPFN vari- the K smallest distance w.r.t. xi . Deep tabular methods impleants leveraging in-context learning [85], [86], [87], and meth- ment f with a deep neural network. Most deep models could
ods utilizing attributes and semantics to unify heterogeneous be decomposed into two parts, i.e., f (xi ) = W  φ(xi ) + b.
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6491

Similar to the linear model, W and b are the components of the generalization challenges [100]. As dimensionality increases,
 
classifier, with W ∈ Rd ×C . φ maps the input vector xi into the the risk of overfitting also increases. Thus, efficient training and
d dimension space, which extracts semantic embeddings for the adequate resources are essential. Scaling tabular models while
given input. φ could be implemented with an MLP or a residual preserving generalization remains a critical challenge [101].
network. Model Selection and Hyperparameter Tuning: Tabular models are highly sensitive to hyperparameters [102], [103]. Choosing suitable architectures and tuning parameters like learning
B. Challenges of Learning From Tabular Data rate or tree count is often costly and time-consuming. Although
 Different from other types of data sources, e.g., images and AutoML techniques [104], [105] offer automation, identifying
texts, there exist several challenges dealing with tabular datasets optimal settings for deep tabular models under constraints redue to their characteristics. mains difficult yet vital.
 Heterogeneity of Features: Unlike continuous image data or Domain-Specific Constraints: Applications in domains like
token-based text, tabular data often contains both numerical and healthcare or finance impose regulatory and ethical concategorical attributes, each requiring different handling [9], [92]. straints [106]. Healthcare models must comply with privacy laws
Numerical features vary in range and distribution, requiring nor- like HIPAA [107] and be interpretable to clinicians. Financial
malization or scaling. Categorical features differ in cardinality systems face fairness and compliance requirements. Such conand semantics, needing encoding methods like one-hot vectors straints affect algorithm choices and demand interpretability and
or embeddings. Models must handle these mixed types carefully validation [108].
to retain feature utility.
 Lack of Spatial Relationships: Tabular data lacks the spatial
or sequential structure present in other modalities [48], [72].
 C. Evaluation of a Tabular Method
Column order has no semantic meaning, making it permutationinvariant. Rows are typically assumed to be independently and We present the evaluation of tabular methods, ranging from
identically distributed (i.i.d.), eliminating temporal or sequential traditional to modern, to provide a comprehensive evaluation
correlations. This lack of structure limits the applicability of across different aspects. For a given model on a dataset D, we
deep architectures designed to exploit such dependencies. employ standard metrics that quantify the discrepancy between
 Sensitivity to Perturbations: Unlike images, text, or time the predicted label ŷi and the true label yi .
series data, tabular data often exhibits sharp decision boundaries Evaluation on A Single Task: For classification tasks, Accuwhere small variations in critical features can lead to significant racy (or Error Rate) is commonly employed as the primary metshifts in the target label [32], [33]. Furthermore, when predicting ric. AUC and F1 scores are further used to address imbalanced lawith LLMs, they often struggle with precise numerical reasoning bel distributions, while Expected Calibration Error (ECE) [109]
and are insensitive to small numerical changes, leading to subop- calculates the weighted average error of the estimated probabiltimal performance on tasks requiring high-precision arithmetic ities. All criteria are the higher, the better, except the error rate
or regression [93]. and ECE. For regression tasks, common metrics include Mean
 Low-quality and Missing Data: Unlike image or text data, Squared Error (MSE), Mean Absolute Error (MAE), and Root
where contextual redundancy helps mitigate missing values, Mean Squared Error (RMSE), with MAE and RMSE sharing
tabular data is more sensitive to incomplete or noisy entries [94], the scale of the original labels. Lower values denote superior
[95]. Missing values can introduce bias and degrade perfor- performance. Additionally, the coefficient of determination (R2 )
mance, while noisy data reduces reliability. Thus, preprocessing is employed, with higher values indicating a better fit.
steps like cleaning and imputation are essential. Evaluation on A Set of Tasks: The diversity of tabular datasets
 Importance of Feature Engineering: Tabular models heavily makes it hard for one model to perform best universally, so evalrely on input feature quality [43], [96]. Unlike in vision or NLP, uation should consider both per-dataset results and aggregated
where DNNs learn from raw data, tabular tasks often require metrics for overall effectiveness. Early research predominantly
domain knowledge and manual feature engineering. Modeling relied on Average Rank (Friedman Rank) [12], [35] and Critfeature interactions usually demands expert-driven transforma- ical Difference Comparisons to evaluate model performance
tions, which significantly affect performance [97]. across datasets. Models are ranked per dataset using metrics like
 Class Imbalance: Tabular classification tasks often face label accuracy or RMSE. Statistical tests such as Wilcoxon-Holm,
imbalance, where some classes are underrepresented [98]. This Friedman, and Nemenyi [110] assess the significance of rank
leads to biased predictions and poor performance on minority differences. To mitigate the influence of outliers, PAMA [12]
classes. Solutions include oversampling, undersampling, and measures the fraction of datasets where a model achieves the
loss reweighting. Metrics like AUC and F1-score help evaluate best accuracy, while P95 quantifies the likelihood that at least
models under imbalance. Recent studies show deep and classical 95% of the maximum.
models handle imbalance differently, warranting careful method As research progressed, more diverse evaluation metrics were
selection [37], [99]. introduced, e.g., Arithmetic Mean, normalized Accuracy, nor-
 Scalability to Large Datasets: Tabular datasets can be malized RMSE [30], [32], Mean Normalized Error, Shifted Gelarge-scale and high-dimensional, posing computational and ometric Mean (SGM) error [30]. Beyond absolute performance,
6492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

relative comparisons such as Relative Improvement [111], ELO- 2) Evaluation Protocols: Given the strong sensitivity of tabbased evaluation [41] are also important. ular methods to data and the additional randomness in deep
 methods, robust evaluation is essential. Furthermore, due to the
 high computational cost of some methods, it is equally important
D. Tabular Benchmarks and Datasets to ensure evaluation efficiency.
 This section introduces existing benchmarks and datasets, Model Selection: Model selection on the validation set inalong with associated considerations for constructing the bench- volves hyperparameter tuning and early stopping to ensure
marks and evaluation protocols. reliable evaluation. Given the high dimensionality of hyperpa-
 1) Popular Tabular Benchmarks and Datasets: We begin by rameters in deep models, automated tools like Optuna [121]
introducing several benchmarks constructed from raw tabular are widely used for efficient search [29], [67]. Models are
features across various dimensions, followed by datasets en- typically trained with multiple random seeds for stability, and
riched with semantic annotations. early stopping [122] is applied in each trial to avoid overfitting,
 Standard Benchmarks: Tabular learning methods often ex- selecting the best epoch based on validation performance.
hibit dataset-specific performance, and evaluations based on Performance Evaluation: To assess generalization and
a small number of datasets may be biased by randomness or prevent overfitting, models are typically evaluated using
dataset idiosyncrasies. Therefore, constructing comprehensive train/val/test splits. However, fixed splits may lead to inconbenchmarks is critical for robust and generalizable evaluation. sistent results. With the rise of deep learning, more robust
 An effective benchmark should cover a wide range of datasets evaluation protocols have been proposed [123], including (1)
to evaluate generalization across different tasks and feature char- fixing the split and running multiple trials with different random
acteristics. This includes binary classification, multi-class clas- seeds [29], [52], [56], [57], [67], [69], [124]; and (2) crosssification, and regression tasks. For example, [12] benchmarked validation, where new splits are generated per fold [30], [61],
179 classifiers across 121 datasets and found that Random Forest [85], [125]. Hybrid approaches combining both have also been
variants consistently outperformed others. [48] evaluated MLPs explored [126].
augmented with ensembling and data augmentation across 40 Recent work has highlighted that holdout-based hyperpaclassification datasets. [29] further demonstrated the competi- rameter tuning can be unstable and prone to overfitting [112],
tiveness of MLPs, ResNets, and Transformer-based models on [127]. [112] found it ineffective on TabZilla [35] datasets,
11 datasets. [32] conducted a broad comparison on 45 datasets, advocating for 5-fold cross-validation, which altered prior
analyzing the performance gap between tree-based and deep meta-feature conclusions. [42] further refined these insights by
learning methods. identifying more predictive meta-features. For small datasets,
 Benchmarks should include datasets of varying sizes to alternative evaluation strategies have been proposed [128]. [129]
evaluate scalability and efficiency. [35] uses 176 classification showed that simple data reshuffling can improve generalizadatasets with different sizes to compare across methods. How- tion, making holdout selection competitive with cross-validation
ever, limited tuning and strict time constraints may have led to while being more efficient.
suboptimal evaluations for some deep methods [112].
 To ensure generalization, datasets should come from mul-
 III. FROM CLASSICAL TO DEEP METHOD
tiple domains, e.g., healthcare, biology, and finance. [113]
evaluates attention and contrastive learning methods on 28 We present possible advantages of deep learning for tabular
datasets. [42] uses over 300 datasets covering diverse tasks, data, as well as the potential challenges of deep learning when
sizes, and domains to assess the generalization of DNN- compared with tree-based methods.
based models. TabArena [114] constructs a continuously maintained living benchmarking system for standardized and reliable
 A. Advantages of Deep Representation Learning
evaluation.
 Semantic-Enriched Datasets: Recent work has focused on Deep tabular models offer several advantages beyond perfortabular datasets with rich semantics, such as task-related meta- mance when compared with classical methods.
information and attribute names. UniTabE [115] introduces a Ability to Model Complex Feature Interactions: DNNs effec-
7 TB dataset with 13 billion examples for pre-training. CM2 [76] tively capture high-order, non-linear feature interactions, which
proposes OpenTabs for cross-table pre-training, including 46 M are difficult for traditional models like linear regression or
tables with column name semantics. TP-BERTa [75] filters decision trees [49], [52]. Through hierarchical representations,
OpenTabs to 101 binary and 101 regression datasets with at low-level interactions are learned in early layers, while deeper
least 10,000 samples and no more than 32 features, totaling layers capture complex dependencies, making DNNs suited for
10 million samples. GTL [78], TabLib [116], and T4 [88] also modeling intricate tabular relationships.
extract large-scale data from real-world sources such as Kaggle End-to-End Learning: Unlike traditional methods that sepaand GitHub. These semantic-rich datasets are primarily used rate feature engineering, preprocessing, and tuning, DNNs can
for pre-training LLMs on tabular data, while others serve for learn directly from raw features without manual transformations.
evaluating standard methods. Several toolboxes support both This end-to-end training reduces human bias and streamlines
classical and deep methods [117], [118], [119], [120]. Build- workflows [29], [130]. DNNs also support multi-task learning,
ing a comprehensive benchmark requires considering both the enabling shared representations that improve both performance
diversity and quality of the dataset. and efficiency [47], [68], [131].
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6493

 Integration with Other Modalities: Deep tabular models excel accommodate missing values through optimal splitting and tolin multi-modal pipelines, combining tabular data with images, erate inconsistent data [32]. In contrast, DNNs are more sensitive
audio, or text. In AI4science, for example, tabular data may and require preprocessing (e.g., imputation, noise filtering) to
be fused with images [132] (e.g., medical imaging) or time maintain performance [63], [85].
series [133], [134] (e.g., forecasting). DNNs naturally model Interpretability and Transparency: Tree-based models are
such heterogeneous interactions, enabling more accurate, com- highly interpretable [58], [59], [141]. Their decision paths can be
prehensive predictions. visualized, and feature importance is directly accessible [142],
 Flexibility with Dynamic Environments: DNNs benefit from [143], [144], making them well-suited for domains like finance
gradient-based optimization, enabling efficient, iterative training and healthcare. Although interpretability tools like LIME [145]
and adaptability to changing objectives [9]. Unlike tree-based and SHAP [146] exist for DNNs, tree-based models remain more
models, which often require task-specific adjustments, DNNs intuitive. Recent work [57], [125] has aimed to improve neural
handle dynamic environments such as real-time prediction, fi- network interpretability by mimicking tree-based behavior.
nancial analysis, and decision systems where feature relation- Handling Outliers and Skewed Data: Tree-based methods
ships may shift. Their adaptability supports online or incre- are more robust to outliers and skewed distributions. Decision
mental learning, integrating new data without retraining from trees split based on feature ranges, naturally isolating extreme
scratch [135], [136]. values. In contrast, DNNs often require additional techniques
 Long-Term Knowledge Transfer and Learning: DNNs can (e.g., outlier removal) to manage such data [147], [148].
retain and transfer knowledge across tasks [137], reducing the In conclusion, despite the rapid progress of deep learning,
need for retraining when applied to related domains [138]. This tree-based models such as XGBoost [142], LightGBM [144],
is especially valuable in AI4science, where models trained on and CatBoost [143] remain the dominant solution for many
one data type can be adapted to others, saving time and resources. tabular tasks. They offer superior training efficiency and robust-
Such transferability enables more efficient and sustained use of ness to unscaled features. Furthermore, classical probabilistic
data and model capabilities. methods continue to serve as strong baselines for tasks requiring uncertainty estimation [149], [150]. Consequently, rigorous
 benchmarking against these established non-DNN approaches
 remains a critical standard for evaluating the effectiveness of
B. Debates Between Tree-Based Methods and DNNs deep tabular representation learning.
 While deep tabular methods show promise in learning representations and nonlinear predictors, they often struggle to
 IV. TAXONOMY OF SPECIALIZED METHODS
outperform classical models like Gradient Boosted Decision
Trees (GBDT). Many studies still consider GBDT strong base- Similar to the evolution of deep learning, which progresses
lines [32], [35], and their relative advantages may diminish from specialized learning to transfer learning and ultimately to
across diverse evaluation datasets. foundation models [195], we categorize deep tabular methods
 Several reasons contribute to why tree-based methods retain into three groups, as shown in Table I and Fig. 2: specialized
their advantages over DNNs in many tabular tasks: methods, transferable methods, and general methods. This clas-
 Better Handling of High-Frequency Data: Tree-based meth- sification reflects both the evolutionary development of deep
ods, especially GBDT, efficiently handle high-frequency or learning techniques and the increasing generalization capabilidense data with small variations [34]. By recursively splitting ties.
on informative features, they capture local and global patterns Beyond such taxonomy, it is also insightful to view the field
effectively. In contrast, DNNs may struggle with fine-grained through the lens of input modalities. Similar to benchmarks
patterns without extensive regularization [139]. To address (in Section II-D), recent deep tabular methods can also be
this, [43] showed that periodic activations enhance learning of divided into standard methods and semantic-enriched methhigh-frequency functions. ods. Standard methods focus on extracting patterns purely
 Natural Handling of Mixed Data Types: Tree-based mod- from raw numerical and categorical values, modeling the strucels naturally support mixed data types and handle categorical tural relationships between rows, columns, and targets. In
features without one-hot encoding [9], [42], streamlining pre- contrast, semantics-enriched methods integrate auxiliary texprocessing, whereas DNNs rely on encoding methods, adding tual information with LLMs, such as attribute names and
complexity and potentially harming performance [61]. meta descriptions. While our survey is organized primar-
 Lower Computational Requirements for Training and In- ily by generalization capability, this modality-based distincference: Tree-based models are often more computationally tion permeates all three categories, with semantic enrichefficient than DNNs [29], especially for smaller datasets or ment becoming increasingly central in transferable and general
rapid deployment [35]. GBDTs train quickly and require fewer models.
resources, while DNNs typically demand more computation Specialized methods, being the earliest developed and most
(e.g., GPUs, time) to match performance [84], [140], making widely used category, will be our starting point for discussion.
them less suitable in resource-limited settings. Tabular data consists of features (columns), samples (rows), and
 Robustness to Noisy and Missing Data: Tree-based models objectives (labels), which together define the structure and the
handle noisy and missing data more effectively. Decision trees task objectives. We emphasize detailed strategies for obtaining
6494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 TABLE I
 THE TAXONOMY OF REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA

high-quality representations at both feature- and sample-level integrate strategies from multiple aspects to tackle the complex
for the target task. Specifically, given the input data, according challenges of tabular learning effectively.
to the general learning objective in (1), we consider how to In specialized methods, we focus solely on learning from
transform the tabular input xi (feature aspect), how to construct pure data, excluding feature semantics considered in transferable
relationships between samples (sample aspect), how to design methods (in Section VI). Since specialized methods cover lots
the objective (·) and regularize Ω(·) (objective aspect). In of approaches—with feature-aspect methods being the largest
particular, subset—we first introduce sample-aspect and objective-aspect
 r Feature Aspect: We focus on how to transform the raw methods, then Feature-aspect methods in Section V.
 tabular input into intermediate representations. We consider two types of features: numerical and categorical. A. Sample-Aspect Specialized Methods
 By explicitly modeling the relationships between the two
 Sample interaction methods take a retrieval-based approach,
 features (e.g., feature importance and interactions), we are
 focusing on relationships between individual samples rather
 able to enhance the model’s understanding of the input
 than features. In a tabular dataset, each sample xi represents
 space.
 r Sample Aspect: In addition to features, we explore how a row with d features, and the goal is to leverage relationships
 between a target sample and its “extracted neighbors” to improve
 to retrieve and utilize neighboring samples to capture
 predictions. The general form for the sample interaction methods
 inter-sample dependencies, thereby improving predictions.
 can be expressed as:
 In order to improve the model’s prediction ability, we
 explore the relationships between a target sample and its ŷi = f (R(xi , D; Φ)) , (2)
 “neighbors.”
 r Objective Aspect: We examine how to modify the loss where D is the set of all samples (training data) available for
 retrieval or learning. R(·) is the sample interaction module,
 function and objective to introduce inductive biases. By
 which retrieves or aggregates information from relevant samples
 directly guiding the learning process with the target variin S for the target sample xi . Φ represents the learnable paramables, we incorporate prior knowledge or task-specific
 eters of R. f (·) is the prediction head that maps the aggregated
 preferences into the model, improving its generalizability
 information to the final output ŷi .
 and interpretability.
 Sample aspect approaches can be broadly categorized into
 It is worth noting that these three aspects are not mutually
 two main strategies. The first approach introduces the modelexclusive but rather complementary. Feature-aspect methods
 ing of sample relationships R during representation training,
primarily address the heterogeneity of tabular attributes, transallowing the model to learn better representations by capturing
forming diverse data types into a unified representation space
 inter-sample dependencies. The second approach is retrievalcapable of capturing high-order interactions. Sample-aspect
 based models, which directly predict outcomes by retrieving
methods compensate for the lack of explicit spatial or sequential
 and utilizing neighbors’ relationships R when testing.
structure by leveraging relationships between instances (e.g.,
 Sample Interaction: These methods assist in representation
retrieval or attention), thereby enriching the representation with
 learning by allowing the model to capture relationships between
global context. Finally, Objective-aspect methods inject necessamples, which in turn helps generate a more robust represensary inductive biases (such as sparsity or regularization) directly
 tation during training. During testing, the model becomes more
into the optimization process to guide generalization. Deep
 sensitive to each sample without interaction.
tabular models (e.g., FT-Transformer [29], SAINT [68]) can
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6495

 SAINT [68] introduces inter-sample attention beyond interattribute attention, which improves row classification by relating each row to others in the table. NPT [154] extends this
via non-parametric Transformers, whereas Hopular [155] employs Hopfield networks, sharing conceptual alignment with
SAINT [68]. Unlike nearest-neighbor classification, the distance
metric is learned end-to-end. Trompt [124] posits that the feature
importance in tabular data is sample-dependent. During feature
extraction, it treats the information between samples as prompts.
PTaRL [65] identifies two issues in the representation of tabular
data samples: entanglement and localization. It addresses these
by modeling global sample relationships through prototype generation and representation projection, helping the model produce
 Fig. 3. Illustration of feature-aspect methods, including feature encoding,
clear and consistent decisions. feature selection, feature projection and feature interaction.
 Neighbor Retrieval: These methods construct high-quality
contexts to aid prediction by retrieving valuable neighbors and
designing efficient ways to utilize them based on the relationof hyperparameters during training by introducing an efficient
ships between samples. The training data is used to assist during
 tuning scheme, which minimizes a new “Counterfactual Loss.”
testing.
 In RLNs, the regularization coefficients are optimized together
 DNNR [66] argues that a key advantage of neighbor-based
 with learning the network weight parameters. [48] introduces
methods is the model’s transparency, meaning that the model’s
 “cocktails,” dataset-specific combinations of 13 regularization
decisions can be explained by inspecting its components.
 techniques, showing that even simple neural networks can
TabR [67] proposes that, compared to purely parametric (e.g.,
 outperform tree-based architectures when optimized with these
retrieval-free) models, retrieval-based models can achieve supemethods. TANGOS [64] introduces a regularization-based
rior performance while also exhibiting several practically imporimprovement. It regularizes neuron attributions to encourage
tant properties, such as the ability for incremental learning and
 neurons to specialize and become orthogonal to one another.
enhanced robustness. ModernNCA [31] revitalizes the classic
tabular prediction method, Neighbourhood Component Analysis (NCA) [196], by designing and incorporating deep learning V. FEATURE-ASPECT SPECIALIZED METHODS
architectures and strategies. The resulting method efficiently Tabular data consists of various features, including categorleverages neighboring samples for prediction. ical and numerical variables. Its complexity stems from varied
 feature types, interrelationships, and often high dimensionality.
B. Objective-Aspect Specialized Methods Traditional methods rely on manual feature engineering—such
 as encoding categorical variables and feature selection—to im-
 The general objective learning f follows the structural risk prove performance and reduce overfitting. As deep learning
minimization as in (1), where  is the loss function to set the evolved, these techniques have been integrated and extended.
training objective between the prediction and the ground truth Deep tabular models can automatically learn feature representalabel. Ω(·) is the regularization on the model, which directs the tions, reducing the need for manual engineering. Feature-aspect
objective or restricts the complexity of f . methods, like encoding, selection, projection, and interaction,
 Objective-aspect methods in deep learning are an extension transform raw inputs into informative forms, helping capture
of these traditional regularization techniques, where inductive intricate relationships and improve generalization, as shown in
bias is introduced by adjusting the loss function  or adding Fig. 3. Feature encoding and interaction methods are specifically
regularizers Ω. In the training progress, the goal is to leverage designed to address the heterogeneity of features, transforming
regularization on the model to improve predictions. diverse data types into a unified latent space. Meanwhile, feature
 Objective-aspect approaches can be broadly categorized into projection techniques help mitigate the high dimensionality
two main strategies. The first approach involves training objec- often resulting from one-hot encoding.
tives, which enhance the model with a specialized ability. The
second approach introduces a regularizer, allowing the model to
learn strong generalized representations. A. Feature Encoding
 Training Objective: For training objectives, PTaRL [65] con- Various encoding strategies have been explored for both catestructs prototype-based projection space and learns the disen- gorical and numerical features in tabular data. Additionally, with
tangled representation around global prototypes. PTaRL uses the advancement of the attention mechanism, feature tokenizaa diversification constraint for representation calibration and tion, similar to word embeddings in natural language processing,
introduces a matrix orthogonalization constraint to ensure the transforms all features into embeddings.
independence of global prototypes. Categorical Encoding: Categorical variables represent data
 Training Regularization: For training regularization, types divided into groups, such as race, sex, age group, and
RLNs [157] overcome the challenge of an intractable number educational level [197]. These features are usually converted
6496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

into integers. Two common techniques are Ordinal Encoding dimension of the input features and meanwhile allows differand One-Hot Encoding. ent types of features to interact with each other. TabTrans-
 Ordinal Encoding assigns each category a distinct integer, use- former [61] embed each categorical feature into a parametful when categories have an inherent order like “low,” “medium,” ric embedding of dimension t using Column embedding. An
and “high.” Its main advantage is simplicity and efficiency, embedding vector is assigned to each feature, and a set of
transforming the variable into a single numeric column. How- embeddings is constructed for all categorical features. Unlike
ever, it assumes an ordinal relationship that may not exist—for TabTransformer, SAINT [68] proposes projecting numerical
example, “red,” “blue,” and “green,” with Ordinal Encoding features into a t-dimensional space before passing their emwould introduce an artificial order that does not reflect any bedding through the transformer encoder. FT-Transformer [29]
meaningful ranking. adapts the Transformer architecture for tabular data, where all
 On the other hand, One-Hot Encoding creates a binary column features are transformed to embeddings and applies a stack of
for each unique category. For example, the variable “color” Transformer layers to the embeddings. Specifically, the numeriwith categories red, blue, and green would generate three cal tokenizer is implemented as the element-wise multiplication
columns: “is_red,” “is_blue,” and “is_green,” encoding red as T num
 i = bnum
 i + xnum
 i · W num
 i , and the categorical tokenizer is
(1,0,0), blue as (0,1,0), and green as (0,0,1). This method suits implemented as the lookup table T cat
 i = bcat
 i + eTi W cat
 i , where
nominal categorical variables without inherent order. While it ei is a one-hot vector for the corresponding categorical feature.
 T

avoids ordinal assumptions, One-Hot Encoding can produce a Other transformer-based methods, like [63], [70], [168], use the
high-dimensional feature space when many unique values exist, same feature tokenizer as FT-Transformer.
increasing computational costs and risking overfitting.
 In some cases, more advanced encodings address these lim- B. Feature Selection
itations. For example, Target Encoding assigns each category
 High dimensionality in tabular data often leads to overfitting,
the mean target value, useful when categorical features strongly
 where models focus on irrelevant features. Feature selection
relate to the target. In Leave-one-out embedding, every category
 addresses this by retaining only the most informative features,
is replaced with the mean of the target variable of that category,
 improving generalization and reducing computational cost. Trawhich excludes the current row to avoid overfitting.
 ditional tree-based models perform feature selection inherently
 Numerical Encoding: For encoding, MLP-PLR [43] introby evaluating feature impact during construction. Decision trees
duces two numerical encoding methods: Piecewise Linear Enutilize metrics such as information gain or the Gini index for
coding (PLE) and Periodic Activation Functions. These encodfeature selection, while ensemble methods like random forests
ing methods can be integrated with other differentiable layers
 determine feature importance by assessing each feature’s contri-
(e.g., Linear, ReLU) to enhance performance. PLE produces
 bution [198], [199]. Recently, modern deep learning methods for
alternative initial representations for the original scalar values
 tabular data often mimic trees’ structures for feature selection.
and is based on feature binning. Periodic Activation Functions
 GrowNet [57] and NODE [58] mimic ensemble methods,
take into account the fact the embedding framework where
 with GrowNet stacking weak DNN learners inspired by GBDT,
all features are computed independently of each other forbids
 and NODE using differentiable oblivious trees with Bagging
mixing features during the embedding process and train the
 and Stacking. NODE-GAM [59] adapts NODE into a scalpre-activation coefficients instead of keeping them fixed. [34]
 able GAM [200] for learning non-linear patterns. TabNet [141]
utilizes tools from spectral analysis, showing that functions
 combines DNN representation learning with tree-like interdescribed by tabular datasets often have high irregularity, and
 pretability and sparse feature selection, while GRANDE [125]
can be smoothed by transformations such as scaling and ranking
 leverages tree-style hard splits via gradient-based learning to
to improve performance. They propose “frequency reduction”
 bridge the gap with deep models. Recursive Feature Machines
as an inductive bias during training.
 (RFM) [151] enables kernel machines to learn features by recur-
 Feature Tokenization: Feature tokenizer performs a similar
 sively reweighting features via a gradient-inspired mechanism
role to the feature extractor in traditional models. It transforms
 without backpropagation. xRFM [152] extends feature learning
the input features to embeddings [29], [60]. Since the feature repkernel machines with a tree structure to both adapt to the local
resentations of features are very sparse and high-dimensional, a
 structure of the data and scale to unlimited amounts of training
common way is to represent them into low-dimensional spaces
 data.
(e.g., word embeddings). The general form for feature tokeniza-
 In parallel, instead of mimicking tree structures, another line
tion can be expressed as:
 of work integrates differentiable feature selection into neural
 T i,j = bj + T (xi,j ; Ψ) ∈ Rt , (3) networks. STG [201] enhances LASSO by modeling nonlinear
 feature interactions and using smooth Bernoulli-based gates for
where T (·) is the feature tokenizer module, which transforms the
 regularization, while LSPIN [202] learns instance-wise gating
input feature vector xi ∈ Rd to a token embedding T i,j ∈ Rt . t
 probabilities to select the most informative features per sample.
is the dimension of token embedding. bj is the j-th feature bias.
T can be implemented with different forms. Ψ represents the
 C. Feature Projection
learnable parameters of T .
 In AutoInt [60], both the categorical and numerical features Feature projection methods aim to project the raw data into
are embedded into low-dimensional spaces, which reduces the a middle form, enhancing the representation ability for later
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6497

architectures. Feature projection methods can be broadly cat- DCNv2 [52] improves the learning of the model’s feature
egorized into two main approaches: MLP variants and special interaction by improving the “Cross Network” structure. Audesigned architectures. These approaches aim to enhance the toInt [60] maps the original sparse high-dimensional feature
model’s ability to represent complex features for underlying vectors into a low-dimensional space and models high-order feafeature structures. ture interactions by stacking interaction layers with a multi-head
 MLP Variants: For model architecture, RTDL [29] investi- attention mechanism. Unlike AutoInt, the TabTransformer [61]
gates both ResNet-like and Transformer-based architectures tai- only maps categorical features into contextual embeddings and
lored for tabular data, proposing simple yet effective adaptations feeds them into a Transformer model, while numerical conof these widely-used deep models. Another contemporaneous tinuous features are directly concatenated with the interacted
work [48] enhances the MLP architecture by equipping it with contextual embeddings. When tabular data contains only numera comprehensive suite of modern regularization techniques. In- ical features, TabTransformer behaves in an MLP-like manner.
stead of introducing architectural innovations, this study focuses Conversely, when the data contains only categorical features,
on systematically exploring different regularization methods to TabTransformer operates similarly to AutoInt.
identify an effective “regularization cocktail” for plain MLPs. Implicit Feature Relationships: Methods in this category typ-
For a more comprehensive strategy, RealMLP [30] explores ically assume that features in tabular data can be abstracted into
multiple aspects including preprocessing, hyperparameters, ar- implicit types and that it is necessary to design a suitable feature
chitecture, regularization, and initialization. learning process to adapt to the characteristics of different types
 Special Designed Architectures: For units, motivated by the of features.
observation that normalization techniques are prone to distur- DANets [53] propose the existence of underlying feature
bances during training, SNN [50] proposes the Scaled Expo- groups in tabular data, where features within each group are
nential Linear Unit (SELU) to improve deep models for tabular correlated. They learn to group input features and perform
data. NAMs [203] uses exp-centered (ExU) hidden units to further feature abstraction. SwitchTab [47] introduces the idea
improve the learnability for fitting jumpy functions. BiSHop [56] of extracting sample-specific “Salient Features” and sampleuses a dual-component approach, sequentially processing data shared “Mutual Information” in tabular features. It leverages
both column-wise and row-wise through two interconnected self-supervised learning to assist in learning feature representadirectional learning modules. They use layers of generalized tions. ExcelFormer [63] argues that while DNN assigns weights
sparse modern Hopfield layers, a sparse extension of the modern to each feature, it does not actively exclude irrelevant features. To
Hopfield model with learnable sparsity. address this, it introduces Semi-Permeable Attention for feature
 interaction, which allows features with lower information content to access information from more informative features while
D. Feature Interaction preventing highly informative features from being influenced
 Feature interaction methods aim to model relationships by less relevant ones. AMFormer [153] proposes the hypothesis
among features to enhance the representation power of deep that arithmetic feature interactions are crucial for deep tabular
learning models on tabular data. In tabular datasets, each sample models. Based on the Transformer architecture, it introduces
xi ∈ Rd is described by d features. The general form for feature components designed to extract both additive and multiplicative
interaction methods can be expressed as: interaction information.

 ŷi = f (H(xi ; Θ)) , (4) VI. FROM SPECIALIZED TO TRANSFERABLE MODEL
 Instead of training a tabular model from scratch, learning
where xi ∈ Rd is the input feature vector for a single instance, based on a Pre-Trained Model (PTM) may increase the learning
H(·) is the feature interaction module, which transforms the efficacy and reduce the resource and data requirement. For
input x by capturing feature dependencies or generating higher- example, in a house prices prediction task, training a regressor
order feature interactions. Θ represents the learnable parameters in a certain area may benefit from a well-trained predictor from
of H. f (·) is the prediction head that maps the transformed its neighborhood. These methods primarily tackle the challenge
representation to the final output ŷ. of low-quality and missing data (specifically, label scarcity) by
 Feature interaction methods can be broadly categorized into transferring knowledge from data-rich source domains.
two main approaches: the design of automatic feature interaction Learning by reusing the PTM usually contains two stages.
modules and the mining of implicit feature relationships. These The first is the pre-training of a tabular model, from one or
approaches aim to enhance the model’s ability to learn complex more upstream tasks. Given the PTM and a downstream task, an
feature interactions and underlying feature structures within adaptation strategy is needed to transform the PTM to the target
tabular data. task or facilitate the learning of the target model. Formally, a
 Automatic Feature Interaction Modules: These methods do well-trained model gΘ is often available and can be leveraged
not assume specific feature types within the tabular dataset. to facilitate the training of fθ over D. Here, gΘ is pre-trained
 
 d
Instead, they focus on improving the feature interaction pro- on a dataset D = {(xj , yj )}N 
 j=1 with instances xj ∈ R and
  
cess, enabling the model to learn complex, high-order feature labels yj ∈ [C ]. To reuse expert knowledge in gΘ , an adaptation
relationships autonomously. strategy is applied: fθ = Adapt(fθ0 | D, gΘ ), where θ 0 is the
6498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 categories: the masked language model, contrastive pre-training,
 and hybrid methods.
 Masked Language Model (MLM): MLM is an unsupervised
 pre-training objective where a random subset of features is
 masked and predicted in a multi-target classification manner [61]. VIME [46] estimates mask vectors from corrupted
 data and reconstructs features, generating multiple augmented
 samples via different masks and imputations. SubTab [44] reconstructs data from a subset of features instead of corrupted
Fig. 4. Illustration of homogeneous transferable tabular methods. The pre- inputs to better capture latent representations. SEFS [159] retrained model could be constructed from supervised or self-supervised learning, constructs the input using a randomly selected feature subset and
including masked language model, contrastive pre-training, and hybrid methods.
 estimates a gate vector to indicate feature selection. MET [161]
 concatenates feature representations and adds an adversarial
 reconstruction loss to the standard objective.
initialization of the model. The notation could also be extended Contrastive Pre-training: Contrastive pre-training uses data
to cases with more than one PTM. The main challenge to reuse augmentations to generate positive pairs or two different augone or more PTMs is to bridge the gap between the PTM and mented views of a given example, and the loss function encourthe target tabular model [204]. We categorize PTMs into three ages a feature extractor to map positive pairs to similar features.
kinds based on the source of PTM gΘ . The key factor in contrastive learning is to generate positive and
 Homogeneous Transferable Tabular Model: First, the PTM negative versions of a given instance xi . SAINT [68] utilizes
may come from the same form of task (with d = d and C  = cutMix in the input space and mixup in the embedding space to
C, but with different distributions Pr(D ) = Pr(D) or model obtain positive pairs, where other instances xj=i are treated as
families g = f ). For example, those pre-trained from other negative ones. SCARF [45] generates a view for a given input
domains [69], or those unlabeled instances [46], [68]. by selecting a random subset of its features and replacing them
 Heterogeneous Transferable Tabular Model: In addition, we with random draws from their respective empirical marginal
consider a PTM pre-trained from a slightly different task with distributions. STab [162] minimizes the distance between the
D. In addition to the previous difference, the PTM gΘ may representations of the same instance processed by these two
differ from fθ in feature dimension (d = d) or target class set weight-sharing neural networks, with the stop-gradient opera-
(C  = C), so the adaptation method Adapt(·) must handle such tion applied to the target network, ensuring to model invariance
heterogeneity [62], [168]. with respect to more complicated regularizations [45], [205].
 Cross-Modal Transferable Tabular Model: Moreover, the pre- DoRA [164] incorporates domain knowledge, training by intratrained model could also be constructed from another modality, sample pretext task and inter-sample contrastive learning to
such as vision and language domains. The cross-modality PTM learn contextualized representations. DACL+ [158] uses Mixup
is hard to be applied to the tabular prediction task in most noise to create similar and dissimilar examples by mixing data
cases, so auxiliary information from the tabular task like the differently to overcome the reliance on a particular domain.
semantic meaning of attributes (i.e., the attribute names) are Hybrid Methods:[160] explores supervised and unsupervised
usually assumed to be available in this case, where PTM like pre-training strategies, using MLM and multi-label classificalarge language models may provide the latent semantic meanings tion, and finds that supervised pre-training yields more transas external knowledge [71], [74]. ferable features. LFR [165] pre-trains models by reconstructing multiple randomly generated projections, demonstrating
 applicability across tabular, vision, and language data. ReCon-
A. Homogeneous Transferable Tabular Model Tab [163] combines self- and semi-supervised learning, using
 Benefiting from the strong capacity of deep neural networks, feature selection and contrastive learning to distill task-relevant
some recent studies focus on pre-training a tabular model from information. [69] investigates whether supervised pre-training
unsupervised instances, and then adapting the model via fine- helps with fully labeled tabular data and shows that target-aware
tuning the PTM on the target (even few-shot) labeled examples, pre-training benefits downstream performance. [204] provides
as shown in Fig. 4. This strategy could be applied in standard a systematic review and summarizes the recent progress and
supervised learning or semi-supervised learning. challenges of self-supervised learning for non-sequential tabular
 Supervised Pre-training Objectives: A straightforward way data.
to incorporate the target variable in pre-training is to treat
input corruption as augmentation for supervised objectives. [69]
identifies pre-training practices for tabular deep models across B. Heterogeneous Transferable Tabular Model
datasets and architectures. They demonstrate that incorporating The main intuition lies in the mapping f and g work in a simtarget labels in pre-training improves downstream performance ilar fashion, i.e., predicting the labels with similar mechanisms.
and propose several target-aware objectives. Therefore, the main idea to transfer knowledge is to match the
 Self-Supervised Pre-training Objectives: The self-supervised target model with the well-trained one, over the weight space or
pre-training objectives can be mainly categorized into three the prediction space, as in Fig. 5.
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6499

Fig. 5. Illustration of heterogeneous transferable tabular methods. During pre- Fig. 6. Illustration of transferable tabular methods with a language model. The
training on one or multiple datasets, most of the parameters in the PTM are language model can be applied at various stages, including feature tokenization,
trained. For downstream tasks, only a small subset of parameters is fine-tuned. feature engineering, and textual serialization.

 encoder, allowing high-level semantic extraction without paired
 Early methods focus on feature-level heterogeneity between f multimodal training data [207].
and g, assuming a shared feature set between the pre-trained task
D and the target task D, allowing weight transfer for shared fea- C. Reusing a Pre-Trained Language Model
tures [206]. Neural models are advantageous due to their ability In some cases, the semantic meaning of features is available,
to learn reusable features and adapt to new domains. Deep PTMs making it natural to leverage pre-trained language models for
can extract generalizable features, enabling knowledge transfer tabular data, as in Fig. 6. Typically, two types of semantic
from vision and language strategies. For example, most PTM information can be derived from a tabular dataset D. First,
parameters are frozen, and only a small subset is fine-tuned using attribute names for each of the d features, A = A1 , . . . , Ad ,
techniques like linear probing or parameter-efficient tuning. provide useful context. Additionally, meta-information such as
 Reuse PTM Pre-trained from One Dataset: These methods a textual description, denoted as meta_descript, can further
primarily focus on the difference between the pre-trained and enhance understanding. The learning process is then formulated
down-streaming datasets. TabRet [70] utilizes masked autoen- as:
coding to make the transformer work in downstream tasks.
 ŷi = f (xi , A | D, meta_descript) (5)
To transfer pre-trained large language models to tabular tasks,
ORCA [71] trains an embedder to align the source and target where the semantic information bridges the gap between feature
distributions. TabToken [62] focuses on improving the quality spaces and facilitates knowledge transfer from pre-trained tasks
of the feature tokens, which are an important component in to downstream applications.
tabular deep models. TabToken leverages a conditional con- Language Models for Feature Tokenization: When the feature
trastive loss to improve the quality of learned embeddings and space changes, language-based methods assume that semantic
demonstrates enhanced transferability of deep learning models relationships exist between feature descriptions and rely on
for tabular data. Pseudo-Feature [160] trains separate models per large-scale language models to capture these connections. For
new feature. It pre-trains on upstream data without the feature, example, the feature “occupation” in one task may share semanfine-tunes on downstream data to predict it, then uses the model tic similarity with the feature “organization” in another, allowing
to assign pseudo-values in the upstream data. The enriched data feature-label relationships to be reused across different datasets.
is used for another pre-training round before transfer. However, By extracting feature embeddings (tokens), tables of varying
this method is computationally costly for broad feature space sizes can be transformed into a standardized set of tokens in a
adaptation. shared space. A pre-trained transformer then encodes transfer-
 Reusing PTMs Pre-trained on Multiple Datasets: XTab [168] able knowledge, aiding the fine-tuning process for downstream
improves transformer transferability by using independent fea- tasks.
tures and federated learning to handle varying column types and TransTab [74] trains a tokenizer on column descriptions and
quantities across tables. Other methods learn shared, attribute- cell values, using them as input to a gated Transformer. It is
agnostic components across datasets to provide strong ini- pre-trained via self-supervised or contrastive loss and evaluated
tialization for downstream tasks. [166] addresses the chal- on transfer and feature-incremental tasks. PTab [170] follows
lenge of differing attribute spaces by treating the problem as a similar approach, learning contextual representations from
a meta-learning task. It utilizes a few labeled instances to tokenized tabular datasets before fine-tuning. UniTabE [115]
infer latent embeddings, then applies them to unlabeled test encodes column names, data types, and cell values into tokens,
instances for predictions, allowing the model to adapt to new using an encoder-decoder architecture with Transformer and
tables with varying dimensions. DEN [167] adopts a three-block LSTM. It applies Multi-Cell-Masking and contrastive learning,
architecture—covariate transformation, distribution embedding, treating sub-vectors as positives and other subsets as negatives.
and classification—and shows that the latter two blocks can CM2 [76] proposes a cross-table pre-training framework
be fixed after pre-training. Meta-Transformer [169] maps raw combining attribute names and feature values. It uses transinputs from various modalities into a shared space using a frozen formers to process feature tokens and applies a prompt-based
6500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

Masked Table Modeling (pMTM) objective, where column
names prompt masked feature prediction. TP-BERTa [75] adopts
a similar approach with numerical discretization and magnitude
tokenization, fine-tuning smaller PLMs like RoBERTa [208].
CARTE [171] models tabular data as a graph, embedding
textual column names and entries. CARTE is pre-trained on
YAGO3 [209] with contrastive loss on graphlets, where original
and truncated variants as positives, others as negatives. Then
pre-trained CARTE model is fine-tuned for downstream tasks. Fig. 7. Illustration of general methods. These methods handle inherent heterogeneity by improving the model’s adaptability or homogenizing the diverse
 Language Models for Feature Engineering: Discriminative tabular formats. Once pre-trained, they can be directly applied to downstream
features enhance the effectiveness of subsequent tabular learning tasks without fine-tuning.
models. Binder [172] uses LLMs to generate auxiliary features
for knowledge grounding by identifying task inputs not directly
 Various transformation strategies have been proposed to enanswerable by the model. Since discriminative features are often
 able such reuse. One line of work uses dimensionality reduction
manually designed, CAAFE [173] employs LLMs to generate
 techniques such as t-SNE [177] or Bayesian Metric Multidiauxiliary features from task and feature semantics, evaluating
 mensional Scaling [178] to project high-dimensional tabular
their quality with TabPFN [85]. FeatLLM [79] uses examplefeatures into 2D spaces, generating image-like representations.
based prompting for LLMs to create new features from textual
 Another direction restructures tabular data into grid-like formats
descriptions. TaPTaP [174], through large-scale pre-training on
 to introduce spatial relationships, as in TAC [179], IGTD [72],
real-world tabular data, aims to capture generic tabular distri-
 TablEye [73], and LM-IGTD [180]. Other approaches encode
butions and generate high-quality synthetic tables for various
 feature values as visual markers, such as fixed-position text [181]
applications.
 or colored bars [182], allowing CNNs to interpret tabular in-
 Language Models for Textual Serialization: A direct way
 stances as images.
to use pre-trained language models is converting tabular data
 By transforming tabular data into images, these methods
into text, letting LLMs infer feature-label relationships from
 enable the application of powerful pre-trained vision models for
embedded expert knowledge, as shown in semantic parsing
 tabular prediction tasks, leveraging established deep learning
tasks [210]. LIFT [175] and TabLLM [77] serialize tables by
 techniques to enhance tabular model performance.
combining feature names and task descriptions, treating prediction as text generation. LIFT fine-tunes on the full training
 VII. FROM TRANSFERABLE TO GENERAL MODEL
set, while TabLLM uses few-shot learning. UniPredict [176]
builds prompts from metadata, sample serialization, and task The general model (also referred to as the tabular foundation
instructions, fine-tuning with confidence-weighted labels from model) represents an advancement over the transferable model,
an external model, validated on multiple datasets. CoT2 [211] as in Fig. 7. It extends the generalization capabilities of a PTM to
uses nearest neighbors and external models to guide LLMs in a variety of heterogeneous downstream tabular tasks, regardless
multi-step reasoning, advancing toward expert-level prediction. of their diverse feature and class spaces, without requiring
 Despite their advantages, textual serialization methods strug- additional fine-tuning. In other words, given a pre-trained model
gle as feature numbers grow, since prompts can exceed the gΘ , it can be directly applied to a downstream tabular task D to
model’s context window. LLM effectiveness on tabular tasks is predict the label of a test instance x∗ as follows:
limited by available semantic information and external tabular
 ŷ ∗ = gΘ (x∗ | D) . (6)
model capabilities. Further discussion of LLM-based methods
appears in the general tabular models in Section VII. Thus, the general model shares similarities with the transferable
 tabular model, but with a greater emphasis on the “zero-shot”
 ability, aims to construct highly adaptive architectures capable
D. Reusing a Pre-Trained Vision Model
 of handling a wide array of heterogeneous datasets simulta-
 Given the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in visual neously. Importantly, it does not require an Adapt function,
tasks, it is natural to leverage pre-trained vision models for which further reduces the computational cost. General models
tabular data. Data augmentation techniques from image pro- aim to overcome the lack of spatial relationships, sensitivity to
cessing can also be applied after converting tabular data into perturbations, and model selection constraints by enforcing a
visual formats. Similar ideas have been explored in time series standardized input format or adapting architectures to handle
forecasting [212] and irregular time series classification [213]. arbitrary tabular structures.
The main challenge is representing tabular instances as images. Pre-training has transformed fields like vision and lan-
Unlike natural images, where neighboring pixels share semantic guage [80], but its use in tabular data remains limited due to the
relationships, tabular features are permutation-invariant and lack inherent heterogeneity of tabular datasets. The tabular data vary
spatial structure. Various methods have been proposed to trans- greatly in the dimensionality and semantic meaning of each feaform tabular data into images, enabling the use of pre-trained ture, even within the same domain. There are two main strategies
vision models fine-tuned for tabular tasks. This subsection re- to address the inherent heterogeneity in tabular datasets: improvviews these transformation strategies. ing the model’s adaptability or homogenizing the diverse tabular
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6501

formats. We categorize general tabular models into three parts also been explored, including tabular data generation [219],
based on their strategies for generalizability. The first focuses on anomaly detection [220], data augmentation [221], and time
raw-feature-based approaches, among which TabPFN variants series forecasting [222].
represent a rapidly evolving branch and are thus discussed sepa- The improvements of TabPFN stem from several aspects.1
rately. The third category encompasses semantic-based methods Pre-training Improvements: TabForestPFN [188] extends
that leverage attribute and task semantics to unify heterogeneous TabPFN by pre-training ICL-transformers on synthetic fortasks. est datasets with complex decision boundaries. TabDPT [41]
 leverages real-world datasets and self-supervised objectives
A. Raw-Feature-Based General Models for pre-training, supporting both classification and regression.
 APT [223] enhances generalization by using adversarial syn-
 To adapt general tabular models to heterogeneous datasets,
 thetic data generated through adaptive agents that modify the
two main strategies are adopted: data-centric and model-centric.
 data distribution. TabICL [40] incorporates tree-based SCMs
From the data-centric perspective, models standardize tabular
 via XGBoost and adopts curriculum learning with progresdatasets into a homogeneous format. For example, TabPTM [82]
 sively larger synthetic datasets. Building upon masked jointuses meta-representations to transform all datasets into a unidistribution modeling with an episodic, context-conditional
form format, enabling pre-training. The resulting model can be
 objective, LimiX [93] introduces two scalable instantiations
directly applied or fine-tuned on downstream tasks without extra
 (LimiX-16 M and LimiX-2 M) of large structured-data models
parameters. From the model-centric perspective, models are
 (LDMs) that complement language and physical world foundatailored to specific tasks for better adaptability. HyperFast [83]
 tion models toward achieving general intelligence.
employs a Hyper Network [214] in meta-learning [215], learning
 Scalable Improvements: The efficiency of TabPFN is highly
a mapping from datasets to classifier weights. To handle varying
 sensitive to context size, prompting strategies to enhance scalainput dimensions, it uses random projections. MotherNet [84]
 bility and performance [35]. These include compressing training
accelerates weight generation by enhancing HyperFast’s ardata into a compact learned representation using sketching [187]
chitecture with Transformer-like modules. iLTM [183] further
 or prompt tuning techniques [186], [224], employing adaptive
unifies tree-derived embeddings, dimensionality-agnostic repdata selection methods to identify the most pertinent training
resentations, a metatrained hypernetwork, MLPs, and retrieval
 examples for each test instance [41], [86], [225], [226], and
within a single architecture.
 replacing traditional quadratic attention with computationally
 efficient linear attention mechanisms [227] and state-space mod-
B. TabPFN Variants els (SSMs) [228].
 The TabPFN family of models [85], [87], [184] leverages Adaptation Improvements: Some approaches improve
the in-context learning capabilities of transformers, directly TabPFN’s performance on downstream tasks by adapting the
predicting labels by adapting test instances according to the context [86] or fine-tuning specific parts of the model [39], [186],
context of training examples. In the first version of TabPFN, [188], [225]. TabICL [40] employs a column-then-row attention
an instance xi is padded to a fixed dimension (e.g., 100), and mechanism to construct fixed-dimensional embeddings of rows,
the features are projected to a higher dimension (e.g., d ) for which are subsequently processed by a transformer like TabPFN
further processing. The label yi is processed similarly and added v1 to facilitate efficient in-context learning. EquiTabPFN [190]
to the instance embeddings. These embeddings are processed introduces self-attention across target components, ensuring that
through several layers of a Transformer, and the output token the arbitrary ordering of target dimensions does not influence
corresponding to the test instance is further predicted using model predictions, enhancing the performance of TabPFN v1
a 10-way classifier. TabPFN is pre-trained over synthetically to some extent. [189] adapts TabPFN v2 to multi-class, highgenerated datasets with structured causal models (SCM) [216] dimensional, and large-scale data scenarios via post-processing
and Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) [217]. Due to the high techniques. [191] investigates various fine-tuning strategies for
complexity of transformers, TabPFN is limited to small-scale TabPFN and concludes that full-model fine-tuning yields the
tasks, with N < 1000, d < 100, and C < 10. optimal performance.
 TabPFN v2 introduces a specialized feature tokenizer to better handle heterogeneity. Specifically, each cell in the table is C. Semantics-Based General Models
projected to a k-dimensional vector using a shared mapping, By leveraging the semantic structure of tabular data, such
and random position encoding vectors are added to differentiate as column names, heterogeneous tasks can be projected into a
features [189]. A two-way attention mechanism is used, with shared language space. This allows a single language model,
each feature attending to the other features in its row and pre-trained on diverse tabular datasets, to handle unseen tasks
then attending to the same feature across its column [218]. in a unified manner. TabuLa-8B [88] fine-tunes a Llama 3-
Several improvements have been made in TabPFN v2, includ- 8B LLM for tabular data prediction (classification and binned
ing increased context size (N < 10000, d < 500), automatic regression) using a novel packing and attention scheme for
feature engineering, and post-hoc ensemble methods. TabPFN
v2.5 [184] further extends with up to 50000 data points and 2000 1 Some variants of TabPFN are not considered general tabular models, espefeatures, and introduces a new distillation engine that converts cially the latter parts, as they require additional fine-tuning steps. We place them
into a compact MLP or tree ensemble. Various applications have in this subsection due to their strong relationship with TabPFN.
6502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

tabular prediction. GTL [78] transforms tabular datasets into compression, outlier removal, and Yeo–Johnson power transan instruction-oriented language format, facilitating the contin- forms [87], enabling effective ensemble learning without extra
ued pre-training of LLMs on instruction-oriented tabular data, training. Other methods adapt ensemble ideas to TabPFN v1 for
which demonstrates strong performance in few-shot scenarios. scalability: TabPFN-Bagging splits large datasets into context
GTL-S [229] unlocks the potential of GTL from a scaling groups and averages predictions [39], [232], while BoostPFN
perspective, revealing that scaling datasets and prediction tasks treats TabPFN v1 as weak learners trained on data subsets,
enhance generalization. [89] extends GTL by incorporating outperforming standard PFNs on large-scale data [232].
retrieval-augmented LLMs for tabular data, combined with
retrieval-guided instruction-tuning for LLMs. MediTab [192]
uses a data engine that leverages LLMs to consolidate tabular IX. EXTENSIONS
samples to overcome the barrier across tables with distinct In this section, we briefly introduce some extensions on deep
schema. MediTab aligns out-domain data with the target task tabular methods across different complex tasks.
using a “learn, annotate, and refinement” pipeline for arbitrary Anomaly Detection: Anomaly detection in tabular data identabular input in the domain without fine-tuning. tifies irregularities such as fraud or failures. Classical methods include Isolation Forest [233] and Local Outlier Factor [234]. Recent methods capture contextual relationships in
 high-dimensional data [235], [236]. For example, [237] maxi-
 VIII. TABULAR ENSEMBLE METHODS
 mizes mutual information between samples and masked parts.
 Ensemble learning enhances generalization by combining ADBench [238] benchmarks 30 algorithms on 57 datasets.
diverse base learners. Classical methods like Random Forest and LLMs have also been applied [239].
AdaBoost use bagging and boosting to ensemble decision trees. Tabular Generation: Synthetic tabular data generation ad-
In deep tabular learning, ensembles are either joint-training en- dresses privacy and data scarcity. Traditional methods like
sembles that aggregate sub-networks during training or post-hoc Bayesian networks and GANs capture marginal distributions;
ensembles that combine predictions from multiple pre-trained newer approaches preserve complex feature dependencies. Difmodels. A major challenge is the high computational cost of fusion models [240] refine synthetic data iteratively. [241] intraining multiple models or submodels. corporates structural causal priors and benchmarks synthesis
 Joint-Training Ensembles: Joint-training ensembles integrate models. To balance realism and privacy, neuro-symbolic models
diverse model architectures within a single training process to improve trustworthy data generation [242].
improve performance and efficiency. These often combine dif- Interpretability: Traditional GBDTs offer interpretability via
ferent models, such as linear and non-linear [230] or tree-based feature importance and decision path visualization [142], [144].
and deep neural networks [61], and tree-mimic methods mix The additive nature of GBDTs enables partial dependence
predictions from multiple tree nodes [57], [125]. plots [243] to visualize feature effects. NeC4.5 [199] integrates
 To balance efficiency and predictive power, parameter- decision tree interpretability with neural network ensembles to
efficient ensembles have been proposed. For example, improve performance while maintaining clarity. Recent deep
TabM [111] uses MLPs with batchEnsemble to generate diverse tabular models also focus on interpretability. NAMs [203] combase learners without greatly increasing parameters. Similarly, bine DNN expressivity with additive model intelligibility by
BETA applies additional tuning on pre-trained TabPFN by learning feature-specific networks. TabNet [141] employs selearning multiple feature projections and aggregating results quential attention with feature masks for global interpretabilwith BatchEnsemble to reduce parameter overhead [39]. Hy- ity. Variants like TabTransformer [61] visualize cross-feature
brid methods like LLM-Boost and PFN-Boost integrate large attention. NODE [58], NODE-GAM [59], and DOFEN [244]
language models and TabPFN with gradient-boosted decision generalize ensembles of oblivious trees with gradient-based
trees [231], where LLMs and PFN serve as initial learners and optimization and hierarchical representations.
additional base learners are trained via boosting, combining Open-Environment Tabular Machine Learning: Real-world
priors with scalability. deployments often face distribution shifts where test data differs
 Post-Hoc Ensembles: Post-hoc ensemble (PHE) methods from training distributions. Research typically categorizes these
combine multiple trained models to enhance robustness and into domain-to-domain shifts [245], handling scenarios with or
accuracy. Bagging ensembles aggregate models trained with without accessible target data via transfer learning [246] or dodifferent random seeds [29], [67], improving robustness at the main generalization techniques [247]. A more challenging setcost of increased computation. Recent studies show LLM-based ting is temporal shift, common in financial or climate data, where
methods produce predictions complementary to deep tabular patterns evolve over time. Benchmarks like TableShift [245]
models without attribute names [89], making them promising and TabReD [148] highlight that most standard models deensemble candidates. Perturbation-based ensembles generate grade significantly in these settings. Recent solutions focus on
diversity from a single pre-trained model without retraining. temporal-aware evaluation protocols [248], drift-resilient archi-
For example, TabPFN exploits feature permutation sensitivity tectures [109], and robust ensemble strategies [90] to maintain
by randomly shuffling feature order [85]. TabPFN v2 further performance in the context of data streams.
increases diversity via random transformations such as var- From Tabular Data to Structured Data: Tabular data often
ied feature encoding, quantization, categorical shuffling, SVD serves as the underlying format for more complex structured
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6503

domains. Time Series can be modeled as tabular data with [6] O. Ivanciuc et al., “Applications of support vector machines in chemistry,”
temporal indices, where recent studies apply tabular methods Rev. Comput. Chem., vol. 23, 2007, Art. no. 291.
 [7] N. K. Ahmed, A. F. Atiya, N. E. Gayar, and H. El-Shishiny, “An empirical
using sliding windows or time-aware embeddings for forecast- comparison of machine learning models for time series forecasting,”
ing [148], [249]. Similarly, Relational and Graph Data are Econometric Rev., vol. 29, no. 5-6, pp. 594–621, 2010.
naturally stored as linked tables. Approaches like CARTE [171] [8] M. R. Allen and D. A. Stainforth, “Towards objective probabalistic
 climate forecasting,” Nature, vol. 419, no. 6903, pp. 228–228, 2002.
bridge this gap by modeling tables as graphs to capture en- [9] V. Borisov, T. Leemann, K. Seßler, J. Haug, M. Pawelczyk, and G.
tity relationships, while Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are Kasneci, “Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
increasingly adapted to model interactions between rows and Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 7499–7519, Jun. 2024.
 [10] C. C. Aggarwal, Data Mining - the Textbook. Berlin, Germany: Springer,
columns in standard tabular tasks [250]. 2015.
 Multi-modal Learning with Tabular Data: Text, such as fea- [11] Z. Ji, Z. C. Lipton, and C. Elkan, “Differential privacy and machine
ture names, enhances tabular learning (see Section VI). We learning: A survey and review,” 2014, arXiv:1412.7584.
 [12] M. F. Delgado, E. Cernadas, S. Barro, and D. G. Amorim, “Do we need
focus here on tabular–image interactions, e.g., in healthcare hundreds of classifiers to solve real world classification problems?,” J.
where medical images require expert knowledge often encoded Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3133–3181, 2014.
as tabular data [251]. MMCL [132] and CHARMS [130] im- [13] C. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Berlin, Germany:
 Springer, 2006.
proving predictions without tables during inference, reducing [14] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. H. Friedman, The Elements of Statistiannotation needs while TIP [252] proposes a self-supervised cal Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction, 2nd Ed. Berlin,
tabular encoder for multimodal joint representation learning. Germany: Springer, 2009.
 [15] M. Mohri, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar, Foundations of Machine
 Tabular Understanding: Tabular understanding includes tasks Learning. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2012.
such as Table Detection (TD) [253], [254], which locates tables [16] A. Voulodimos et al., “Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review,”
in images, and Table Structure Recognition (TSR) [255], [256], Comput. Intell. Neurosci., vol. 2018, 2018, Art. no. 7068349.
 [17] D. W. Otter, J. R. Medina, and J. K. Kalita, “A survey of the usages
which extracts cell coordinates and spanning info. Table Ques- of deep learning for natural language processing,” IEEE Trans. Neural
tion Answering (TQA) [257], [258], [259] answers user queries Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 604–624, Feb. 2021.
from tables. Traditional OCR-based [260] and OCR-free [261] [18] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A
 review and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
methods have advanced TD and TSR, which are simpler tasks. vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1798–1828, Aug. 2013.
More complex TQA tasks have also progressed with the help of [19] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521,
LLMs [262]. Please refer to [257], [263] for more details. no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
 [20] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. Cambridge,
 MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
 X. CONCLUSION [21] J. Donahue et al., “DeCAF: A deep convolutional activation feature for
 generic visual recognition,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2014, pp.
 Tabular data remains a cornerstone of real-world machine 647–655.
learning applications, and the advancement of deep learning has [22] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of
 data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp. 504–507,
opened new possibilities for effective representation learning 2006.
in this domain. In this survey, we present a comprehensive [23] L. Van Der Maaten, “Learning a parametric embedding by preserving looverview of deep tabular representation learning, covering its cal structure,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2009, pp. 384–391.
 [24] M. R. Min, L. Maaten, Z. Yuan, A. J. Bonner, and Z. Zhang, “Deep
background, challenges, evaluation benchmarks, and the discus- supervised t-distributed embedding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
sion between tree-based models and DNNs. We systematically 2010, pp. 791–798.
categorize existing methods into three categories—specialized, [25] W. Zhang, T. Du, and J. Wang, “Deep learning over multi-field categorical
 data—A case study on user response prediction,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Inf.
transferable, and general models—based on their generaliza- Retrieval, 2016, pp. 45–57.
tion capabilities. In addition, we discuss ensemble techniques, [26] K. G. Mehrotra, C. K. Mohan, H. Huang, K. G. Mehrotra, C. K. Mohan,
extensions, and some promising future directions, such as open- and H. Huang, Anomaly Detection. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2017.
 [27] F. O. Isinkaye, Y. O. Folajimi, and B. A. Ojokoh, “Recommendation
environment and multimodal tabular learning. We hope this systems: Principles, methods and evaluation,” Egyptian Inform. J., vol.
survey serves as a valuable reference for understanding the 16, no. 3, pp. 261–273, 2015.
current state of the field and inspires further progress for more [28] B. Lim and S. Zohren, “Time-series forecasting with deep learning: A
 survey,” Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A, vol. 379, no. 2194, 2021, Art. no.
robust and generalizable tabular learning methods. 20200209.
 [29] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, V. Khrulkov, and A. Babenko, “Revisiting
 deep learning models for tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 REFERENCES Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 18932–18943.
 [1] B. Kovalerchuk and E. Vityaev, Data Mining in Finance: Advances in [30] D. Holzmüller, L. Grinsztajn, and I. Steinwart, “Better by default: Strong
 Relational and Hybrid Methods. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005. pre-tuned MLPs and boosted trees on tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 [2] S. L. Hyland et al., “Early prediction of circulatory failure in the intensive Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 26577–26658.
 care unit using machine learning,” Nature Med., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. [31] H.-J. Ye, H.-H. Yin, D.-C. Zhan, and W.-L. Chao, “Revisiting nearest
 364–373, 2020. neighbor for tabular data: A deep tabular baseline two decades later,” in
 [3] C. Romero and S. Ventura, “Educational data mining: A review of the Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
 state of the art,” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, Cybern., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. [32] L. Grinsztajn, E. Oyallon, and G. Varoquaux, “Why do tree-based models
 601–618, Nov. 2010. still outperform deep learning on typical tabular data?,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 [4] X. Amatriain, A. Jaimes, N. Oliver, and J. M. Pujol, “Data mining meth- Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 507–520.
 ods for recommender systems,” in Recommender Systems Handbook. [33] R. Shwartz-Ziv and A. Armon, “Tabular data: Deep learning is not all
 Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 39–71. you need,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 81, pp. 84–90, 2022.
 [5] R. Tibshirani, T. Hastie, B. Narasimhan, and G. Chu, “Diagnosis of [34] E. Beyazit, J. Kozaczuk, B. Li, V. Wallace, and B. Fadlallah, “An inductive
 multiple cancer types by shrunken centroids of gene expression,” Proc. bias for tabular deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 99, no. 10, pp. 6567–6572, 2002. Syst., 2023, pp. 43108–43135.
6504 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

 [35] D. C. McElfresh et al., “When do neural nets outperform boosted trees [61] X. Huang, A. Khetan, M. Cvitkovic, and Z. S. Karnin, “TabTranson tabular data?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. former: Tabular data modeling using contextual embeddings,” 2020,
 76336–76369. arXiv:2012.06678.
 [36] H.-J. Ye, D.-C. Zhan, N. Li, and Y. Jiang, “Learning multiple local [62] Q.-L. Zhou, H.-J. Ye, L. Wang, and D.-C. Zhan, “Unlocking the
 metrics: Global consideration helps,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. transferability of tokens in deep models for tabular data,” 2023,
 Intell., vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 1698–1712, Jul. 2020. arXiv:2310.15149.
 [37] S. M. Jesus et al., “Turning the tables: Biased, imbalanced, dynamic [63] J. Chen, J. Yan, Q. Chen, D. Z. Chen, J. Wu, and J. Sun, “Can a deep
 tabular datasets for ML evaluation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. learning model be a sure bet for tabular prediction?,” in Proc. ACM
 Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 33563–33575. SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2024, pp. 288–296.
 [38] R. Kohli, M. Feurer, K. Eggensperger, B. Bischl, and F. Hutter, “Towards [64] A. Jeffares, T. Liu, J. Crabbé, F. Imrie, and M. van der Schaar, “Tangos:
 quantifying the effect of datasets for benchmarking: A look at tabular Regularizing tabular neural networks through gradient orthogonalization
 machine learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations Workshop, and specialization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 2024. [65] H. Ye et al., “Ptarl: Prototype-based tabular representation learning via
 [39] S.-Y. Liu and H.-J. Ye, “TabPFN unleashed: A scalable and effective space calibration,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
 solution to tabular classification problems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [66] Y. Nader, L. Sixt, and T. Landgraf, “DNNR: Differential nearest
 Learn., 2025, pp. 40043–40068. neighbors regression,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp.
 [40] J. Qu, D. Holzmüller, G. Varoquaux, and M. L. Morvan, “TabICL: A 16296–16317.
 tabular foundation model for in-context learning on large data,” in Proc. [67] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, N. Kartashev, D. Shlenskii, A. Kotelnikov,
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2025, pp. 50817–50847. and A. Babenko, “TabR: Tabular deep learning meets nearest neighbors
 [41] J. Ma et al., “TabDPT: Scaling tabular foundation models on real data,” in 2023,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025. [68] G. Somepalli, A. Schwarzschild, M. Goldblum, C. B. Bruss, and T.
 [42] H.-J. Ye, S.-Y. Liu, H.-R. Cai, Q.-L. Zhou, and D.-C. Zhan, “A closer Goldstein, “SAINT: Improved neural networks for tabular data via row
 look at deep learning on tabular data,” 2024, arXiv:2407.00956. attention and contrastive pre-training,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 [43] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, and A. Babenko, “On embeddings for nu- Process. Syst. Workshop, 2022.
 merical features in tabular deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [69] I. Rubachev, A. Alekberov, Y. Gorishniy, and A. Babenko, “Re-
 Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 24991–25004. visiting pretraining objectives for tabular deep learning,” 2022,
 [44] T. Ucar, E. Hajiramezanali, and L. Edwards, “Subtab: Subsetting features arXiv:2207.03208.
 of tabular data for self-supervised representation learning,” in Proc. Int. [70] S. Onishi, K. Oono, and K. Hayashi, “TabRet: Pre-training transformer-
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 18853–18865. based tabular models for unseen columns,” 2023, arXiv:2303.15747.
 [45] D. Bahri, H. Jiang, Y. Tay, and D. Metzler, “SCARF: Self-supervised [71] J. Shen et al., “Cross-modal fine-tuning: Align then refine,” in Proc. Int.
 contrastive learning using random feature corruption,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 31030–31056.
 Learn. Representations, 2022. [72] Y. Zhu et al., “Converting tabular data into images for deep learning with
 [46] J. Yoon, Y. Zhang, J. Jordon, and M. van der Schaar, “VIME: Ex- convolutional neural networks,” Sci. Rep., vol. 11, no. 11325, 2021.
 tending the success of self- and semi-supervised learning to tabu- [73] S. Lee and S.-C. Lee, “TablEye: Seeing small tables through the lens of
 lar domain,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, images,” 2023, arXiv:2307.02491.
 pp. 11033–11043. [74] Z. Wang and J. Sun, “TransTab: Learning transferable tabular transform-
 [47] J. Wu et al., “Switchtab: Switched autoencoders are effective tabular ers across tables,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp.
 learners,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 15924–15933. 2902–2915.
 [48] A. Kadra, M. Lindauer, F. Hutter, and J. Grabocka, “Well-tuned simple [75] J. Yan et al., “Making pre-trained language models great on tabular
 nets excel on tabular datasets,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
 Syst., 2021, pp. 23928–23941. [76] C. Ye et al., “Towards cross-table masked pretraining for web data
 [49] R. Wang, B. Fu, G. Fu, and M. Wang, “Deep & cross network for ad click mining,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., 2024, pp. 4449–4459.
 predictions,” in Proc. ADKDD, 2017, pp. 1–7. [77] S. Hegselmann, A. Buendia, H. Lang, M. Agrawal, X. Jiang, and D.
 [50] G. Klambauer, T. Unterthiner, A. Mayr, and S. Hochreiter, “Self- Sontag, “TabLLM: Few-shot classification of tabular data with large
 normalizing neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2023, pp.
 Syst., 2017, pp. 971–980. 5549–5581.
 [51] G. Ke, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, J. Bian, and T.-Y. Liu, “TabNN: A universal [78] X. Wen, H. Zhang, S. Zheng, W. Xu, and J. Bian, “From supervised
 neural network solution for tabular data,” 2018. to generative: A novel paradigm for tabular deep learning with large
 [52] R. Wang et al., “DCN V2: Improved deep & cross network and practical language models,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
 lessons for web-scale learning to rank systems,” in Proc. World Wide Web Data Mining, 2024, pp. 3323–3333.
 Conf., 2021, pp. 1785–1797. [79] S. Han, J. Yoon, S. Ö. Arik, and T. Pfister, “Large language models can
 [53] J. Chen, K. Liao, Y. Wan, D. Z. Chen, and J. Wu, “Danets: Deep abstract automatically engineer features for few-shot tabular learning,” in Proc.
 networks for tabular data classification and regression,” in Proc. AAAI Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 17454–17479.
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 3930–3938. [80] C. Zhou et al., “A comprehensive survey on pretrained foundation mod-
 [54] J. Chen, K. Liao, Y. Fang, D. Chen, and J. Wu, “TabCaps: A capsule els: A history from BERT to chatGPT,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern.,
 neural network for tabular data classification with bow routing,” in Proc. 2024, pp. 1–65.
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023. [81] Y. Liang et al., “Foundation models for time series analysis: A tutorial and
 [55] J. Yan, J. Chen, Q. Wang, D. Z. Chen, and J. Wu, “Team up gbdts and dnns: survey,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 Advancing efficient and effective tabular prediction with tree-hybrid 2024, pp. 6555–6565.
 mlps,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, [82] H.-J. Ye, Q.-L. Zhou, H.-H. Yin, D.-C. Zhan, and W.-L. Chao, “Rethink-
 2024, pp. 3679–3689. ing pre-training in tabular data: A neighborhood embedding perspective,”
 [56] C. Xu et al., “Bishop: Bi-directional cellular learning for tabular data with 2025, arXiv:2311.00055.
 generalized sparse modern hopfield model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. [83] D. Bonet, D. M. Montserrat, X. G. i Nieto, and A. G. Ioannidis, “Hy-
 Learn., 2024, pp. 55048–55075. perfast: Instant classification for tabular data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 [57] S. Badirli, X. Liu, Z. Xing, A. Bhowmik, and S. S. Keerthi, “Gradient Intell., 2024, pp. 11114–11123.
 boosting neural networks: Grownet,” 2020, arXiv:2002.07971. [84] A. Müller, C. Curino, and R. Ramakrishnan, “Mothernet: Fast training
 [58] S. Popov, S. Morozov, and A. Babenko, “Neural oblivious decision and inference via hyper-network transformers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 ensembles for deep learning on tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025.
 Representations, 2020. [85] N. Hollmann, S. Müller, K. Eggensperger, and F. Hutter, “TabPFN: A
 [59] C.-H. Chang, R. Caruana, and A. Goldenberg, “NODE-GAM: Neural transformer that solves small tabular classification problems in a second,”
 generalized additive model for interpretable deep learning,” in Proc. Int. in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022. [86] V. Thomas et al., “Retrieval & fine-tuning for in-context tabular models,”
 [60] W. Song et al., “Autoint: Automatic feature interaction learning via self- in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 108439–108467.
 attentive neural networks,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2019, pp. [87] N. Hollmann et al., “Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular
 1161–1170. foundation model,” Nature, vol. 637, no. 8045, pp. 319–326, 2025.
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6505

 [88] J. Gardner, J. C. Perdomo, and L. Schmidt, “Large scale transfer learning [114] N. Erickson et al., “TabArena: A living benchmark for machine learning
 for tabular data via language modeling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. on tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025.
 Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 45155–45205. [115] Y. Yang, Y. Wang, G. Liu, L. Wu, and Q. Liu, “Unitabe: A universal
 [89] X. Wen, S. Zheng, Z. Xu, Y. Sun, and J. Bian, “Scalable in-context pretraining protocol for tabular foundation model in data science,” in
 learning on tabular data via retrieval-augmented large language models,” Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
 2025, arXiv:2502.03147. [116] G. Eggert, K. Huo, M. Biven, and J. Waugh, “Tablib: A dataset of 627M
 [90] Y. Gorishniy, A. Kotelnikov, and A. Babenko, “TabM: Advancing tables with context,” 2023, arXiv:2310.07875.
 tabular deep learning with parameter-efficient ensembling,” 2024, [117] H. W. J. Yang and X. Li, “DeepTables: A deep learning python packarXiv:2410.24210. age for tabular data,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
 [91] P. A. Gutiérrez, M. Pérez-Ortiz, J. Sánchez-Monedero, F. Fernández- DataCanvasIO/DeepTables
 Navarro, and C. Hervás-Martıńez, “Ordinal regression methods: Survey [118] N. Erickson et al., “Autogluon-tabular: Robust and accurate autoML for
 and experimental study,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 28, no. 1, structured data,” 2020, arXiv:2003.06505.
 pp. 127–146, Jan. 2016. [119] J. R. Zaurin and P. Mulinka, “pytorch-widedeep: A flexible package
 [92] D. Lane, D. Scott, M. Hebl, R. Guerra, D. Osherson, and H. Zimmer, for multimodal deep learning,” J. Open Source Softw., vol. 8, no. 86,
 Introduction to Statistics. Princeton, NJ, USA: Citeseer, 2003. Jun. 2023, Art. no. 5027.
 [93] X. Zhang et al., “Limix: Unleashing structured-data modeling capability [120] S.-Y. Liu et al., “TALENT: A tabular analytics and learning toolbox,” J.
 for generalist intelligence,” 2025, arXiv:2509.03505. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 26, pp. 226:1–226:16, 2025.
 [94] A. F. Karr, A. P. Sanil, and D. L. Banks, “Data quality: A sta- [121] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optistical perspective,” Statist. Methodol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 137–173, tuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in
 2006. Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2019,
 [95] A. Sánchez-Morales, J.-L. Sancho-Gómez, J.-A. Martıńez-Garcıá, and A. pp. 2623–2631.
 R. Figueiras-Vidal, “Improving deep learning performance with missing [122] N. Morgan and H. Bourlard, “Generalization and parameter estimation
 values via deletion and compensation,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 32, in feedforward nets: Some experiments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 pp. 13233–13244, 2020. Process. Syst., 1989, pp. 630–637.
 [96] D. Chicco, L. Oneto, and E. Tavazzi, “Eleven quick tips for data cleaning [123] S. Arlot and A. Celisse, “A survey of cross-validation procedures for
 and feature engineering,” PLoS Comput. Biol., vol. 18, no. 12, 2022, Art. model selection,” 2009, arXiv:0907.4728.
 no. e1010718. [124] K.-Y. Chen, P.-H. Chiang, H.-R. Chou, T.-W. Chen, and T.-H. Chang,
 [97] Y. Luo et al., “Autocross: Automatic feature crossing for tabular data “Trompt: Towards a better deep neural network for tabular data,” in Proc.
 in real-world applications,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 4392–4434.
 Discov. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1936–1945. [125] S. Marton, S. Lüdtke, C. Bartelt, and H. Stuckenschmidt, “GRANDE:
 [98] H. He and Y. Ma, Imbalanced Learning: Foundations, Algorithms, and Gradient-based decision tree ensembles for tabular data,” in Proc. Int.
 Applications. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2013. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024.
 [99] J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on deep learning with [126] X. Jiang, A. Margeloiu, N. Simidjievski, and M. Jamnik, “Protogate:
 class imbalance,” J. Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–54, 2019. Prototype-based neural networks with global-to-local feature selection
[100] Y. Xie et al., “Fives: Feature interaction via edge search for large-scale for tabular biomedical data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp.
 tabular data,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data 21844–21878.
 Mining, 2021, pp. 3795–3805. [127] G. C. Cawley and N. L. C. Talbot, “On over-fitting in model selection and
[101] Y. Hu, I. Fountalis, J. Tian, and N. Vasiloglou, “Annotatedtables: subsequent selection bias in performance evaluation,” J. Mach. Learn.
 A large tabular dataset with language model annotations,” 2024, Res., vol. 11, pp. 2079–2107, 2010.
 arXiv:2406.16349. [128] H. Schulz-Kümpel, S. Fischer, T. Nagler, A. Boulesteix, B. Bischl, and
[102] A. Klein and F. Hutter, “Tabular benchmarks for joint architecture and R. Hornung, “Constructing confidence intervals for ’the’ generalization
 hyperparameter optimization,” 2019, arXiv:1905.04970. error–A comprehensive benchmark study,” 2024, arXiv:2409.18836.
[103] P. Pokhrel, “A comparison of automl hyperparameter optimization [129] T. Nagler, L. Schneider, B. Bischl, and M. Feurer, “Reshuffling resamtools for tabular data,” Ph.D. dissertation, Youngstown State Univ., pling splits can improve generalization of hyperparameter optimization,”
 Youngstown, OH, USA, 2023. in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024.
[104] X. He, K. Zhao, and X. Chu, “Automl: A survey of the state-of-the-art,” [130] J.-P. Jiang, H.-J. Ye, L. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Jiang, and D.-C. Zhan, “Tabular
 Knowl. Based Syst., vol. 212, 2021, Art. no. 106622. insights, visual impacts: Transferring expertise from tables to images,”
[105] M. Feurer, K. Eggensperger, S. Falkner, M. Lindauer, and F. Hut- in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp. 21988–22009.
 ter, “Auto-sklearn 2.0: Hands-free automl via meta-learning,” J. Mach. [131] J. Feng, Y. Yu, and Z. Zhou, “Multi-layered gradient boosting decision
 Learn. Res., vol. 23, no. 261, pp. 1–61, 2022. trees,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 3555–
[106] C. Mennella, U. Maniscalco, G. De Pietro, and M. Esposito, “Ethical 3565.
 and regulatory challenges of AI technologies in healthcare: A narrative [132] P. Hager, M. J. Menten, and D. Rueckert, “Best of both worlds: Mulreview,” Heliyon, vol. 10, no. 4, 2024, Art. no. e26297. timodal contrastive learning with tabular and imaging data,” in CVPR,
[107] W. Moore and S. Frye, “Review of HIPAA, part 1: History, protected 2023, pp. 23924–23935.
 health information, and privacy and security rules,” J. Nucl. Med. Tech- [133] I. Padhi et al., “Tabular transformers for modeling multivariate time
 nol., vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 269–272, 2019. series,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2021,
[108] B. S. Caffo, F. A. D’Asaro, A. Garcez, and E. Raffinetti, “Explainable pp. 3565–3569.
 artificial intelligence models and methods in finance and healthcare,” [134] F. D. Martino and F. Delmastro, “Explainable AI for clinical and remote
 Front Artif. Intell., vol. 5, 2022, Art no. 970246. health applications: A survey on tabular and time series data,” Artif. Intell.
[109] K. Helli, D. Schnurr, N. Hollmann, S. Müller, and F. Hutter, “Drift- Rev., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 5261–5315, 2023.
 resilient tabPFN: In-context learning temporal distribution shifts on [135] G. M. Van de Ven, T. Tuytelaars, and A. S. Tolias, “Three types of
 tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. incremental learning,” Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1185–1197,
 98742–98781. 2022.
[110] J. Demsar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,” [136] D.-W. Zhou, Q.-W. Wang, Z.-H. Qi, H.-J. Ye, D.-C. Zhan, and Z. Liu,
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 1–30, 2006. “Class-incremental learning: A survey,” IEEE Trans. pattern Anal. Mach.
[111] Y. Gorishniy, A. Kotelnikov, and A. Babenko, “Tabm: Advancing tabular Intell., vol. 46, no. 12, pp. 9851–9873, 2024.
 deep learning with parameter-efficient ensembling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [137] J. Yosinski, J. Clune, Y. Bengio, and H. Lipson, “How transferable are
 Learn. Representations, 2025. features in deep neural networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
[112] A. Tschalzev, L. Purucker, S. Lüdtke, F. Hutter, C. Bartelt, and H. Stuck- Syst., 2014.
 enschmidt, “Unreflected use of tabular data repositories can undermine [138] S. U. H. Dar, M. Özbey, A. B. Çatlı, and T. Çukur, “A transfer-learning
 research quality,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations Workshop, approach for accelerated MRI using deep neural networks,” Magn. Reson.
 2025. Med., vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 663–685, 2020.
[113] S. B. Rabbani, I. V. Medri, and M. D. Samad, “Attention versus con- [139] R. Basri, M. Galun, A. Geifman, D. Jacobs, Y. Kasten, and S. Kritchman,
 trastive learning of tabular data–A data-centric benchmarking,” 2024, “Frequency bias in neural networks for input of non-uniform density,” in
 arXiv:2401.04266. Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 685–694.
6506 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

[140] M. Pang, K. M. Ting, P. Zhao, and Z. Zhou, “Improving deep forest by [167] L. Liu, M. M. Fard, and S. Zhao, “Distribution embedding networks for
 screening,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 4298–4312, generalization from a diverse set of classification tasks,” Trans. Mach.
 Sep. 2022. Learn. Res., 2022, arXiv:2202.01940.
[141] S. Ö. Arik and T. Pfister, “TabNet: Attentive interpretable tabular learn- [168] B. Zhu, X. Shi, N. Erickson, M. Li, G. Karypis, and M. Shoaran, “Xtab:
 ing,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 6679–6687. Cross-table pretraining for tabular transformers,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[142] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 43181–43204.
 Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. [169] Y. Zhang et al., “Meta-transformer: A unified framework for multimodal
 785–794. learning,” 2023, arXiv:2307.10802.
[143] L. O. Prokhorenkova, G. Gusev, A. Vorobev, A. V. Dorogush, and A. [170] G. Liu, J. Yang, and L. Wu, “PTab: Using the pre-trained language model
 Gulin, “CatBoost: Unbiased boosting with categorical features,” in Proc. for modeling tabular data,” 2022, arXiv:2209.08060.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, pp. 6639–6649. [171] M. J. Kim, L. Grinsztajn, and G. Varoquaux, “CARTE: Pretraining and
[144] G. Ke et al., “LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision transfer for tabular learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, pp.
 tree,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 3146–3154. 23843–23866.
[145] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ““why should I trust you?”: [172] Z. Cheng et al., “Binding language models in symbolic languages,” in
 Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016, pp. 1135–1144. [173] N. Hollmann, S. Müller, and F. Hutter, “Large language models for au-
[146] S. M. Lundberg and S. Lee, “A unified approach to interpreting model tomated data science: Introducing CAAFE for context-aware automated
 predictions,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. feature engineering,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
 4765–4774. pp. 44753–44775.
[147] A. Tschalzev, S. Marton, S. Lüdtke, C. Bartelt, and H. Stuckenschmidt, [174] T. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Yan, L. Jian, and Q. Liu, “Generative table
 “A data-centric perspective on evaluating machine learning models for pre-training empowers models for tabular prediction,” in Proc. Conf.
 tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Datasets Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2023.
 Benchmarks Track, 2024. [175] T. Dinh et al., “LIFT: Language-interfaced fine-tuning for non-language
[148] I. Rubachev, N. Kartashev, Y. Gorishniy, and A. Babenko, “TabReD: machine learning tasks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 A benchmark of tabular machine learning in-the-wild,” 2024, 2022, pp. 11763–11784.
 arXiv:2406.19380. [176] R. Wang, Z. Wang, and J. Sun, “UniPredict: Large language models are
[149] H. A. Chipman, E. I. George, and R. E. McCulloch, “BART: Bayesian universal tabular predictors,” 2023, arXiv:2310.03266.
 additive regression trees,” Ann. Appl. Statist., vol. 1, pp. 266–298, 2010, [177] A. Sharma, E. Vans, D. Shigemizu, K. A. Boroevich, and T. Tsunoda,
 doi: 10.1214/09-AOAS285. “Deepinsight: A methodology to transform a non-image data to an image
[150] T. Duan et al., “NGBoost: Natural gradient boosting for probabilistic for convolution neural network architecture,” Sci. Rep., vol. 9, no. 1, 2019,
 prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 2690–2700. Art. no. 11399.
[151] A. Radhakrishnan, D. Beaglehole, P. Pandit, and M. Belkin, “Mechanism [178] O. Bazgir, R. Zhang, S. R. Dhruba, R. Rahman, S. Ghosh, and R. Pal,
 of feature learning in deep fully connected networks and kernel machines “Representation of features as images with neighborhood dependencies
 that recursively learn features,” Science, vol. 383, pp. 1461–1467, 2024. for compatibility with convolutional neural networks,” Nature Commun.,
[152] D. Beaglehole, D. Holzmüller, A. Radhakrishnan, and M. Belkin, vol. 11, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 4391.
 “xRFM: Accurate, scalable, and interpretable feature learning models [179] L. Buturović and D. Miljković, “A novel method for classification
 for tabular data,” 2025, arXiv:2508.10053. of tabular data using convolutional neural networks,” BioRxiv, 2020,
[153] Y. Cheng, R. Hu, H. Ying, X. Shi, J. Wu, and W. Lin, “Arithmetic feature doi: 10.1101/2020.05.02.074203.
 interaction is necessary for deep tabular learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [180] V. Gómez-Martıńez, F. J. Lara-Abelenda, P. Peiro-Corbacho, D.
 Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 11516–11524. Chushig-Muzo, C. Granja, and C. Soguero-Ruıź, “LM-IGTD: A 2D
[154] J. Kossen, N. Band, C. Lyle, A. N. Gomez, T. Rainforth, and Y. Gal, “Self- image generator for low-dimensional and mixed-type tabular data
 attention between datapoints: Going beyond individual input-output pairs to leverage the potential of convolutional neural networks,” 2024,
 in deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. arXiv:2406.14566.
 28742–28756. [181] B. Sun et al., “SuperTML: Two-dimensional word embedding for the
[155] B. Schäfl, L. Gruber, A. Bitto-Nemling, and S. Hochreiter, “Hopular: precognition on structured tabular data,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 Modern hopfield networks for tabular data,” 2022, arXiv:2206.00664. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops, 2019.
[156] H. Kim et al., “Attentive neural processes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. [182] A. Mamdouh, M. El-Melegy, S. Ali, and R. Kikinis, “Tab2Visual: Over-
 Representations, 2019. coming limited data in tabular data classification using deep learning with
[157] I. Shavitt and E. Segal, “Regularization learning networks: Deep learning visual representations,” 2025, arXiv:2502.07181.
 for tabular datasets,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, [183] D. Bonet, M. C. Cara, A. Calafell, D. M. Montserrat, and A. G. Ioannidis,
 pp. 1386–1396. “iLTM: Integrated large tabular model,” 2025, arXiv:2511.15941.
[158] V. Verma, T. Luong, K. Kawaguchi, H. Pham, and Q. V. Le, “Towards [184] L. Grinsztajn et al., “TabPFN-2.5: Advancing the state of the art in tabular
 domain-agnostic contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., foundation models,” 2025, arXiv:2511.08667.
 2021, pp. 10530–10541. [185] X. Zhang et al., “Mitra: Mixed synthetic priors for enhancing tabu-
[159] C. Lee, F. Imrie, and M. van der Schaar, “Self-supervision enhanced lar foundation models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 feature selection with correlated gates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Rep- 2025.
 resentations, 2022. [186] B. Feuer et al., “Tunetables: Context optimization for scalable prior-data
[160] R. Levin et al., “Transfer learning with deep tabular models,” in Proc. fitted networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp.
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023. 83430–83464.
[161] K. Majmundar, S. Goyal, P. Netrapalli, and P. Jain, “MET: Masked [187] B. Feuer, C. Hegde, and N. Cohen, “Scaling tabPFN: Sketching
 encoding for tabular data,” 2022, arXiv:2206.08564. and feature selection for tabular prior-data fitted networks,” 2023,
[162] E. Hajiramezanali, N. L. Diamant, G. Scalia, and M. W. Shen, “STab: arXiv:2311.10609.
 Self-supervised learning for tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. [188] F. den Breejen, S. Bae, S. Cha, and S.-Y. Yun, “Fine-tuned in-context
 Process. Syst. Workshop, 2022. learning transformers are excellent tabular data classifiers,” 2025,
[163] S. Chen, J. Wu, N. Hovakimyan, and H. Yao, “ReConTab: Reg- arXiv:2405.13396.
 ularized contrastive representation learning for tabular data,” 2023, [189] H.-J. Ye, S.-Y. Liu, and W.-L. Chao, “A closer look at tabPFN V2:
 arXiv:2310.18541. Strength, limitation, and extension,” 2025, arXiv:2502.17361.
[164] W.-W. Du, W.-Y. Wang, and W.-C. Peng, “DoRA: Domain-based self- [190] M. Arbel, D. Salinas, and F. Hutter, “EquitabPFN: A target-permutation
 supervised learning framework for low-resource real estate appraisal,” in equivariant prior fitted network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Proc. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 4552–4558. Syst., 2025.
[165] Y. Sui et al., “Self-supervised representation learning from random data [191] I. Rubachev, A. Kotelnikov, N. Kartashev, and A. Babenko, “On finetunprojectors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024. ing tabular foundation models,” 2024, arXiv:2506.08982.
[166] T. Iwata and A. Kumagai, “Meta-learning from tasks with heterogeneous [192] Z. Wang, C. Gao, C. Xiao, and J. Sun, “Meditab: Scaling medical tabular
 attribute spaces,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. data predictors via data consolidation, enrichment, and refinement,” in
 6053–6063. Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 6062–6070.
JIANG et al.: REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR TABULAR DATA: A COMPREHENSIVE SURVEY 6507

[193] A. Arazi, E. Shapira, and R. Reichart, “TabSTAR: A foundation tabular [221] A. Margeloiu, A. Bazaga, N. Simidjievski, P. Liò, and M. Jamnik,
 model with semantically target-aware representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. “TabMDA: Tabular manifold data augmentation for any classifier using
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025. transformers with in-context subsetting,” 2024, arXiv:2406.01805.
[194] M. Spinaci, M. Polewczyk, M. Schambach, and S. Thelin, “Contexttab: [222] S. B. Hoo, S. Müller, D. Salinas, and F. Hutter, “The tabular foundation
 A semantics-aware tabular in-context learner,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural model tabPFN outperforms specialized time series forecasting models
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2025. based on simple features,” 2025, arXiv:2501.02945.
[195] R. Bommasani et al., “On the opportunities and risks of foundation [223] Y. Wu and D. L. Bergman, “Zero-shot meta-learning for tabular prediction
 models,” 2021, arXiv:2108.07258. tasks with adversarially pre-trained transformer,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
[196] J. Goldberger, G. E. Hinton, S. Roweis, and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Neigh- Mach. Learn., 2025.
 bourhood components analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. [224] J. Ma, V. Thomas, G. Yu, and A. L. Caterini, “In-context data distillation
 Syst., 2004. with tabPFN,” 2024, arXiv:2402.06971.
[197] J. T. Hancock and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on categorical data for [225] D. Xu, O. Cirit, R. Asadi, Y. Sun, and W. Wang, “Mixture of in-context
 neural networks,” J. Big Data, vol. 7, no. 1, 2020, Art. no. 28. prompters for tabular PFNs,” 2024, arXiv:2405.16156.
[198] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001. [226] M. Koshil, T. Nagler, M. Feurer, and K. Eggensperger, “Towards local-
[199] Z.-H. Zhou and Y. Jiang, “NeC4. 5: Neural ensemble based C4. ization via data embedding for tabPFN,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf.
 5,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. data Eng., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 770–773, Process. Syst. Workshop, 2024.
 Jun. 2004. [227] Y. Zeng, W. Kang, and A. C. Mueller, “Tabflex: Scaling tabular learning
[200] T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, “Generalized additive models,” Statist. Sci., to millions with linear attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 297–310, 1986. Syst. Workshop, 2024.
[201] Y. Yamada, O. Lindenbaum, S. Negahban, and Y. Kluger, “Feature [228] S. K. Baur and S. Kim, “Exploration of autoregressive models for inselection using stochastic gates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, context learning on tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 pp. 10648–10659. Syst. Workshop, 2024.
[202] J. Yang, O. Lindenbaum, and Y. Kluger, “Locally sparse neural networks [229] Y. Sun, X. Wen, S. Zheng, X. Jia, and J. Bian, “Scaling generative
 for tabular biomedical data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. tabular learning for large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 25123–25153. Inf. Process. Syst. Workshop, 2024.
[203] R. Agarwal et al., “Neural additive models: Interpretable machine learn- [230] H.-T. Cheng et al., “Wide & deep learning for recommender sysing with neural nets,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, tems,” in Proc. 1st Workshop Deep Learn. Recommender Syst., 2016,
 pp. 4699–4711. pp. 7–10.
[204] W.-Y. Wang, W.-W. Du, D. Xu, W. Wang, and W.-C. Peng, “A survey on [231] M. Jayawardhana et al., “Transformers boost the performance of decision
 self-supervised learning for non-sequential tabular data,” Mach. Learn., trees on tabular data across sample sizes,” 2025, arXiv:2502.02672.
 vol. 114, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. 16. [232] Y. Wang et al., “Prior-fitted networks scale to larger datasets when treated
[205] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: as weak learners,” 2025, arXiv:2503.01256.
 Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [233] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. Int.
 Mach. Learn., 2016, pp. 1050–1059. Conf. Des. Mater., 2008, pp. 413–422.
[206] H.-J. Ye, D.-C. Zhan, Y. Jiang, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Rectify heterogeneous [234] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
 models with semantic mapping,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, density-based local outliers,” in Proc. 26th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
 pp. 5630–5639. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2000, pp. 93–104.
[207] H.-J. Ye, L. Han, and D.-C. Zhan, “Revisiting unsupervised meta-learning [235] O. Lindenbaum, Y. Aizenbud, and Y. Kluger, “Transductive and inductive
 via the characteristics of few-shot tasks,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. outlier detection with robust autoencoders,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty
 Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3721–3737, Mar. 2023. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2271–2293.
[208] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining ap- [236] A. Rozner, B. Battash, H. Li, L. Wolf, and O. Lindenbaum, “Anomaly
 proach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692. detection with variance stabilized density estimation,” in UAI, 2024, pp.
[209] F. Mahdisoltani, J. Biega, and F. M. Suchanek, “YAGO3: A knowledge 3121–3137.
 base from multilingual Wikipedias,” in Proc. Conf. Innov. Data Syst. Res., [237] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with internal
 2015, pp. 177–185. contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2022.
[210] P. Yin, G. Neubig, W. tau Yih, and S. Riedel, “Tabert: Pretraining for [238] S. Han, X. Hu, H. Huang, M. Jiang, and Y. Zhao, “Adbench: Anomaly
 joint understanding of textual and tabular data,” in Proc. Annu. Meeting detection benchmark,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022,
 Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2020, pp. 8413–8426. pp. 32142–32159.
[211] S.-Y. Liu, Q. Zhou, and H.-J. Ye, “Make still further progress: Chain of [239] A. Li et al., “Anomaly detection of tabular data using LLMs,” 2024,
 thoughts for tabular data leaderboard,” 2025, arXiv:2505.13421. arXiv:2406.16308.
[212] M. Chen, L. Shen, Z. Li, X. J. Wang, J. Sun, and C. Liu, “Visionts: Visual [240] C. Lee, J. Kim, and N. Park, “CoDi: Co-evolving contrastive diffusion
 masked autoencoders are free-lunch zero-shot time series forecasters,” models for mixed-type tabular synthesis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 2024, arXiv:2408.17253. Learn., 2023, pp. 18940–18956.
[213] Z. Li, S. Li, and X. Yan, “Time series as images: Vision transformer for [241] R. Tu, Z. Senane, L. Cao, C. Zhang, H. Kjellström, and G. E. Henter,
 irregularly sampled time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. “Causality for tabular data synthesis: A high-order structure causal
 Syst., 2023, pp. 49187–49204. benchmark framework,” CoRR, vol. 2024, arXiv:2406.08311.
[214] D. Ha, A. M. Dai, and Q. V. Le, “Hypernetworks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [242] R. Feinman and B. M. Lake, “Generating new concepts with hybrid
 Learn. Representations, 2017. neuro-symbolic models,” 2020, arXiv:2003.08978.
[215] W.-L. Chao, H.-J. Ye, D.-C. Zhan, M. E. Campbell, and K. Q. [243] B. M. Greenwell et al., “pdp: An R package for constructing partial
 Weinberger, “Revisiting meta-learning as supervised learning,” 2020, dependence plots,” R J., vol. 9, no. 1, 2017, Art. no. 421.
 arXiv:2002.00573. [244] K.-Y. Chen, P.-H. Chiang, H.-R. Chou, C.-S. Chen, and D. H. Chang,
[216] J. Peters, D. Janzing, and B. Schölkopf, Elements of Causal Inference: “DOFEN: Deep oblivious forest ensemble,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 Foundations and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 44624–44677.
 Press, 2017. [245] J. Gardner, Z. Popovic, and L. Schmidt, “Benchmarking distribution shift
[217] R. Neal, Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks. Berlin, Germany: in tabular data with tableshift,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Springer, 1996. Syst., 2024, pp. 53385–53432.
[218] T. Iwata and A. Kumagai, “Meta-learning of semi-supervised [246] C. Kim, T. Kim, S. Woo, J. Y. Yang, and E. Yang, “Adaptable: Test-time
 learning from tasks with heterogeneous attribute spaces,” 2023, adaptation for tabular data via shift-aware uncertainty calibrator and label
 arXiv:2311.05088. distribution handler,” 2024, arXiv:2407.10784.
[219] J. Ma, A. Dankar, G. Stein, G. Yu, and A. L. Caterini, “TabPFGen - [247] S. Sagawa, P. W. Koh, T. B. Hashimoto, and P. Liang, “Distributionally
 tabular data generation with tabPFN,” 2024, arXiv:2406.05216. robust neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
[220] S. Ruiz-Villafranca, J. R. Gómez, J. M. C. Gómez, J. C. Mondéjar, 2020.
 and J. L. Martıńez, “A tabPFN-based intrusion detection system for the [248] H.-R. Cai and H.-J. Ye, “Understanding the limits of deep tabular
 industrial Internet of Things,” J. Supercomputing, vol. 80, no. 14, pp. methods with temporal shift,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2025,
 20080–20117, 2024. pp. 6366–6386.
6508 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. 48, NO. 6, JUNE 2026

[249] H.-R. Cai and H.-J. Ye, “Feature-aware modulation for learning from Jun-Peng Jiang is currently working toward the PhD degree with the National
 temporal tabular data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence,
 2025. Nanjing University, China. His research interests include primarily in tabular
[250] X. Guo, Y. Quan, H. Zhao, Q. Yao, Y. Li, and W. Tu, “TabGNN: data learning, multimodal learning, and multimodal large language models.
 Multiplex graph neural network for tabular data prediction,” 2021,
 arXiv:2108.09127.
[251] W. Huang, “Multimodal contrastive learning and tabular attention for
 automated Alzheimer’s disease prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Workshops, 2023, pp. 2465–2474.
[252] S. Du, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Bai, D. P. O’Regan, and C. Qin, “Tip: Si-Yang Liu is currently working toward the MSc degree with the National Key
 Lab for Novel Software Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
 Tabular-image pre-training for multimodal classification with incomplete
 University, China.
 data,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 478–496.
[253] A. Gilani, S. R. Qasim, I. Malik, and F. Shafait, “Table detection using
 deep learning,” in Proc. 14th IAPR Int. Conf. Document Anal. Recognit.,
 2017, pp. 771–776.
[254] M. Li, L. Cui, S. Huang, F. Wei, M. Zhou, and Z. Li, “Tablebank: Table
 benchmark for image-based table detection and recognition,” in Proc.
 Lang. Resour. Eval. Conf., 2020, pp. 1918–1925. Hao-Run Cai is currently working toward the PhD degree with the National Key
[255] S. Schreiber, S. Agne, I. Wolf, A. Dengel, and S. Ahmed, “Deepdesrt: Lab for Novel Software Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
 Deep learning for detection and structure recognition of tables in docu- University, China.
 ment images,” in Proc. IAPR Int. Conf. Document Anal. Recognit., 2017,
 pp. 1162–1167.
[256] M. s. Kasem et al., “Deep learning for table detection and structure
 recognition: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 1–41,
 2024.
[257] N. Jin, J. Siebert, D. Li, and Q. Chen, “A survey on table question answering: Recent advances,” in Proc. China Conf. Knowl. Graph Semantic Qi-Le Zhou received the MSc degree from the National Key Lab for Novel
 Comput., 2022, pp. 174–186. Software Technology, School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University,
[258] J.-P. Jiang, T. Zhou, D.-C. Zhan, and H.-J. Ye, “Compositional condition China.
 question answering in tabular understanding,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Learn., 2025, pp. 27831–27850.
[259] J.-P. Jiang et al., “Multimodal tabular reasoning with privileged structured
 information,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025.
[260] S. Appalaraju, B. Jasani, B. U. Kota, Y. Xie, and R. Manmatha, “Doc- Han-Jia Ye received the PhD degree in computer science from Nanjing Uniformer: End-to-end transformer for document understanding,” in Proc.
 versity, China, in 2019. He joined the School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing
 IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 993–1003.
 University as a faculty member in the same year and currently holds the position
[261] J. Wan et al., “Omniparser: A unified framework for text spotting key inof associate professor. His research focuses primarily on machine learning, with
 formation extraction and table recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
 interests in representation learning, model reuse, and meta-learning. He has
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 15641–15653.
 served as the Tutorial Co-Chair for SDM 2023. Additionally, he participates as
[262] N. Deng et al., “Tables as images? Exploring the strengths and limiarea chairs in conferences, such as ICML, NeurIPS, and CVPR, and others.
 tations of LLMs on multimodal representations of tabular data,” 2024,
 arXiv:2402.12424v3.
[263] X. Fang et al., “Large language models (LLMs) on tabular data: Prediction, generation, and understanding–A survey,” 2024, arXiv:2402.17944.