IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 4403

RET-Net: A CNN Framework for Real-Time Traffic
 Classification Using Key-Byte Mechanism
 Zhe Li , Chengxuan Pei , Yanyue Xu, Sifan Hou, Onur Barut, Kun Qiu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Jin Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The ever-increasing diversity of encrypted traffic allows for the dynamic optimization of resource allocation
flows has posed significant challenges to both rule-based clas- and Quality of Service (QoS) according to the prevailing
sification methods and traditional machine learning approaches. network traffic, thus improving network performance and user
Recently, deep learning has emerged as a promising solution
by automatically learning the features of traffic data. However, experience.
when it comes to real-time traffic classification, deep learning- Initially, real-time traffic classification was conducted using
based approaches often encounter performance bottlenecks. Deep rule-based methods. As encrypted traffic has become more
learning models use complex structures to improve the accu- common, traffic information needed for classification will be
racy of traffic classification. In addition, they typically need encrypted and no longer visible to rule-based methods, the
to extract the initial 500 to 3000 bytes of each traffic flow
as input. Consequently, current deep learning-based approaches functionality of which will decrease as a result [4]. Meanstill experience milliseconds of latency in processing each traffic while, machine learning and deep learning technologies are
flow, making them unsuitable for real-world applications that driving advancements in various fields. Some researchers have
demand extremely fast responses. To address this problem, we attempted to employ these two approaches in network traffic
propose RET-Net. RET-Net employs the Key-Byte mechanism classification scenarios [2], [5], [6], [7].
to identify the bytes that are decisive for traffic classification,
thus significantly reducing the number of bytes required to be Currently, traditional machine learning algorithms are extenextracted from each flow. The extracted bytes are then processed sively applied in real-time traffic classification, delivering
using a refined Convolutional Neural Network architecture. satisfactory outcomes with an F1 score above 0.9 and sub-
Extensive experiments on real-world datasets demonstrate the millisecond level response times [7], [8], [9]. However, these
remarkable performance of RET-Net. It can identify each flow algorithms rely heavily on feature engineering, a laborin just 0.201ms. It also produces better F1 scores than state-ofthe-art models while achieving approximately 21.52× inference intensive process that requires significant domain-specific
speed improvement at the same time. knowledge. Nonetheless, the ongoing evolution of network
 traffic poses a significant risk that the efficacy of feature
 Index Terms—Traffic classification, real-time, key-byte mechanism. engineering may diminish progressively over time.
 In contrast, deep learning, with its ability to learn
 autonomously from raw data, has become the mainstream
 I. I NTRODUCTION model for traffic classification, with F1 scores usually exceed-

R EAL-TIME traffic classification has been the focus of
 network traffic analysis research [1]. In contrast to offline
traffic classification, real-time traffic classification can instantly
 ing 0.95 [1], [10]. Despite their superior classification
 performance, implementing deep learning models in realtime traffic classification meets notable challenges [11], [12],
react to changes in network conditions, quickly identifying [13]. The main challenge lies in the long latency introduced
and addressing network security threats [1], [2], [3]. It also by the deep learning model [14]. First, state-of-the-art deep
 learning models usually contain complex neural networks,
 Received 22 March 2025; revised 20 February 2026 and 19 April 2026;
accepted 24 April 2026. Date of publication 30 April 2026; date of current which need lots of computations and introduce significant
version 6 May 2026. This work was supported by Songshan Laboratory latency. Moreover, these models require large amounts of data
Research Fund under grant No. ZZK202402010. The associate editor coor- as input, for instance, 7 to 32 packets per flow, accumulating
dinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
A. Moubayed. (Corresponding author: Jin Zhao.) from 500 to 3000 bytes in one round of model classification
 Zhe Li and Jin Zhao are with the College of Computer Science and [15], [16], [17]. These drawbacks result in delays of 4ms or
Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China, and higher [6], taking a significant part of normal internet service
also with the Songshan Laboratory, Zhengzhou 452470, China (e-mail:
zheleee@outlook.com; jzhao@fudan.edu.cn). latency (usually from 1ms to 20ms [18], [19]), thus affecting
 Chengxuan Pei and Kun Qiu are with the College of Computer Science the quality of service.
and Artificial Intelligence, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China (e-mail: To address these challenges, we propose RET-Net, a novel,
pcx15272453751@outlook.com; qkun@fudan.edu.cn).
 Yanyue Xu and Sifan Hou are with Intel Asia–Pacific Research and high-speed, and lightweight framework for traffic classifica-
Development Ltd., Shanghai 200241, China (e-mail: yanyue.xu@intel.com; tion. RET-Net can be deployed in end systems for real-time
sifan.hou@intel.com). classification of both encrypted and unencrypted traffic. There
 Onur Barut is with Intel Corporation, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail:
onur.barut@intel.com). are mainly two contributions in RET-Net, including the key
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3689150 bytes extraction process and the lightweight Convolutional
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Neural Network (CNN). Firstly, instead of extracting the byte rithm to select a compact exemplars set from the old
sequence starting from the 0-th byte of each packet, we choose dataset, retaining only the most representative samples.
to select the key bytes in the header. During this process, Subsequently, we leverage knowledge distillation to fine-
Key-Byte mechanism is utilized to help pinpoint the needed tune the existing model with a combination of these
key bytes. By employing the Key-Byte mechanism, RET-Net exemplars samples and new traffic data. This design
only needs to extract the key bytes from the first two packets, enables RET-Net to rapidly adapt to new traffic without
accumulating to merely 60 ∼ 70 key bytes and reducing the relying on large-scale retraining on the entire historical
waiting time for more packets. Compared to other models, dataset, significantly reducing the time and computational
RET-Net needs 7 to 30 times fewer bytes. Moreover, the resources required while effectively mitigating the issue
classifier used in RET-Net is a lightweight CNN, and it only of catastrophic forgetting.
contains two 2-dimensional convolution layers, significantly The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
lowering computational complexity. From our experiments, introduces the background of traffic classification. Section III
RET-Net demonstrates F1 scores ranging from 0.9273 to demonstrates the overview design of RET-Net. Section IV
0.9983, and its inference speed is 20.52 times faster than other describes the detailed architecture and working principles
state-of-the-art deep-learning-based models. After the above of RET-Net. Section V evaluates RET-Net and analyzes the
two optimizations, RET-Net can finish classifying one flow evaluation results. Section VI discusses the limitations of
within approximately 0.201ms in serial processing, regardless RET-Net. Finally, Section VII concludes.
of the size of the network flow.
 In addition, to more efficiently adapt to new traffic types, II. BACKGROUND
this study employs the Herding [20] algorithm to select a
 A. Rule-Based Methods
small set of representative samples from the old dataset, thus
constructing an exemplars set. By combining the exemplars Initially, real-time traffic classification relied on portset with new traffic samples, RET-Net can utilize knowledge based and payload-based methods [21], [22]. The port-based
distillation to implement incremental learning on the existing approach is specified by the Internet Assigned Numbers
model. Through this approach, when there is a need to Authority (IANA) and utilizes a predefined list of ports to
recognize new traffic, it is no longer necessary to retrain on a classify application types [23]. Nevertheless, this approach
large-scale historical dataset. Instead, the model can be fine- encounters several limitations [24], [25], including issues with
tuned on a smaller new dataset, significantly reducing both dynamic port allocation, risks of port number exploitation
training time and computational costs. by malicious users, and reduced flexibility inherent to static
 In summary, we have achieved the following goals: port-based classification systems. Payload-based approaches or
 deep packet inspection (DPI) techniques categorize traffic by
 • We have devised an innovative Key-Byte mechanism
 examining packet headers and payloads [2]. However, the profor extracting byte sequences that are critical for clasliferation of encrypted traffic brings tremendous challenges to
 sification decisions. This mechanism initially employs
 payload-based approaches [26]. They have difficulty extracting
 Gradient-Weighted Class Activation Mapping (Gradsignatures from encrypted traffic, which significantly reduces
 CAM) to obtain feature matrix of different traffic types.
 their effectiveness.
 Subsequently, the Key-Byte Region Discovery (KRD)
 algorithm is utilized to identify key bytes that are essential
 for classification decisions based on these feature matrix. B. Traditional Machine-Learning-Based Methods
 Thanks to this mechanism, we can achieve high-accuracy With the advancement of machine learning, researchers have
 classification tasks by extracting only 60 to 70 bytes from attempted to combine traditional machine learning algorithms
 the first two packets of each flow. This approach sig- with statistical features extracted from traffic data to address
 nificantly reduces the amount of data and computational these challenges [2], [8], [27]. Traditional machine-learningcomplexity required for classification, thereby optimizing based methods are different from rule-based approaches by
 the overall classification speed. emphasizing machine-learning models, which need the devel-
 • We have proposed an innovative framework for real- opment of effective feature sets [28], [29]. There are several
 time encrypted traffic classification, named RET-Net. This traditional machine-learning-based works concentrating on
 framework has exhibited significant superiority in two real-time traffic classification. For instance, Pernay et al. [8]
 pivotal performance metrics: classification accuracy and accomplished the real-time classification of media streams by
 speed. Specifically, the RET-Net model has achieved F1 utilizing meticulously optimized features derived from packet
 scores ranging from 0.9273 to 0.9983 across three diverse attributes and decision trees. Similarly, Dias et al. [27] also
 datasets. Furthermore, compared to other models, the developed a classifier predicated on the Naive Bayes algo-
 RET-Net model has substantially increased the classifi- rithmic framework, achieving the dual objectives of real-time
 cation speed by a factor of 20.52, with the capability video traffic classification and increased classification accuto classify an individual network flow in merely 0.201 racy. Nonetheless, a notable limitation of traditional machine
 milliseconds, irrespective of the flow’s size. learning approaches is their need for sophisticated feature
 • We have introduced an incremental learning mechanism engineering, which requires extensive expertise, knowledge,
 into RET-Net to efficiently accommodate newly emerging and time. Moreover, the dynamic nature of network traffic risks
 traffic types. Concretely, we employ the Herding algo- rendering the features outdated.
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4405

 TABLE I
 S UMMARY OF R EPRESENTATIVE W ORKS IN E NCRYPTED T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION

C. Deep-Learning-Based Methods offloading but lack the flexibility to adapt to evolving application logic. Conversely, CPU-optimized models like MIMETIC
 Deep learning has established itself as the dominant [39] reduce parameter counts but do not fully address input
paradigm in traffic classification due to its automated fea- data sparsity, nor do they provide robust mechanisms to
ture extraction capabilities [10], [41], [42], [43]. Despite handle the performance degradation caused by dynamic traffic
achieving high precision, deploying these models on resource- evolution.
constrained end systems remains challenging due to inefficien- Table I summarizes the characteristics and limitations of
cies in data processing and model architecture. representative works.
 To mitigate potential biases from manual feature selection,
current approaches typically ingest full packet payloads [44].
Seminal works like Deep Packet [10] and MTL [15] process D. Incremental Learning
the first 1000 to 1500 bytes of a flow to maximize information As network traffic evolves, retraining models from scratch
retention. However, this strategy proves computationally inef- is computationally prohibitive. Incremental Learning (IL) mitficient for encrypted traffic. Since encrypted payloads exhibit igates catastrophic forgetting when adapting to new classes.
high entropy and limited discriminative value compared to pro- While traditional IL methods rely on basic replay or regtocol headers, processing entire payloads consumes substantial ularization, recent works have explored more sophisticated
resources on redundant data without significantly contributing frameworks to balance plasticity and stability. For example,
to classification accuracy. Zhu et al. [45] utilized generative adversarial networks to
 Beyond spatial redundancy, the reliance on long-range synthesize data for past classes, avoiding raw sample storage.
temporal dependencies introduces non-negligible buffering Cerasuolo et al. [46] introduced selective smoothing and model
latency. Methods such as FS-Net [4] and FlowTransformer calibration to reduce classification bias during model updates.
[31] require aggregating complete flow sequences or mul- Furthermore, Li et al. [47] applied contrastive learning to
tiple initial packets to construct sufficient semantic context. improve feature discrimination between old and new classes,
This dependency introduces unavoidable waiting time for while Di Monda et al. [48] adapted few-shot techniques for
data accumulation, creating a critical bottleneck for real-time scenarios with limited novel traffic samples.
applications where immediate response is essential. However, many of these advanced methods introduce struc-
 The escalating complexity of traffic patterns has further tural complexities or rely on resource-intensive generative
driven the adoption of intricate model architectures, often at processes. The resulting computational overhead poses a practhe expense of inference speed. Graph Neural Networks (e.g., tical challenge for real-time edge deployment, which typically
GraphDApp [33]) and Transformer-based pre-training mod- requires strictly low latency and operates under constrained
els (e.g., ET-BERT [34], FlowletFormer [38]) offer stronger processing capabilities.
feature extraction but incur heavy computational overhead. Consequently, RET-Net prioritizes computational efficiency
Specifically, the quadratic complexity O(N 2 ) inherent in to meet these edge constraints. Rather than deploying a
self-attention mechanisms results in high latency on general- structurally complex IL framework, we adopt a straightpurpose CPUs typically found in end systems, rendering such forward, lightweight strategy that combines exemplar-based
models unsuitable for line-rate processing. replay [49] with knowledge distillation. This baseline approach
 Consequently, recent research has shifted toward lightweight provides a practical foundation for mitigating catastrophic
designs to address these deployment hurdles, yet existing solu- forgetting with minimal overhead, the specific implementations face distinct trade-offs [12]. Hardware-centric approaches tion details of which are expanded upon in the subsequent
like Synecdoche [40] achieve high throughput via ASIC sections.
4406 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 B. Key-Byte Mechanism
 1) Pre-Training Phase: The middle panel of Fig. 1 depicts
 the Key-Byte Mechanism, which serves as the core feature
 extraction engine. After raw data processing, the raw data
 matrix of each flow is extracted. Then the raw data matrix
 is used as model input for pre-train. In the pre-train process
 of RET-Net, we treat packets as sequences of bytes, each
 represented as an integer between 0 and 255. The model
 commences with the extraction of semantic and positional
 features of bytes, facilitated by token embedding and position
 embedding techniques. Subsequently, a lightweight CNN is
 used to effectuate the classification of network traffic.
 Following this, the Grad-CAM analysis was applied to the
 last convolutional layer of the pre-trained model to acquire
 the feature matrix for each type of traffic. Subsequently, we
 employ the KRD algorithm to identify the common key-byte
 region within the feature matrix of all traffic types. The region
 is presumed to encapsulate the most critical bytes for the
 model’s classification decisions.
 2) Training Phase: After the pre-training phase, the RET-
 Net model utilizes the data from the Key-Byte Region for
 formal training. Through this training process, we obtain the
 final model that is deployed on the endpoint system to achieve
 real-time traffic classification.
 Key-Byte mechanism allows us to focus our attention on
 a finite region that is rich in feature information during the
 actual training. Utilizing the byte sequences within the keybyte region for training, the RET-Net model is capable of
Fig. 1. The architecture of RET-Net. enhancing classification accuracy while concurrently reducing
 classification latency.

 III. D ESIGN OVERVIEW
 C. Incremental Learning
 Fig. 1 depicts the architecture of RET-Net, comprising three 1) Exemplars Set Construction: To handle the dynamic
core modules dedicated to the parsing and classification of net- nature of network environments, the Incremental Learning
work flows. A brief introduction to these essential components module (bottom panel of Fig. 1) enables the model to adapt
follows. without retraining from scratch. Upon receiving new traffic data, the model must integrate additional classes while
 preserving prior knowledge. To achieve this, we select a
A. Raw Data Processing
 small set of representative samples (exemplars set) from old
 1) Analysis of IP and Transport Layer: As illustrated in classes. A common approach is herding, which iteratively
the top panel of Fig. 1, our process begins with the extraction picks samples that best approximate the mean feature distribuof bidirectional flows from packet capture files available in tion of the old data. These exemplars are then combined with
public datasets. This delineation utilizes five tuples that include newly collected traffic to form an incremental training set.
source and destination IPs, source and destination ports, and This strategy effectively reduces forgetting while minimizing
the transport layer protocol. For every packet in a bidirectional storage overhead.
flow, the process needs the discarding of link-layer headers, 2) Model Update via Knowledge Distillation: Next, we
initiating the parsing sequence from the first byte of the IP employ a Teacher-Student knowledge distillation framework
layer header. Regarding the transport layer, our analysis is to retain the old model’s discriminative ability for previous
confined to the UDP and TCP protocols. classes. The Teacher remains fixed, generating soft labels for
 2) Analysis of Application Layer: In handling application old-class samples. These soft labels, containing inter-class
layer protocols, we categorize them into two groups. For TLS, similarity and confusion information, guide the Student model
HTTP, and DNS protocols, we extract header information to replicate the Teacher’s distribution. The overall loss is
based on domain expertise, omitting their payloads. For the composed of a standard classification loss and a distillation
remaining application layer protocols, we drop both headers loss, balanced by a weighting coefficient.
and payloads. By exclusively leveraging non-sensitive header In addition, because the new categories comprise only a
information and discarding the encrypted sensitive payload, small proportion of the data, we refrain from modifying
this method averts the risk of privacy violation. the key-byte regions during incremental learning to avoid
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4407

Fig. 2. Packet parsing process in RET-Net.

adversely affecting recognition of the majority of existing user data (hexadecimal value 16). Conversely, for
traffic. We only consider re-running the KRD algorithm and records containing encrypted data (hexadecimal value
training a new model when the volume of new traffic sub- 17), only the TLS header is retained.
stantially exceeds that of old traffic, thereby enhancing overall 2) HTTP is an application layer protocol specifically
performance. designed for the exchange of data in network services.
 The header section of its request or response mes-
 IV. D ESIGN OF RET-N ET sages encompasses the essential metadata required for
 the classification. We identify and preserve headers up
 This section provides a comprehensive overview of our real- to the point marked by carriage return and line feed
time traffic classification framework. Initially, we detail the symbols (’’<CR><LF>’’), signifying the payload’s
methodology adopted for parsing packets. Subsequently, we commencement.
present the workflow of the Key-Byte Mechanism. Finally, 3) The DNS protocol, utilizing UDP for domain name
we will introduce the structure of the model. resolution, requires preserving only the 12-byte header,
 excluding all payloads.
A. Raw Data Processing Within each network flow, all packets are parsed per a
 1) Analysis of IP and Transport Layer: Our system initiates predefined method. This procedure enables the successful
packet parsing at the IP layer, extending through to the extraction of a raw data matrix Draw ∈ R p×b from each flow,
application layer headers. Fig. 2 illustrates the packet parsing where p represents the count of packets extracted from each
process. The construction of our model leverages IPv4 network flow and b represents the byte lengths extracted from each
traffic, due to its prevalence in existing datasets and the real packet respectively. Importantly, the sequence of p extracted
world. In the IPv4 packet header, we omit the final two packets explicitly includes pure signaling packets (e.g., TCP
segments, which encode source and destination IP addresses. SYN and SYN-ACK) to capture initial connection metadata.
This approach strengthens the model’s focus on traffic classification behaviors and content features, thereby increasing B. Key-Byte Mechanism
the generality of the model. This approach also mitigates The Key-Byte Mechanism primarily consists of two compothe risk of utilizing potentially sensitive user information. nents: the generation of the feature matrix through Grad-CAM
Furthermore, optional IP header fields are disregarded due and the KRD algorithm. This section first outlines the features
to their infrequent use. Subsequent to IP header parsing, of the Key-Byte mechanism. Subsequently, it delves into the
we analyze the transport layer, focusing on the TCP/UDP working principles of Grad-CAM and its application in traffic
protocols that dominate network traffic. The initial segments feature matrix extraction. Finally, the implementation details
of these protocols’ headers, denoting source and destination of the KRD algorithm are thoroughly described.
ports, are similarly excluded from the analysis. 1) Features: Machine learning-based traffic classification
 2) Analysis of Application Layer: The examination of the methods typically involve a pre-model training phase where
application layer concentrates on TLS, DNS, and HTTP statistical features of the traffic are manually selected based
protocols, while headers and payloads of other proto- on expert knowledge. The advantage of this approach is
cols are discarded. By employing packet headers devoid that the feature extraction process is decoupled from the
of user-sensitive information, our method prevents privacy training process, resulting in a model with low classification
infringement risks. latency. However, this method is subject to the subjectivity
 1) For TLS, operating over TCP for encrypted commu- of feature engineering and is labor-intensive. In contrast,
 nication, we preserve the entire TLS record if the deep learning-based traffic classification methods automati-
 ’’Content-Type’’ field indicates non-encrypted cally extract features during the training process, eliminating
4408 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

the need for feature engineering. The downside is that the
resulting models tend to have higher computational complexity
and longer classification latency.
 The Key-Byte Mechanism aims to integrate the strengths
of both machine learning-based and deep learning-based traffic classification methods while mitigating their respective
drawbacks. Initially, the pre-training phase of the Key-Byte
Mechanism can be regarded as a form of feature engineering.
In this specialized feature engineering process, convolutional
layers, Grad-CAM, and the KRD algorithm within the pretrained model are utilized to automatically extract key-byte
regions. Compared to traditional feature engineering, this step
is devoid of human subjectivity. During the training phase, the
model is formally trained using the key-byte regions extracted
in the previous step to obtain a deployable model. In this
step, the model ensures classification accuracy by focusing
on features that are more critical for decision-making, similar
to the self-attention mechanism. However, unlike the selfattention mechanism, where feature acquisition is often an
integral part of the model, the pre-training phase for feature
acquisition and the training phase for obtaining the deployable
model in the Key-Byte Mechanism are distinct. This separation ensures that the model obtained through the Key-Byte
Mechanism has extremely low computational complexity and
classification latency, meeting the demands of real-time traffic
classification.
 Fig. 3. Workflow of Key-Byte mechanism.
 2) Grad-CAM: Grad-CAM [50], [51] is a technique harnessed within the realm of deep learning to visualize and
elucidate the decision-making processes of Convolutional
 the Grad-CAM is applied to extract the feature matrix for each
Neural Networks (CNNs). This method can delineate the
 type of traffic within the dataset. The specific procedure is as
regions of features that contribute most significantly to the
 follows:
model’s classification decisions.
 Initially, Grad-CAM is applied to each sample to generate
 Initially, the Grad-CAM is conventionally applied to the
 a corresponding feature matrix Fi ∈ R p×b . Subsequently, for
last convolutional layer of a CNN, as the activation maps
 each traffic category c within the dataset S , the feature matrix
of this layer are adept at capturing spatial information from
 Fi of all samples belonging to traffic category
 P c are aggregated
the raw data matrix. Subsequently, the gradient with respect
 through summation to form Fagg,c = i∈c Fi . This step is
to the final convolutional layer is computed for the class
 designed to combine the common features of all samples
of interest, such as the one predicted by the model. This
 belonging to traffic category c. Fagg,c can more accurately
gradient signifies the degree of contribution of each location
 reflect the typical characteristics of traffic category c.
within the feature matrix to the target class. Thereafter, a
 To ensure numerical consistency and comparability of the
ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) operation is performed on the
 feature matrix across different traffic categories, the Mingradient to ensure that all negative values are converted to
 Max normalization method is employed to standardize Fagg,c ,
zero, thereby highlighting the regions that positively contribute
 resulting in Fnorm,c . This process scales the range of values
to the predictive outcome. Ultimately, the ReLU-processed
 within Fagg,c to the interval [0, 1], ensuring that the feature
gradient is multiplied by the corresponding feature maps,
 matrix across different traffic categories can be compared and
followed by a weighted averaging of all feature maps to derive
 analyzed on an equitable basis.
an integrated feature matrix, known as the Class Activation
 In Fnorm,c , each element represents the importance of the
Map. Upsampling the obtained CAM to the size of the original
 byte in Draw at the corresponding position. By setting a
image yields a feature matrix of the same dimensions as
 threshold τ, key bytes in Draw can be identified. The key bytes
the raw data matrix. Each element in the feature matrix
 are defined as follows using a piecewise function:
represents the importance of the byte at the corresponding
position. (
 Fig. 3 provides an exhaustive illustration of the Key-Byte 1 if Fagg,c ( j, k) ≥ τ
 Dckey ( j, k) = (1)
mechanism. Initially, the raw data matrix Draw ∈ R p×b is 0 if Fagg,c ( j, k) < τ
selected to commence the pre-training phase, ensuring that its
dimensions p × b are large enough to incorporate all potential Here, Dckey ( j, k) indicates whether the byte at position
key bytes. After the pre-training phase, the emphasis is placed Draw ( j, k) is considered as a key byte (1) or not (0) for traffic
on the final convolutional layer of the RET-Net model, where category c. In this paper, τ is set to 0.5.
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4409

 Following this, key-byte region is identified using Dckey and Score(Region) represents the final score of candidate region
Fnorm,c with the KRD algorithm. In the next section, the details Region across all traffic categories.
of KRD will be presented. This approach takes into account both the most impor-
 3) Key-Byte Region Discovery (KRD) Algorithm: In the tant bytes and the average importance of all bytes within
KRD algorithm, two principal stages were undertaken: the the candidate region for each traffic category. In this mansearch for candidate key-byte regions and the selection of ner, the evaluation function can achieve a balance between
optimal key-byte regions. Initially, a dynamic sliding window- the significance of individual bytes and the overall average
based method was developed to identify candidates for importance. This balance is instrumental in circumventing the
key-byte regions. The method can do adaptive adjustment of selection of key-byte regions that are either too localized or
the scope of key-byte regions according to the characteristics too diffuse, enhancing both the accuracy and robustness of the
of traffic patterns. For traffic patterns where key bytes are classification process. This holistic approach ensures that the
highly concentrated, the algorithm can correspondingly reduce selected key-byte regions are effective not only for specific
the window size, thereby narrowing down the regions of key traffic categories but also applicable to the entire dataset.
bytes to consider and enhancing efficiency. Conversely, for The KRD algorithm encompasses the following detailed
traffic patterns where key bytes are more sparsely distributed, steps:
the algorithm expands the window range to ensure exten- • Definition of Window Size Boundaries: The minimum
sive coverage of key bytes across different traffic categories, window size is set to Wmin = (hmin , wmin ), where hmin is
thereby enhancing the accuracy of classification. the minimum height and wmin is the minimum width of
 Subsequently, to assess and select the best key-byte regions, the window. The maximum window size is set to Wmax =
an evaluation function was meticulously crafted. This function (hmax , wmax ), where hmax is the maximum height and wmax
assigns scores to candidate regions based on a normalized is the maximum width of the window.
feature matrix Fnorm,c . The function integrates two pivotal • Initialization of Window: The initial window Winit is set
metrics: the maximum importance of bytes within the region, to the minimum size Wmin , that is, Winit = (hmin , wmin ).
denoted as MaxImpc , and the average importance of all bytes, • Sliding Window Process: Simultaneously across all Dckey ,
represented as AvgImpc . The calculation for these metrics is a sliding window is initiated. The window commences
as follows: its traversal from the upper left corner of the matrix,
 MaxImpc = max(Fnorm,c [Region]) (2) proceeding in a row-major order. In this process, the
 P sliding window should remain within the confines of the
 Fnorm,c (i, j)∈Fnorm,c [Region] Fnorm,c (i, j) Dckey boundaries.
 AvgImpc = (3)
 |Fnorm,c [Region]| • Key Byte Distribution: At each window position, the
 Fnorm,c represents the normalized feature matrix for traffic distribution of key bytes within the window is evaluated
category c. Region is the candidate region that we are eval- to determine how many distinct traffic types contain key
uating. The Fnorm,c [Region] is the submatrix extracted from bytes within the window’s area.
Fnorm,c corresponding to region Region. The |Fnorm,c [Region]| • Window Size Adjustment: The window size is increrefers to the total number of elements within the candidate mentally increased according to a predetermined step
region Region. The evaluation function then computes the until it reaches Wmax . After each increment, the sliding
score for each candidate region by balancing the significance window process and key byte distribution evaluation are
of the most important individual bytes with the overall average repeated.
importance. This is encapsulated in the following formula: • Recording Candidate Regions: Among all window positions, the ones that cover the most traffic categories are
 Scorec (Region) = w1 · MaxImpc + w2 · AvgImpc (4) selected as candidate key-byte regions, and their position
Here, w1 and w2 are weights that modulate the contribution of and size are recorded.
MaxImpc and AvgImpc to the final score, respectively. These • Candidate Regions Evaluation: For each candidate
weights are crucial as they allow us to balance the influence region, denoted as region, the evaluation function is
of the maximum importance and average importance within employed to obtain its Score(Region). The regions are
our scoring system. then ranked in descending order of their scores. The
 To aggregate contributions from all traffic categories, we region with the highest score is selected as the optimal
sum the individual scores using Eq. 5. Crucially, this eval- key-byte region.
uation function inherently regularizes heterogeneous traffic
distributions. Excessive window expansion to capture dis- C. RET-Net Model
persed features simultaneously ingests task-irrelevant bytes,
diluting feature density and decreasing the AvgImpc metric. Fig. 4 illustrates the RET-Net model. The raw data matrix
By penalizing overly broad windows, this structural constraint or the Key-Byte region serves as its input. In our model,
encourages a compact balance between comprehensive feature each byte within a packet is considered a word within a
coverage and a high density of informative features. sentence in the domain of text analysis. This view is predicated
 X upon the observed similarities between byte sequences in
 Score(Region) = Scorec (Region) (5) packets and sentences in textual content. Initially, parallelism
 c∈S in positional characteristics is identified: both sentences in text
4410 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 while also avoiding—or at least reducing—the phenomenon
 of “catastrophic forgetting” of previously acquired knowledge.
 As a result, incremental learning is well-suited for scenarios
 where all training data cannot be collected at once or when
 data continues to be generated over time.
 In this study, incremental learning chiefly consists of two
 stages: (1) constructing a representative exemplars set, and
Fig. 4. Architecture of the RET-Net model. (2) adjusting the model through knowledge distillation.
 1) Construct Exemplars Set: In the exemplars set construcand packet formats are governed by stringent rules that dictate tion stage, once new training data becomes available, we select
the potential for the meaning of a word or byte to be altered a small number of samples from historical data that are most
based on its positional context. Furthermore, a congruence representative or have the greatest impact on the model’s
in semantic features is noted: both words and bytes are full performance. These selected samples form a small “replay”
of distinct semantic information, which is shaped by their set, known as the exemplars set. Then, both these historical
literal meaning and the context of their usage. Capitalizing samples and newly collected traffic samples are used together
on these similarities, token embedding and position embedding for incremental training. Through this process, the model can
techniques are utilized, as illustrated in Fig. 4, to delineate the “recall” previously acquired knowledge while using only a
semantic and positional attributes inherent in byte sequences. minimal amount of historical data, thereby greatly reducing
 Following the embedding phase, the resulting data is the risk of forgetting.
fed into a lightweight CNN model. The use of a CNN
offers two main advantages. Firstly, the architecture of CNN Algorithm 1 Exemplars Selection via Herding
enables highly efficient parallel processing, which signif- Require:
icantly enhances computational speed compared to more 1: Dc : Samples of class c (input data)
complex models like Transformers. Secondly, CNN is adept 2: f (·): Feature extractor (e.g., model backbone)
at identifying and extracting local patterns through their con- 3: m: Number of exemplars to select
volutional layers, an attribute that is particularly beneficial Ensure:
when local semantic features are crucial for the task. As 4: S c : Selected exemplars for class c (size m)
demonstrated in the experiments discussed in Section V, 5: function B UILD E XEMPLARS (Dc , f , m)
the bytes critical to classification decision tend to clus- 6: ∈ Dc } .Φc ∈ R|Dc |×d
 Extract features: Φc = { f (x) | x P
ter together, highlighting the suitability of CNN for this 7: Compute class mean: µc = |D1c | φ∈Φc φ .µc ∈ Rd
application. 8: Initialize exemplars set: S c ← ∅
 We use Cross Entropy Loss as the loss function. The 9: Initialize exemplars features: E ← ∅
formula for Cross Entropy Loss in multi-class classification 10: for k = 1to m do
is delineated as: 11: if k = 1 then
 M
 X 12: Target: µtarget ← µc
 LCE = − yo,c log(po,c ) (6) 13: else
 Current mean of E: µE = k−1 1
 φ∈E φ
 P
 c=1 14:
 LCE represents the computed loss value. M denotes the 15: Target: µtarget ← µc · k − µE · (k − 1)
total number of classes. yo,c is a binary indicator (0 or 1) 16: end if
that signifies whether class c is the correct classification for 17: Compute distances: di = kφi − µtarget k22 , ∀φi ∈ Φc
observation o. po,c is the predicted probability that observation 18: Mask already selected indices: di ← ∞, ∀i ∈ S c
o belongs to class c. 19: Select closest sample: i∗ = arg mini di
 20: Add to exemplars: S c ← S c ∪ {xi∗ }
D. Incremental Learning 21: Update exemplar features: E ← E ∪ {φi∗ }
 22: end for
 In network environments, traffic types are constantly evolv-
 23: return S c
ing. When new traffic types emerge, the RET-Net model must
 24: end function
be updated to handle these changes. In traditional methods,
each update to the model requires retraining with the complete
set of old data plus the new traffic data, along with running To choose the representative samples from the old data,
the KRD algorithm. However, this process is costly. To make we adopt the herding algorithm to select instances that best
updates more efficient, we adopt an incremental learning approximate the mean feature distribution. The detailed proapproach for model adjustment. cedure is explicitly described in Algorithm 1.
 Incremental Learning refers to a training paradigm in The process begins by taking the samples of a specific
which a model continually receives new data and tasks and class Dc , the feature extractor f (·), and the target number of
updates itself accordingly. Unlike traditional batch learning, exemplars m as inputs. First, the algorithm extracts the feature
the main objective of incremental learning is to integrate representations Φc for all samples and computes the global
new information without fully retraining the entire model, class mean µc , which serves as the statistical center of the
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4411

class (Line 6-7). The selection then proceeds iteratively for m divergence:
steps (Line 10-22). N
 In each iteration k, we determine a dynamic target vector 1 X
 LDistill = DKL p̃(i) k q̃(i) ,
 
 (7)
µtarget to guide the selection. For the first exemplar, the N
 i=1
target is simply the global mean µc ; for subsequent steps, the
 where:
target is adjusted based on the current mean of the already
 – p̃(i) = softmax t(i) is the teacher’s probability distribu-
 
selected exemplars µE (Line 11-16). Specifically, the update
rule µtarget ← k · µc − (k − 1) · µE is designed to pull the average tion over old classes (Cold ) for sample i,
of the selected set closer to the true global mean with each – q̃(i) = softmax s(i) is the student’s distribution over old
addition. Next, the algorithm calculates the Euclidean distance classes,
between each candidate sample’s feature vector and this target – t(i) , s(i) are logits from the teacher and student models,
(Line 17). The sample that minimizes this distance is identified respectively.
(Line 19) and added to the exemplar set S c (Line 20-21). This For old-class samples, the Student predicts a distribution
iterative greedy optimization enables the final exemplar set S c for all classes, while the Teacher provides its distribution
to effectively approximate the mean feature representation of specifically for the old classes. Using the KL divergence, the
the original data. difference between the Student’s and Teacher’s distributions
 Upon completion of the selection process, we merge the on these old classes is calculated and added as a distillation
newly constructed exemplar set with the new traffic data to loss to the total loss.
form an incremental training set. This allows the model to d) Balancing New and Old Knowledge: Relying only
adapt to new types of traffic while substantially preserving on distillation loss might leave the new model undertrained
its prior discriminative capabilities, thereby mitigating catas- on the new classes. Relying only on the regular classification
trophic forgetting of old knowledge. loss, however, might cause the model to forget old knowledge.
 2) Model Adjustment Through Knowledge Distillation: Therefore, a weighting coefficient is used to balance the
Knowledge distillation was first proposed by Hinton et al distillation loss and classification loss, so that the model retains
[52]. It transfers the knowledge of an existing, already-trained adequate performance on both new and old classes.
model (the Teacher) to a smaller or new model (the Student). The total loss combines these two components:
The key idea is to use the “soft labels” produced by the Ltotal = LCE + λ · LDistill , (8)
Teacher—these labels reflect how confident the Teacher is
about each class—to guide the Student’s training. Compared where λ controls the trade-off between learning new classes
with the “hard labels” (true labels), soft labels often pro- and retaining old knowledge.
vide richer information about the relative relationships among e) Final Outcome: By training in this manner, the new
classes. model gains sufficient discriminative power for the new classes
 a) Freezing the Old Model (Teacher): The old model, while also inheriting the old model’s output distribution for
trained in the previous phase, usually has strong recognition old classes, thereby reducing forgetting. The additional use
abilities for old classes. To preserve this capability, the old of exemplars replay further helps the model see part of
model should remain unchanged during the current stage and the original old-class samples during training, making the
only provide soft labels. Hence, all its parameters are fixed distillation loss more effective for these old classes.
and not updated. f) Keep the key byte region unchanged: During this trainb) Training the New Model (Student) with Soft Labels: In ing stage, we do not modify the key byte region for two main
the current phase, the new model must learn both new classes reasons. First, if the key bytes of the new traffic do fall within
and old classes. For old classes, besides keeping a small this region, keeping it unchanged is reasonable for recognizing
number of representative samples (exemplars), we also obtain that new traffic. If the new traffic’s key bytes lie outside of
the old model’s output distribution—i.e., soft labels—for these it, this fact itself becomes a helpful feature that allows the
old-class samples. Soft labels, which reveal similarities or model to distinguish new from old traffic. The model can
potential confusions among classes, offer more information learn that “the new and old traffic differ in their key byte
than hard labels (only class indices or one-hot vectors). By distributions.” Second, in our scenario, newly emerging traffic
imitating this distribution, the new model helps retain its usually makes up only a small fraction of the overall data,
ability to distinguish old classes. meaning old traffic still dominates. Frequently making large
 adjustments to the key byte region could undermine existing
 c) Adding a “Knowledge Distillation” Term to the Loss
 feature extraction capabilities, leading to poorer recognition
Function: When training the new model, the overall loss
 performance for most old traffic. Therefore, when new traffic
consists of:
 is relatively small and old traffic still dominates, leaving the
 • A regular classification loss: Ensures the new model key byte region unaltered helps avoid major distribution shifts.
 can correctly classify both new and old classes. This is If we wished to dynamically change the key byte region as
 implemented using the Cross-Entropy Loss. new classes appear, we would need an additional mechanism
 • A knowledge distillation loss: Encourages the new to determine “when” and “under what criteria” to make these
 model’s output distribution over old classes to match the changes, which would increase both system complexity and
 old model’s predictions. This is formulated using the KL maintenance costs. By contrast, keeping the key byte region
4412 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

fixed simplifies the incremental learning process and places TABLE II
more emphasis on modeling how the new traffic differs from D ETAILS OF THE DATASETS
the old. However, if over time the new traffic grows so large
that it becomes the majority (an extreme case), reapplying the
KRD algorithm on an entirely fresh dataset would be a better
choice than continuing incremental adjustments or training a
new model directly.

 TABLE III
 V. E VALUATION E XPERIMENTAL E NVIRONMENT
A. Datasets
 We utilized three publicly accessible datasets, summarized
in Table II, to evaluate RET-Net under diverse conditions
spanning traffic visibility, threat scenarios, and statistical distribution.
 • Traffic Visibility: NetML primarily consists of encrypted
 TLS flows to challenge payload-independent analysis. In
 contrast, CICIDS2017 and CICDDOS2019 contain mixed
 protocols, testing robustness across both encrypted and designed to assess the efficiency of the proposed Keytransparent traffic. Byte mechanism in achieving robust performance with
 • Threat Scenarios: The datasets cover a broad secu- a highly compacted input of 60-70 bytes.
 rity spectrum, including heterogeneous intrusions in 4) Residual 1-D Image Transformer (R1DIT): As a
 CICIDS2017, volumetric DDoS saturation in CICD- representative Transformer-based traffic classification
 DOS2019, and fine-grained malware classification in model [6], R1DIT leverages multi-head self-attention
 NetML. mechanisms. Notably, it also performs coarse-grained
 • Statistical Distribution: To stress-test adaptability to feature selection by focusing on specific packet segclass imbalances, we selected the benign-dominant ments. We selected this baseline to benchmark our
 CICIDS2017 for background noise filtering, the attack- fine-grained Key-Byte mechanism against a coarsedominant CICDDOS2019 for simulating active assaults, grained strategy within a distinct architectural paradigm.
 and the long-tail NetML dataset for evaluating few-shot
 capabilities on scarce minority classes.
 C. Experimental Setup
 To ensure robustness and generalizability, a ten-fold crossvalidation method was adopted across all datasets. To accurately measure the classification prowess of the
 system we devised, we engaged a comprehensive set of standardized metrics, which include Accuracy, Precision, Recall,
B. Baselines and Macro F1 Score.
 Our experimental environment is presented in Table III. The
 To systematically evaluate RET-Net across diverse technical
 training process is performed on a GPU, while the statistical
paradigms, the following baseline models were selected:
 inference time is calculated on a mid-to-low-end CPU from an
 1) Random Forest (RF): As a representative ensem- earlier generation. This illustrates that our experimental results
 ble learning algorithm, RF was selected to benchmark do not rely on high-performance equipment.
 against traditional methods that typically rely on
 labor-intensive feature engineering. This comparison is
 intended to demonstrate RET-Net’s capacity for fully D. Key-Byte Mechanism
 automated feature extraction. In our setup, the RF model 1) Pre-Training Phase: In this experimental phase, the raw
 utilizes 100 decision trees with a maximum depth of 20. data matrix Draw of size p = 2 and b = 125 was selected
 2) K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN): KNN is a non-parametric for pre-training the model. This implies that only the first two
 algorithm that predicts labels based on distance metrics. packets of each flow are parsed, with 125 bytes extracted from
 Similar to RF, it serves as a baseline to evaluate the each packet.
 trade-off between the computational simplicity of tradi- In real-time traffic classification, the maximum value for
 tional machine learning and the representational capacity p can be 2. In this setting, RET-Net can extract a sufficient
 of deep learning approaches. The number of neighbors sequence of bytes from the first packet of the sender and the
 was set to 5. corresponding response packet of the receiver. It allows the
 3) 1D-CNN: This model was selected as a structurally receiver to classify the flow immediately upon receiving the
 similar baseline to control for the architectural vari- sender’s initial packet, without awaiting additional subsequent
 able. Unlike RET-Net, standard 1D-CNNs typically packets. Should p be set to a value greater than 2, the recipient
 require substantially larger input sequences (784 bytes) would be required to wait for a sufficient number of packets to
 to extract effective features [56]. This comparison is classify the bidirectional flow. It will lead to prolonged waiting
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4413

 TABLE IV
 T HE R ESULT OF K EY-B YTE R EGION D ISCOVERY

Fig. 5. Heatmap of traffic labeled ‘benign’ in CICIDS2017.

 Subsequently, we employ the KRD algorithm to identify
 key-byte regions within each dataset. In our experiments,
 we initially define the size boundaries of the window: the
 height is set to 2, with the width ranging from 30 to 50.
 Additionally, both weight parameters, w1 and w2 , within the
 evaluation function are assigned a value of 0.5. We then initiate
 the dynamic sliding window to search for candidate key-byte
Fig. 6. Heatmap of traffic labeled ‘ssh-patator’ in CICIDS2017. regions. Ultimately, the evaluation function is applied to each
 candidate region to ascertain its score, which is subsequently
 ranked according to its magnitude. The region with the highest
 score is designated as the final key-byte region.
 Table IV presents the outcomes of the KRD algorithm. For
 the NetML, the key-byte region corresponds to the submatrix
 Draw [0 : 2, 8 : 38] of Draw , encompassing a total of 60 bytes. In
 the case of the CICDDOS2019, the key-byte region is mapped
 to the submatrix Draw [0 : 2, 3 : 38], which contains 68 bytes in
Fig. 7. Heatmap of traffic labeled ‘adload’ in NetML dataset. total. For the CICIDS2017, the key-byte region corresponds to
 the submatrix Draw [0 : 2, 8 : 40], totaling 64 bytes. Following
 the identification of key-byte regions, these regions are utilized
 as inputs to train classification models. From the coverage of
 the key-byte regions, it can be observed that the key bytes
 exhibit a feature of local convergence within the first 50 bytes.

 E. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
Fig. 8. Heatmap of traffic labeled ‘DrDoS UDP’ in CICDDOS2019. To verify the robustness of KRD hyperparameters, we
 analyze the window size and weight parameters.
 First, the window size boundaries are determined by nettimes when the number of packets exchanged in the network work protocol structures. We set the minimum width Wmin =
flow is less than p. Thus the setting(p > 2) is impractical for 30 bytes to cover essential IPv4 and Transport Layer control
traffic classification that demands real-time processing. The fields (e.g., Protocol, Flags), which typically occupy roughly
configuration of b = 125 is chosen to ensure that the raw data 28 bytes. The maximum width Wmax is limited to 50 bytes to
matrix encompasses as many potential key bytes as possible. focus on local feature concentrations.
 2) Training Phase: Following the pre-training phase of our Second, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the weight
model, we employed Grad-CAM to produce the feature matrix parameter w1 (range [0.3, 0.7]) in Eq. 4, with w2 constrained
for each traffic category. To provide a direct representation of as 1 − w1 . As shown in Fig. 9, the Intersection over Union
Grad-CAM’s effectiveness, the feature matrix is displayed as (IoU) scores remain consistently high across datasets. This
a heatmap. Figs. 5∼6 illustrate the heatmaps for ‘benign’ and stability, driven by the rigid positional characteristics of
‘ssh-patator’ traffic from the CICIDS2017. It is observable that network protocol headers, demonstrates that the algorithm
for the ‘benign’ traffic, the key bytes are predominantly located is highly insensitive to minor weight variations. Given this
within the first 10 bytes of the IP header, which is a part of robustness, we opted to equally balance the peak feature value
the header checksum. For ‘ssh-patator’ traffic, the critical bytes and the average regional density by setting w1 = w2 = 0.5.
are focused around the 38th byte. Furthermore, Fig. 7 presents This configuration yields reliable performance across datasets
the heatmap for ‘adload’ traffic in the NetML dataset, showing without requiring complex parameter tuning.
discriminative features concentrated in the specific fields of the
application layer. Finally, Fig. 8 depicts the ‘DrDoS UDP’
traffic in CICDDOS2019, where high-importance bytes are F. Comparison of Performance With and Without KRD
densely distributed across the IP and UDP headers, aligning To evaluate the effectiveness of the KRD algorithm,
with the structural characteristics of volumetric attacks. we compare RET-NetKRD against two baselines: one
4414 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON B ETWEEN RET-N ET M ODELS W ITH AND W ITHOUT KRD

extracting sequences sequentially from the zeroth byte
(RET-NetWithoutKRD ) and another using random extraction
(RET-NetRandom ). As detailed in Table V, KRD’s performance
gains relative to the static zeroth-byte baseline vary significantly. This variation is closely associated with the spatial
distribution of discriminative features across network protocols. The adaptive capacity of KRD allows it to dynamically
align with these diverse distributions, whereas static extraction
windows frequently prove insufficient.
 On the CICIDS2017 dataset, RET-NetKRD achieves a substantial 85.8% F1 score improvement over RET-NetWithoutKRD .
This gain can be attributed to the fact that highly discriminative
features for specific attacks reside beyond the default [0, 32]
byte range. As illustrated by Fig. 6, these features are primarily
concentrated between bytes 35 and 40. By dynamically shift- Fig. 9. Sensitivity analysis of w1 (IoU with baseline w1 = 0.5).
ing the window to span [8, 40] bytes, KRD captures displaced
features that static methods typically discard.
 For the NetML dataset, KRD yields a 6.55% improvement.
This dataset comprises diverse malware families characterized
by spatially dispersed features, as seen in the adload heatmap
(Fig. 7). While the static [0, 30] byte window captures a
portion of the relevant information, it simultaneously ingests
task-irrelevant fields at the packet’s immediate beginning (e.g.,
initial lower-layer headers). By shifting the extraction region
to [8, 38] bytes, KRD bypasses these initial non-discriminative Fig. 10. Confusion matrix for RET-Net.
bytes and extends the trailing boundary, thereby increasing the
density of informative features within the input matrix.
 Conversely, the improvement on CICDDOS2019 is marginal early payloads rather than standard initial headers; and (2) in
(0.02%), reflecting a scenario where the default extraction heterogeneous traffic environments where diverse protocols
strategy already establishes a strong baseline. This dataset render a fixed extraction window suboptimal.
predominantly contains volumetric DDoS attacks, whose distinguishing characteristics consistently reside within standard G. Compare RET-Net to Baseline Models
protocol headers at the packet’s immediate beginning (Fig. 8). In this phase of the experiment, it was ensured that each
Consequently, the KRD-identified region ([3, 37] bytes) heav- model was trained on an identical total byte count across
ily overlaps with the default window ([0, 34] bytes). Under the same datasets. Furthermore, the baseline models were set
these homogeneous traffic conditions, the primary discrimina- to extract byte sequences starting from the zeroth byte of
tive features are already effectively encompassed by the static each packet by default. Fig. 10 displays the performance of
baseline. the RET-Net model through the confusion matrix on three
 Synthesizing the results from these diverse environments, datasets. The comparison with multiple baseline models, as
we observe that KRD’s advantage is most pronounced when shown in Figs. 11∼14, demonstrates that RET-Net exhibited
the default extraction strategy is misaligned with the spatial superior classification performance on all three datasets. Parfeature distribution. Specifically, the KRD algorithm provides ticularly, on the CICIDS2017 dataset, RET-Net’s classification
notable benefits under two distinct conditions: (1) when ability significantly surpassed other models. This result contraffic exhibits a significant feature offset, placing discrim- firms both the strong traffic classification capacity of our
inative characteristics in variable fields, deep headers, or lightweight CNN model and the effectiveness of the Key-
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4415

 TABLE VI
 T EMPORAL P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON

Fig. 11. F1 score of all models.

 TABLE VII
 RF R ESULTS ON N ET ML U NDER S ERIAL E XECUTION (max depth = 20)

Fig. 12. Accuracy of all models.

 volutional Neural Network. Although RET-Net is slightly
 slower by a factor of 1.72 when compared to 1D-CNN, the
 results depicted in Fig 11 indicate that 1D-CNN significantly
 falls behind RET-Net in terms of classification accuracy. This
 implies that 1D-CNN’s rapid classification speed does not
 translate into practical benefits due to the sacrifice of accuracy. Moreover, RET-Net has achieved improvements in both
 classification speed and accuracy when compared to machine
Fig. 13. Recall of all models. learning algorithms such as KNN and RF.
 We additionally evaluated Random Forest on NetML under
 serial execution with max depth = 20 and nestimators ∈
 {50, 100, 150, 200, 250}. As shown in Table VII, the Macro-
 F1 score increases from 0.8383 at 50 estimators to 0.8914 at
 100, and reaches 0.8975 at 150. When the ensemble size is
 further increased to 200 and 250, the Macro-F1 score slightly
 decreases to 0.8953 and 0.8929, respectively. In contrast, the
 serial inference latency increases steadily from 1.4016 ms
 to 3.4024, 5.3432, 6.3090, and 7.8816 ms. These results
Fig. 14. Precision of all models. suggest that a larger RF model can improve accuracy to some
 extent, but the gain becomes limited once the ensemble is
 already moderately large, while the temporal cost continues
Byte mechanism in enhancing classification accuracy without to increase. Overall, RET-Net still provides a more favorable
augmenting the input data volume. balance between classification accuracy and serial inference
 On the NetML, we conducted a temporal performance anal- latency for real-time traffic classification.
ysis to compare the serial and parallel classification latencies Additionally, we analyzed the serial latency under different
of the RET-Net model with other models under identical input conditions. Fig 15 illustrates the trend of RET-Net’s
input data conditions. Serial classification latency reflects the classification latency as it varies with the number of input
model’s potential adverse impact on the normal communi- bytes. It is observable that there is a positive correlation
cation of network flows. In contrast, parallel classification between RET-Net’s classification latency and the number of
latency assesses the model’s concurrency capabilities. input bytes. As the number of input bytes decreases, RET-
 As shown in table VI, in a serial setup, RET-Net’s clas- Net’s classification latency exhibits an approximately linear
sification latency is a mere 0.201 milliseconds. Compared to decrease, indicating that reducing the number of input bytes
R1DIT, which employs a self-attention mechanism, RET-Net yields stable classification speedup benefits.
demonstrates a remarkable 21.52-fold increase in classification In parallel settings, we utilize batch size to define the numspeed. This significant enhancement in speed is attributed ber of flows processed simultaneously by the model. It should
to RET-Net’s unique design, where we have decoupled the be noted that this batch size setup is strictly designed for the
complex self-attention mechanism from the model through inference phase, rather than the training phase. Specifically, the
a key-byte mechanism and incorporated a lightweight Con- batch sizes adopted in our parallel inference setup are 4, 8, 16,
4416 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE VIII
 M ACRO -F1 S CORES AND R ETENTION R ATES ACROSS I NCREMENTAL
 P HASES (E XEMPLARS /C LASS = 400). VALUES IN PARENTHESES I NDI -
 CATE THE P ERCENTAGE D ROP R ELATIVE TO P HASE 0

Fig. 15. Inference time under varying input conditions in the serial setting.
 a total of 6 phases. This evaluates the model’s stability
 under sequential update conditions.
 • NetML (10+2 Scenario): This represents a scenario with
 larger incremental steps. The model starts with a reduced
 knowledge base of 10 classes and is updated with two
 new classes per phase. This setting evaluates the capacity
 to handle larger batches of new information relative to a
 smaller existing knowledge base.
 • CICDDOS2019 (8 + 1 Scenario): To examine generalizability across datasets, we incorporated the CICD-
 DOS2019 dataset. Initialized with 8 base classes, the
 model incrementally learns 1 new DDoS attack type
 per phase. Unlike NetML, this dataset contains classes
Fig. 16. Inference time under varying batch size in the parallel setting. with highly correlated structural patterns, testing whether
 RET-Net can preserve discriminative boundaries in homogeneous traffic environments.
32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, and 2048. Furthermore, to ensure 2) Robustness Evaluation: To quantify the model’s resisa fair comparison of parallel inference efficiency, this identical tance to catastrophic forgetting, we analyzed the performance
batch processing configuration is also applied to the traditional trajectories across the defined scenarios. Fig. 17 illustrates the
machine learning models, including RF and KNN. Fig. 16 variations in the Macro-F1 score across sequential incremental
clearly illustrates how the inference time of different models phases for different exemplar memory sizes (Exemplars/Class
varies with changes in batch size. At smaller batch sizes, ranging from 50 to 500). Furthermore, Table VIII presents the
specifically less than 64, RET-Net outperforms the RF, KNN, specific Macro-F1 scores and retention rates for the setting
and R1DIT models. When the batch size increases beyond 64, with 400 exemplars per class, which was empirically selected
although RET-Net is slightly behind RF and 1D-CNN, it still as an empirically balance between memory constraints and
outperforms R1DIT and KNN. As the batch size grows, RET- classification accuracy.
Net’s average inference time shows a trend of stabilization, Early-Phase Stability (Phases 1–2): In the initial increultimately settling at 22 µs. This result indicates that RET-Net mental stages, defined as Phases 1 and 2, RET-Net demoncan handle large-scale network flow classification tasks with strates strong robustness. The NetML 15 + 1 scenario
exceptional efficiency. exemplifies this stability, where the model maintains high
 classification performance with a Macro-F1 score of 0.9513 at
H. Incremental Learning Analysis Phase 2, representing a retention rate exceeding 96% relative
 to the baseline. Similarly, the CICDDOS2019 scenario sustains
 1) Experimental Scenarios: To further evaluate the robust- an F1 score of 0.8763 during this period. These results indicate
ness of our incremental learning mechanism against catas- that for moderate traffic variations, the initial Key-Byte regions
trophic forgetting, we expanded the experimental scope remain valid, and the model effectively assimilates new knowlbeyond a single configuration. We defined three distinct sce- edge through parameter adaptation without requiring structural
narios using the NetML and CICDDOS2019 datasets, varying reconfiguration.
the initial knowledge base size, incremental step size, and Analysis of Late-Phase Degradation (Phases 3–5): Contraffic distribution. In all scenarios, λ is equal to 0.1. trastingly, a noticeable performance degradation emerges
 • NetML (15 + 1 Scenario): This setting serves as the during the late stages, spanning Phases 3 through 5. This trend
 baseline evaluation for fine-grained classification. The is particularly pronounced in the more challenging NetML
 model is initialized with 15 base classes, and new traffic 10 + 2 scenario, where the F1 score declines to 0.6238 by
 is introduced sequentially, adding 1 class per phase over the final phase. We attribute this degradation to two factors:
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4417

Fig. 17. Macro-F1 Score variations across incremental phases for different exemplar sizes (50 to 500) and scenarios on NetML and CICDDOS2019 datasets.

 1) Catastrophic Forgetting: As the sequence of tasks helps sustain the model’s robust feature extraction capability
 grows, the model’s capacity to retain boundaries for without disrupting real-time services during high-load periods,
 original classes naturally diminishes, a phenomenon par- thereby maintaining high classification efficacy over long-term
 tially mitigated by our exemplar replay and knowledge operation.
 distillation mechanisms.
 2) Distributional Shift in Key Features: More criti- VI. D ISCUSSION
 cally, as new diverse traffic types are introduced, their
 discriminative features may spatially lie outside the RET-Net is inherently protocol-agnostic and adaptive. By
 fixed Key-Byte region optimized for the initial base processing packets as raw byte sequences rather than relying
 classes. This spatial misalignment significantly restricts on manual feature engineering, the framework generalizes
 the model from accessing the necessary information, to various protocols without requiring redesign of the core
 regardless of parameter fine-tuning. neural network architecture. A critical practical advantage
 of this data-driven design is its robust generalization capa-
 Adaptive KRD Update Strategy: Based on the analysis of
 bility across heterogeneous traffic distributions. Although
performance degradation, we propose a potential maintenance
 key-byte regions exhibit dataset-specific variations, their overstrategy to balance the trade-off between adaptability and
 lap confirms that they capture deterministic protocol header
computational cost:
 fields rather than arbitrary statistical artifacts. By aggre-
 • Tier 1 (Soft Update): In scenarios where performance gating feature importance across diverse traffic classes, the
 remains stable, standard incremental learning appears KRD algorithm inherently identifies a broadly applicable
 sufficient. This is supported by the observations in the region. Consequently, RET-Net functions reliably in heterofirst four phases of the NetML 15 + 1 scenario, where geneous networks without requiring prior knowledge of traffic
 the existing Key-Byte region remains valid. In such distribution.
 cases, avoiding structural updates minimizes computa- However, the Key-Byte mechanism exhibits operational
 tional overhead. boundaries in extreme scenarios. If a network environment
 • Tier 2 (Hard Update): Conversely, a significant drop contains fundamentally different protocols with completely
 in metrics could signal a critical feature shift, as seen in non-overlapping key-byte locations, KRD effectively degrades
 Phase 3 of the NetML 10 + 2 scenario. This phenomenon into a union strategy to cover all types. This significantly
 suggests the necessity of re-executing the KRD algorithm enlarges the selected region, increasing RET-Net’s input
 to discover an updated, representative Key-Byte region data size and diminishing its speed advantage over tradithat covers the novel traffic patterns. tional deep learning models. Additionally, if traffic patterns
 In addition to performance-driven triggers, practical deploy- evolve abruptly or if adversarial attacks are specifically
ments could leverage off-peak periods (e.g., nighttime) to crafted to manipulate the identified key bytes, the existing
perform scheduled Hard Updates. This proactive measure region may become invalid, necessitating a re-execution of
4418 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

the KRD algorithm and incurring additional computational [7] H. A. Jamil, B. M. Ali, M. Hamdan, and A. E. Osman, “Online P2P
overhead. internet traffic classification and mitigation based on snort and ML,”
 Eur. J. Eng. Res. Sci., vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 131–137, Oct. 2019.
 Moving forward, deep learning-based traffic classification [8] G. Perna et al., “Online classification of RTC traffic,” in Proc. IEEE 18th
faces ongoing challenges from encryption evolution and Annu. Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf. (CCNC), Jan. 2021, pp. 1–6.
interpretability limits. The widespread adoption of advanced [9] P. Tang, Y. Dong, S. Mao, H.-L. Wei, and J. Jin, “Online classification of
 network traffic based on granular computing,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man,
cryptographic standards such as TLS 1.3 progressively dimin- Cybern., Syst., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 5199–5211, Aug. 2023.
ishes available plaintext metadata, making exclusive reliance [10] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
on spatial byte features insufficient. Furthermore, while our packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
post-hoc mechanisms, specifically Grad-CAM and KRD, [11] D. Joon and M. Pundir, “A comprehensive investigation into the
effectively locate discriminative features, they cannot fully implementation of machine learning solutions for network traffic
elucidate the underlying non-linear combinatorial logic of the classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Comput. Commun. Technol.
 (ICACCTech), Dec. 2023, pp. 467–472.
model. Acknowledging these boundaries, our future research [12] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescape, “Mobile encrypted
will focus on evolving RET-Net into a multi-modal framework. traffic classification using deep learning: Experimental evaluation,
By integrating protocol-agnostic side-channel information lessons learned, and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
 vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 445–458, Jun. 2019.
such as packet timing, we aim to sustain classification effi- [13] P. Wang, X. Chen, F. Ye, and Z. Sun, “A survey of techniques for
cacy in zero-visibility networks while concurrently exploring mobile service encrypted traffic classification using deep learning,” IEEE
advanced analytical approaches to further improve model Access, vol. 7, pp. 54024–54033, 2019.
 [14] C. Li, C. Dong, K. Niu, and Z. Zhang, “Mobile service traffic classiinterpretability for network operators. fication based on joint deep learning with attention mechanism,” IEEE
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 74729–74738, 2021.
 [15] H. Huang, H. Deng, J. Chen, L. Han, and W. Wang, “Automatic
 VII. C ONCLUSION multi-task learning system for abnormal network traffic detection,” Int.
 J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. (iJET), vol. 13, no. 4, p. 4, Mar. 2018.
 In this paper, we introduce a novel real-time traffic classifi- [16] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Mobile encrypted
cation framework, RET-Net. RET-Net improves classification traffic classification using deep learning,” in Proc. Netw. Traffic Meas.
accuracy and speed by precisely locating key bytes in pack- Anal. Conf. (TMA), Jun. 2018, pp. 1–8.
 [17] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A
ets via the Key-Byte mechanism. Then the RET-Net model hierarchical hybrid intrusion detection approach in IoT scenarios,”
employs a lightweight CNN for classification. Our experi- in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2020,
mental evaluations on 3 different datasets demonstrate the pp. 1–7.
 [18] L. Mostacero-Agama and P. Shiguihara, “Analysis of internet service
superior performance of RET-Net, with F1 scores ranging from latency and its impact on Internet of Things (IoT) applications,” in Proc.
0.9273 to 0.9983, which significantly outperforms existing IEEE Eng. Int. Res. Conf. (EIRCON), Oct. 2022, pp. 1–4.
high-level models. A key highlight of RET-Net is its speed. [19] I. Parvez, A. Rahmati, I. Guvenc, A. I. Sarwat, and H. Dai, “A
 survey on low latency towards 5G: RAN, core network and caching
More specifically, it processes each flow in just 0.201ms solutions,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3098–3130,
when executed serially, marking a significant 21.52-fold speed 2018.
enhancement over R1DIT. This high-speed characteristic posi- [20] S.-A. Rebuffi, A. Kolesnikov, G. Sperl, and C. H. Lampert, “ICaRL:
 Incremental classifier and representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
tions RET-Net as a viable solution for the majority of Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 2001–2010.
internet services. Meanwhile, RET-Net supports incremental [21] A. Dhakad, S. Singh, Mohana, M. Moharir, and A. R. A. Kumar, “Real
learning by constructing an exemplars set with the herding time network traffic analysis using artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning: A review of methods, tools and applications,”
algorithm and combining it with knowledge distillation. By in Proc. Int. Conf. Self Sustain. Artif. Intell. Syst. (ICSSAS), Oct. 2023,
sacrificing a small amount of old knowledge, the model pp. 372–378.
can efficiently adapt to new traffic types. RET-Net has been [22] A. Azab, M. Khasawneh, S. Alrabaee, K.-K.-R. Choo, and M. Sarsour,
 “Network traffic classification: Techniques, datasets, and challenges,”
successfully integrated into TADK [57] and it is available for Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 676–692, Jun. 2024.
public use. [23] Y. Qi, L. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Xue, and J. Li, “Packet classification
 algorithms: From theory to practice,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr.
 2009, pp. 648–656.
 R EFERENCES [24] R. M. AlZoman and M. J. F. Alenazi, “A comparative study of traffic
 classification techniques for smart city networks,” Sensors, vol. 21,
[1] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Deep learning for encrypted traffic classifica- no. 14, p. 4677, Jul. 2021.
 tion: An overview,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 76–81, [25] J. Zhao, X. Jing, Z. Yan, and W. Pedrycz, “Network traffic classification
 May 2019. for data fusion: A survey,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 72, pp. 22–47, Aug. 2021.
[2] A. A. Ahmed and G. Agunsoye, “A real-time network traffic classifier [26] P. Choorod, G. Weir, and A. Fernando, “Classifying tor traffic
 for online applications using machine learning,” Algorithms, vol. 14, encrypted payload using machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12,
 no. 8, p. 250, Aug. 2021. pp. 19418–19431, 2024.
[3] M. Camelo, P. Soto, and S. Latré, “A general approach for traffic [27] K. L. Dias, M. A. Pongelupe, W. M. Caminhas, and L. de Errico, “An
 classification in wireless networks using deep learning,” IEEE Trans. innovative approach for real-time network traffic classification,” Comput.
 Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5044–5063, Dec. 2022. Netw., vol. 158, pp. 143–157, Jul. 2019.
[4] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence [28] S. Ahn, J. Kim, S. Y. Park, and S. Cho, “Explaining deep learning-based
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- traffic classification using a genetic algorithm,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 put. Commun. (IEEE INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. pp. 4738–4751, 2021.
[5] Y. Zeng, H. Gu, W. Wei, and Y. Guo, “Deep-full-range: A deep learning [29] S. Dong, “Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network
 based network encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detection traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 176, Aug. 2021, Art. no.
 framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 45182–45190, 2019. 114885.
[6] O. Barut, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “R1DIT: Privacy-preserving [30] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprintmalware traffic classification with attention-based neural networks,” ing: Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 2071–2085, Jun. in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2018,
 2023. pp. 1928–1943.
LI et al.: RET-Net: A CNN FRAMEWORK FOR REAL-TIME TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4419

[31] L. D. Manocchio, S. Layeghy, W. W. Lo, G. K. Kulatilleke, M. Sarhan, [44] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 and M. Portmann, “FlowTransformer: A transformer framework for for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
 flow-based network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., Art. no. 108117.
 vol. 241, May 2024, Art. no. 122564. [45] W. Zhu, X. Ma, Y. Jin, and R. Wang, “ILETC: Incremental learning for
[32] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme encrypted traffic classification using generative replay and exemplar,”
 of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient Comput. Netw., vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109602.
 management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. [46] F. Cerasuolo et al., “MEMENTO: A novel approach for class incremental
 107974. learning of encrypted traffic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 245, Mar. 2024,
[33] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen- Art. no. 110374.
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using [47] Z. Li, L. Bu, Y. Wang, Q. Ma, L. Tan, and F. Bu, “Hierarchical percepgraph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, tion for encrypted traffic classification via class incremental learning,”
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021. Comput. Secur., vol. 149, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 104195.
[34] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [48] D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, P. Voria, M. De Ieso, and
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers A. Pescape, “Few-shot class-incremental learning for network intrusion
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, detection systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 6736–6757,
 pp. 633–642. 2024.
[35] T.-D. Pham, T.-L. Ho, T. Truong-Huu, T.-D. Cao, and H.-L. Truong, [49] Y. Chen, T. Zang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Ouyang, and P. Yang,
 “MAppGraph: Mobile-app classification on encrypted network traffic “Incremental learning for mobile encrypted traffic classification,” in
 using deep graph convolution neural networks,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2021, pp. 1–6.
 Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2021, pp. 1025–1038. [50] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
[36] H. Huang, Y. Zhou, and F. Jiang, “CLA-BERT: A hybrid model for D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Visual explanations from deep networks via
 accurate encrypted traffic classification by combining packet and byte- gradient-based localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 level features,” Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 973, Mar. 2025. (ICCV), Oct. 2017, pp. 618–626.
[37] R. Masukawa et al., “PACKETCLIP: Multi-modal embedding of net- [51] R. R. Selvaraju, A. Das, R. Vedantam, M. Cogswell, D. Parikh,
 work traffic and language for cybersecurity reasoning,” Frontiers Artif. and D. Batra, “Grad-CAM: Why did you say that?,” 2016,
 Intell., vol. 8, Jul. 2025, Art. no. 1593944. arXiv:1611.07450.
[38] L. Liu, R. Li, Q. Li, M. Hou, Y. Jiang, and M. Xu, “FlowletFormer: [52] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
 Network behavioral semantic aware pre-training model for traffic network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
 classification,” 2025, arXiv:2508.19924. [53] O. Barut, Y. Luo, T. Zhang, W. Li, and P. Li, “NetML: A challenge for
[39] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile network traffic analytics,” 2020, arXiv:2004.13006.
 encrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput. [54] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, S. Hakak, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 Netw., vol. 165, Dec. 2019, Art. no. 106944. “Developing realistic distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack dataset
[40] M. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, T. Guan, M. Xia, and W. Li, “Synecdoche: and taxonomy,” in Proc. Int. Carnahan Conf. Security Technol. (ICCST),
 Efficient and accurate in-network traffic classification via direct packet 2019, pp. 1–8.
 sequential pattern matching,” 2025, arXiv:2512.21116. [55] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward
[41] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic
 representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018,
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K), pp. 108–116.
 Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8. [56] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
[42] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat. (ISI), Jul.
 Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023. 2017, pp. 43–48.
[43] Z. Sha, C. Sun, S. Wei, R. Huo, and H. Ren, “A transformer based [57] K. Qiu et al., “Traffic analytics development kits (TADK): Enable
 classified traffic prediction scheme for energy digital twin network,” in real-time AI inference in networking apps,” in Proc. 13th Int. Conf.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Energy Internet (ICEI), Oct. 2023, pp. 218–223. Ubiquitous Future Netw. (ICUFN), Jul. 2022, pp. 392–398.