IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 3331

 Retriever: A Distributed Intrusion Detection System
 for NOS-Enabled Networks
 Runmin Ou , Yijie Bai, Yanjiao Chen , Senior Member, IEEE, Bingchuan Tian, Ming Tang, Zhiming Ji,
 Ennan Zhai , Dennis Cai, and Wenyuan Xu , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Network Operating Systems (NOS) are being widely expose unsafe TCP/UDP ports to attackers [2] to gain control of
deployed on edge devices by cloud service providers to perform the switches and perform further network intrusions [32], [47].
fast configurations and offer high availability for new network Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) detect and identify potenprotocols. However, NOS-enabled networks open the door to intial security breaches in networks, generating real-time alerts and
truders that can stealthily corrupt less-guarded programmable
switches to launch attacks on the entire network. Traditional cen- notifying administrators of the potential threat [35]. However,
tralized intrusion detection systems may neglect anomalous events traditional intrusion detection systems are typically designed
on NOS-equipped switches and fail to detect such attacks. In this for servers but not for switches (or NOS). Burdensome data
paper, we make the first attempt towards intrusion detection for collection and computing-intensive analysis of existing IDS are
NOS-enabled networks by designing Retriever. Retriever features not affordable for resource-limited switches. Other non-IDS proa lightweight local anomaly detection module on programmable tection methods, including firewall [45], malware detection [4],
switches and a central anomaly assessment module on the central
server. The local anomaly detection module selectively traces both
 and kernel hardening [1], have difficulties in detecting more
system and network events on switches, based on which a prove- sophisticated adversary tactics and techniques like Advanced
nance graph of events is established. Upcoming events unmatched Persistent Threat (APT) [8].
by the provenance graph are aggregated to construct a suspicious To fill this research gap, in this paper, we present the design
subgraph to report to the central server. The central anomaly as- of Retriever, the first distributed intrusion detection system
sessment module extracts semantic representations from reported for NOS-enabled networks. Retriever features a local anomaly
suspicious subgraphs and computes their anomaly scores. Large- detection module deployed on switches and a central anomaly
scale experiments show that Retriever can achieve high intrusion
detection accuracy (nearly 100%) with low overheads. assessment module deployed on the central server, working
 cooperatively to perform intrusion detection.
 Index Terms—Provenance graph, advanced persistent threat, Local anomaly detection: The NOS on switches has intenintrusion detection, causality analysis, anomaly detection. sive CPU workloads for numerous tasks, including routing
 table calculation, network monitoring, network management,
 I. INTRODUCTION and even some complex data-plane functions. Therefore, the
 N RECENT years, Network Operating Systems (NOS) have local anomaly detection module should not consume sizeable
I been widely deployed on network switches by cloud service
providers [6], [13], [54] for more flexible network functions [40],
 hardware resources (e.g., CPU, RAM, and even the disk). Otherwise, the critical functionality of switches could be severely
higher manageability [7], and fewer infrastructure costs [33]. affected. To address this challenge, we design and implement a
Although NOS greatly enhances edge intelligence, it may also lightweight local anomaly detection module to collect relevant
expose new attack surfaces. For example, dockers are widely events and build event provenance graphs on switches without
used in open-source NOS for both typical switch control planes influencing the normal NOS tasks (Section IV). The suspicious
(e.g., routing protocols) and customized network functions (e.g., subgraphs will be extracted from provenance graphs and reencapsulation). Unfortunately, such container applications may ported to the central server upon anomaly detection.
 Central anomaly assessment: With a huge number of reported
 Received 30 September 2024; revised 28 September 2025; accepted 6 Novemsuspicious subgraphs from switches, the central server may be
ber 2025. Date of publication 21 November 2025; date of current version overwhelmed and fail to distill key information for intrusion
12 March 2026. This work was supported in part by the project on Software detection. To address this challenge, we first extract informa-
Quality and Runtime Environment Security of Cloud Platform Domain Name tive semantic representations from suspicious subgraphs based
Resolution, in part by the Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Electrical Technology and
System on Renewable Energy, and in part by Alibaba Group through Alibaba on knowledge graphs and then compute both edge-level and
Innovative Research Program. (Corresponding authors: Yanjiao Chen; Ennan graph-level anomaly scores to assess the anomaly degree of
Zhai.) reported suspicious subgraphs. The feedback from network ad-
 Runmin Ou, Yijie Bai, Yanjiao Chen, and Wenyuan Xu are with the Col- ministrators on alerted suspicious subgraphs with high anomaly
lege of Electrical Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China
(e-mail: ourunmin@zju.edu.cn; baiyj@zju.edu.cn; chenyanjiao@zju.edu.cn; scores is utilized to continually improve Retriever with life-long
xuwenyuan@zju.edu.cn). learning.
 Bingchuan Tian, Ming Tang, Zhiming Ji, Ennan Zhai, and Den- We implement Retriever on our large-scale production cloud
nis Cai are with Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 311121, China (e-mail:
bingchuan.tbc@alibaba-inc.com; ming.tang@alibaba-inc.com; zhimnetwork, and the experiment results prove that Retriever can
ing.jzm@alibaba-inc.com; ennan.zhai@alibaba-inc.com). achieve accurate intrusion detection while keeping the CPU uti-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3635127 lization ratio under 0.5% for event tracing, memory usage under

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3332 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Command Line Interface, CLI) or different network protocol
 processors, such as Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), Link Layer
 Discovery Protocol (LLDP), and telemetry. These updates are
 stored in the in-memory database (Redis) and then synchronized
 with the syncd container. Unlike traditional switches, users can
 access the CLI, log in to the backend Linux system, and even
 directly access the containers to manage customized network
 functions, which may expose programmable switches to higher
 security risks. Network operating systems enable cloud service
 providers to perform fast configurations and offer high availability for new network protocols and functions.
Fig. 1. SONiC, a Linux-based open-source NOS. It uses containers that
manage different routing and control plane functions, which are delivered to
ASIC to manage the data plane. B. Security Concerns of NOS-Enabled Networks
 Traditionally, network intrusion detection systems are de-
150 MB for the in-memory provenance graph construction, and ployed only at the central server but not edge switches [14], since
network usage under 1 KB/s in each NOS. the latter usually have limited programmable capabilities. With
 We summarize our contributions as follows: the rapid penetration of programmable switches equipped with
 1) We make the first attempt to design a distributed intrusion NOS, new attack surfaces emerge as the attackers can stealthily
 detection system, Retriever, for NOS-enabled networks. corrupt the NOS at the edge to initiate attacks [30]. For example,
 Retriever can be deployed on programmable switches with high-privilege containers on NOS could be compromised by
 limited resources. attackers leveraging vulnerabilities [46], allowing for container
 2) We design a lightweight local anomaly detection mod- escaping. When compromised, the programmability of ASIC
 ule on switches to trace events and report suspicious may further allow attackers to transform the switch into a
 subgraphs of provenance graphs. We develop a central high-performance network scanner [32], add malicious Access
 anomaly assessment module on the central server to ex- Control List (ACL) rules to block traffic, and announce fake Bortract representations from provenance graphs and perform der Gateway Protocol (BGP) updates to paired switches, causing
 continuous intrusion detection with life-long learning. route hijacking. Specific examples are analyzed in Section VI-B.
 3) We deploy Retriever on more than 50 switches in pro- We give examples of advanced persistent threats (APT) that can
 duction environments, processing over 2 billion system potentially leverage NOS on programmable switches that differ
 events. We also validate Retriever on the DARPA dataset, from host-based scenarios in Section VI-B.
 and evaluation results show the superiority of Retriever
 over baselines.
 C. Intrusion Detection System
 II. BACKGROUND & MOTIVATION Intrusion detection systems monitor a network for malicious
 activities or policy violations. Intrusion detection and intru-
 In this section, we introduce the customized network opersion investigation are two typical functionalities of intrusion
ating systems and discuss potential attacks exploiting network
 detection systems. Intrusion detection aims to detect ongoing
operating systems, highlighting the need for a new paradigm of
 intrusions, while intrusion investigation attempts to trace the
intrusion detection that taps into edge intelligence.
 provenance of detected intrusions [19].
 Intrusion detection: Intrusion detection methods can be cate-
A. Network Operating Systems gorized as traffic-based and behavior-based. Distributed traffic-
 There is a trend of edge intelligence in cloud computing. based IDS [16], [31], [39] has been widely explored, which
Traditionally, network switches are maintained by manufactur- monitors network traffic and extracts features for network aters and regarded as black-box routing devices by cloud service tacks. Unlike existing distributed IDS in IoT, which are priproviders. To cater to the ever-increasing need for high-quality marily traffic-based, our system is an event-based IDS that
cloud services, cloud providers are transforming switches into focuses on detecting and investigating the behaviors of the
white-box programmable devices using customized or open- attacker. Behavior-based intrusion detection methods analyze
source Network Operating Systems (NOS), e.g., SONiC [53]. potential malicious behaviors in host contexts (e.g., the system
SONiC is a Linux-based open-source NOS initially released calls [15], process arguments and configurations [18]), using
in 2016 by Microsoft, actively developed and maintained by statistics-based, heuristic-based or learning-based approaches.
communities. As shown in Fig. 1, SONiC uses a containerized DISTDET [11] extracts statistical characteristics from a system
architecture for customized network protocol processing while event tree to filter events and rank the anomaly of mismatched
Switch Abstraction Interface (SAI) sets up and manages the event sets. Heuristic algorithms have been designed based on
Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) for fast devel- specific system events [23], [41]. Recent works use deep learning
opment. It uses containers that manage different routing and to process raw logs or provenance graphs to identify anomacontrol plane functions. Such information is delivered to ASIC lies [12], [21], [60].
to manage the switch’s data plane. The updates of routing tables Intrusion investigation: To cope with large-scale data logs, reand configurations are triggered by either a network operator (via cent works on intrusion investigation mainly resort to techniques
OU et al.: RETRIEVER: A DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR NOS-ENABLED NETWORKS 3333

that audit the occurrence of data provenance [19], [61]. Rulebased methods leverage the attacker’s knowledge to endow specific meanings of suspicious actions. For example, researchers
utilize anomaly score-based approaches for alert reduction [24]
or rule-based attacker knowledge for alert correlation and analysis [23], [42]. Rule-based methods usually have poor generalization capabilities. Learning-based intrusion investigation
method has a better generalization. Graph Neural Networks have
been used to embed provenance graphs with sequence-based and
recommendation-based architecture to analyze attacks [3], [60].
A major concern of provenance-based intrusion investigation is
high time complexity due to a large amount of data provenance
generated, which can lead to dependence explosion problems. Fig. 2. Overview of Retriever.

 III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW the final alerts based on the scoring threshold α to network
 administrators.
 In this section, we define our threat model and outline the
 To achieve this goal, we design Retriever, a distributed intruarchitecture of the proposed intrusion detection system.
 sion detection system, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The local anomaly
 detection module, deployed on the NOS system, collects and
A. Threat Model filters system behavior (including system calls and control-plane
 We assume the APT scenarios for network system intrusion events), builds provenance graphs, and reports suspicious subdetection, extending existing host intrusion detection scenar- graphs to the central server. To determine whether the reported
ios [22], [24], [28], [58]. An attacker illegitimately gains access event is suspicious, we adopt a pretrained Subject-Object-Event
to a NOS infrastructure, whose goals are persistently remaining Diagram (SOED) as a baseline model to check its behaviors and
there, exfiltrating sensitive information (e.g., network topology attributes. The central analyzer of the Retriever collects the reand routing tables), and impacting (e.g., for further network and ports from all local anomaly detection devices and constructs an
host intrusion). The attacker may have significant knowledge ensemble anomaly analysis. The aggregated suspicious graphs
and corresponding capability of controlling target NOS, where are then fed into the ensemble anomaly detection model for
she/he is familiar with the common deployment patterns and anomaly detection and ranking. The anomaly alerts are reported
management methods of the open-source NOS (e.g., container to network administrators, including the graph with emphasized
orchestration, SSH-based administration) and has the ability for malicious nodes and their translated human-readable descripconducting common attack techniques [8] as well as configure tions.
methods for control plane (e.g., CLI for modifying ACL rules
and BGP routing configurations). IV. LOCAL ANOMALY DETECTION
 The goal of Retriever is to detect such attacks at any stage The local anomaly detection module features three carefullyby analyzing the provenance generated by the local network designed sub-modules to suit resource-limited programmable
devices. We assume the eBPF, which is the subsystem of the switches.
Linux kernel, correctly provides the monitor guarantees [51] for
event collections. Like existing works [11], [22], we also make
similar integrity assumptions for data collection and processing A. Lightweight Event Tracing
frameworks of Retriever. Compared to traditional networks, NOS-enabled networks
 are susceptible to new attacks that leverage the large numbers
B. System Overview of less-guarded programmable switches. Existing event tracing tools used for host-based intrusion detection systems (e.g.,
 The goal of our proposed distributed intrusion detection sys- CamFlow [48] and Linux Auditd [50]) mainly focus on user
tem is to make a binary decision by comparing a constructed behavior (i.e., interactions between kernel and users), which is
provenance graph G to a pre-encoded set of benign graphs [19], not sufficient in handling security-related events [17]. Moreover,
 f (G) = 1 (F (E (N (G))) ≥ α) , (1) these techniques cannot capture underlay network events that
 are handled in kernel network stacks. For example, users are not
where G = (V, E) is a directed acyclic graph with the vertex
 |V |
 aware of the ARP and BGP updates after changing the routing
set V = {vi }i=1 (representing process, file and network node) configuration. Existing event tracing tools include whole-system
 |E|
and the event set E = {ej }j=1 (corresponding to multi-level provenance tools (e.g., CamFlow [48]) and userspace tools (e.g.,
behaviors, like system calls and kernel or user activities). N is a tcpdump), which log detailed information about data flows.
deconstruction function that generates the suspicious subgraph While being suitable for comprehensive event tracing on central
for further analysis. E is the encoding function that encode servers, these tools are extremely expensive for auditing on
the information in G. The encoding function greatly reduces resource-limited edge devices [20], [49]. Therefore, we develop
irrelevant information in the raw graph G, which facilitates a lightweight event tracing tool for Retriever.
scalability for large-scale cloud networks. Finally, the central We trace three kinds of events (i.e., kernel functions, sysanalysis function F performs an online analysis and generates tem calls, and netlink messages) which characterize system
3334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 We use on-demand tokenization for parameter generalization.
 For example, an executing event (execve syscall in UNIX)
 contains the parent process exe as the subject and the path
 of the executable file as an object to look up the exe hash
 table.
 To save space, we perform event encoding as follows. Subject
 is encoded in 40 bytes (containing a 4-byte vertex identifier,
 3-byte process ID, 16-byte for hash of executable path, 4-byte
 user id, 4-byte cgroup ID for different namespaces, an 8-byte
 timestamp for last event, and 1-byte tag for processing), while
 objects are encoded in 30 bytes (including vertex identifier, 1-
 byte object type, 20-byte object name, 4-byte owner id, and
 1-byte tag). For event encoding, we limit to 7 bytes (with 1-
Fig. 3. Subject-Object-Event Diagram for Baseline Modeling of Provenance byte type, 2-byte timestamp, and 4-byte object id). For network
Graph. connection, the object is obtained from the subnet based on the IP
 trie tree, which fits NOS while a host-based system has broader
 IP ranges.
behaviors including network events. As shown in Fig. 2, we We initialize the baseline model using collected events from
design a lightweight event tracing engine based on the kernel an attack-free network (as we assume in section Section III-A).
network monitoring tool, i.e., the Extended Berkeley Packet During intrusion detection, we compare upcoming events with
Filter (eBPF). The eBPF runtime is a virtual machine system nodes on the baseline model. If there is a match, the event
that supports static and dynamic probing for both kernel and is considered benign and inserted into the provenance graph
user space. Probes are dynamic or static codes inserted at the (as described in section Section IV-C); otherwise, the event is
beginning and end of kernel functions or system calls. They use a regarded as suspicious and used to build suspicious subgraphs.
small set of helper functions carefully designed to minimize risk. Given the current incoming traced event ei , we compare the
Existing works have used eBPF for system behavior auditing subject, object, and event attributes of ei with nodes on T . If
with promising results [36], [51]. there is a mismatch, the event will be tagged as suspicious as it
 For monitoring NOS behaviors, we leverage reporting pri- is unseen during the training period.
oritization [51] and use another set of helper functions, which
provide a key-value store called BPF tables, to filter the data to
be reported. As illustrated at the top of Fig. 3, BPF tables define C. Provenance Subgraph Reporting
data structures that can perform exact string matches (using
hash tables) or IP range matches (using long prefix-match trie Suspicious subgraph construction and reporting are triggered
trees). This strategy reduces the amount of log data, allowing periodically or if the anomaly queue is full. The suspicious
Retriever to collect more critical events during busy states (as subgraph is composed of suspicious events and necessary benign
we evaluate in Section VII). In this way, we can flexibly define events in the baseline model to associate these suspicious events.
the BPF tables to limit the performance impact of the collection Similar to existing works [25], [28], we use forward tracking
tool. and backward tracking algorithms for suspicious subgraph generation, as described in Algorithm 1, with a highlight that the
 provenance graph is locally built. We report a space-efficient
B. Baseline Modeling for Anomaly Detection subgraph with detailed semantic information of the mismatched
 We build a space-efficient SOED baseline for anomaly de- event for causal analysis. We first merge mismatched attributes
tection, which only occupies a minimum space but preserves att into a suspicious event of the subgraph G (line 4), then
necessary details for suspicious events when an anomaly is perform forward tracking (lines 8-20) and backward tracking
detected. Our constructed baseline model is a Subject-Object- with half of the batch size. In forward tracking, we aim to
Event diagram (SOED), as illustrated in Fig. 3. The SOED obtain the entities after the mismatched event. We get the events
consists of a hierarchical tree T and a series of lookup tables whose timestamps are next to the current event (the first one in
L. T contains four layers of nodes: Subject, Object, Event, and the candidate set C) and insert them into the subgraph (lines
Attribute layers. The subject represents the process, either in 9-11). Then, we search if there is the next event of the current
userspace or in the kernel, which may have attributes including subject and object (lines 15-18), and add them into C with the
the process ID (PID), process command, owner, cgroup ID, and insertion sort algorithm. Furthermore, Retriever automatically
tags for data processing. The object includes the type (such as merges consecutive events of the same type into a single edge
a file, network, tuple, or routing table), name, owner, and tags. and makes efforts to avoid object versioning. One example are
The edge represents the events that may occur between a subject illustrated in Fig. 4.
vi and a vertex vj (a subject or an object), i.e., ei = vi , act, vj . We use the decay rate τ and decay interval Δt to calculate
The event contains kernel hook functions and system calls the frequency of the subject-object-event diagram. For exam-
(including clone and execute process, open and delete file, send ple, we set τ = 0.997 and Δt = 10 s so that an entry in the
and receive network, and so on), encoded with the arrangement anomaly queue will be forgotten in two days. The forgetting
in one byte to be routed to specific diagrams in matching. curve ensures that the same attack semantics within a short
Each node in a layer links to a local or a global diagram Lk . term are aggregated, so that the next attack can be triggered.
OU et al.: RETRIEVER: A DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR NOS-ENABLED NETWORKS 3335

 Algorithm 1: Suspicious Subgraph Generation.
 Input: G: dependency graph; Q: anomaly queue; d: search
 depth; b: batch size;
 Output: G : Suspicious Subgraph;
 1: G = (V  , E  );
 2: for each entry in Q do
 3: ts , v, e, att ← entry;
 Fig. 4. Sub-graph construction for Retriever reporting.
 4: E  = E  ∪ {e, att}
 5: b0 = 0;
 6: /∗ Forward tracking ∗/ graph embedding methods TransE [5] to extract the embedding
 7: C = {ts , v, e}; as semantic representations, maintaining the causal information
 8: repeat in the tuples. We extract the semantic embedding representa-
 9: ts , v  , e = C.pop(); tions separately for events and entities. In order to optimize
 10: v  = e .getObject(); the embedding representations, we set up scoring functions as
 11: V  = V  ∪ {v  , v  }; the optimization target and maximize the score of the tuples
 12: if e ∈ / E  then in a training dataset. We utilize negative sampling to construct
 13: 
 E = E  ∪ {e , ∅}; abnormal triples.
 14: end if
 15: insertSort(C, G.getNextEvent(v  , ts )); B. Anomaly Score Calculation
 16: if isSubject(v  ) and getDistance(v, v  ) < d then
 17: insertSort(C, G.getNextEvent(v  , ts )); After generating semantic representations for entities and
 18: end if events, we compute the anomaly score of each reported sus-
 19: b0 ++; picious subgraph. We compute both the edge-based anomaly
 20: until b0 > b/2 or isEmpty(C); score and the graph-level anomaly score.
 21: C = {G.getPreviousEvent(v, ts ) }; Edge-level anomaly score: The edge-level anomaly score as-
 22: /∗ Backward tracking ∗/ sesses each edge in suspicious subgraphs. For each edge (h, r, t),
 23: end for we calculate the representation tuple (Rh , Rr , Rt ). Then, we
 24: returnG ; leverage the knowledge graph model MK to predict the tail
 representation Rt based on the head representation Rh and
 relation representation Rr . The model will output each entity’s
To prevent the provenance graph from growing infinitely large, possibility value P . The value of pt for Rt demonstrates the
we implement a pruning strategy. The pruning algorithm aims possibility of Rt appearing given Rh and Rr . We use 1/pt to
to delete benign nodes and edges that will not be needed in indicate the edge-level anomaly score. We aggregate anomaly
suspicious subgraph construction [22], such as those with no scores for all edges to form the global edge-level anomaly score
relationship to a suspicious event, to save memory space. The Ae for the suspicious subgraph.
pruned provenance nodes will be stored on the disk for log per- Graph-level anomaly score: With knowledge graph represistence. Since the pruning algorithm needs to traverse through sentation extraction model MK , we transform the reported
the provenance graph, we perform it periodically (e.g., every suspicious subgraphs {V, E} into the representation subgraphs
day) as a routine task with limited CPU usage. {V, E, R}. We leverage the representation graph analysis model
 Graph Isomorphism Networks (GIN) [57] to compute the graph-
 V. CENTRAL ANOMALY ASSESSMENT level anomaly score. Specifically, the GIN model defines a learnable aggregation function that combines the node’s own features
 The central alert assessment module conducts three steps on with the features of its neighboring nodes to generate new node
the central server to pinpoint network intrusions. First, we extract representations. The design of this aggregation function enables
the semantic information of entities and events in suspicious the GIN model MG to capture graph isomorphism, meaning that
subgraphs (reported by numerous switches) based on knowledge it can produce the same node representations for isomorphic
graphs. Second, we compute the anomaly scores of each suspi- graphs. The GIN model is updated as
cious subgraph based on the extracted representations. Third, ⎛ ⎞
we provide an in-depth analysis of suspicious subgraphs with   
anomaly indicators above the threshold. h(k+1)
 v = MLP(k) ⎝ 1 + (k) · h(k) v + h(k)
 u
 ⎠ (2)
 u∈N (v)

A. Semantic Representation Extraction (k)
 where hv represents the representation vector of node v at
 The reported suspicious subgraphs contain implicit informa- the k-th layer, N (v) denotes the set of neighboring nodes of
tion that is useful for intrusion detection. To distill the key v, MLP(k) represents a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) [27] at the
information, we propose to extract semantic representations of k-th layer, and (k) is a learnable parameter. To train the GIN
entities and events based on knowledge graphs [29], [56]. For a model, we construct a training dataset consisting of both benign
reported suspicious subgraph, we extract each edge to form the and malicious subgraphs. The normal subgraphs are sampled
ei = h, r, t tuple, where h is a subject entity, t is a subject or from the provenance graph built in Section IV-B, labeled as
object entity, and r is the relation. We leverage the knowledge 0. The malicious subgraphs are collected from the red team
3336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

attack rehearsal, labeled as 1. After training, the model MG BCC kernel code for kernel probe and tracepoint to hook kernel
can predict the anomaly score Ag of a suspicious subgraph. functions and syscall while using Redis API for network (e.g.,
When in an unsupervised setting where no attack subgraphs are routing tables) changes tracing. We built Retriever for local
provided, the graph-level anomaly assessment can be conducted processing (∼ 7.5K lines of Python code) and data processing
with clustering. cluster analysis (∼ 5K lines of Python code and modules of a
 machine learning platform from our private cloud) for anomaly
C. Alert Analysis and Feedback detection and causal analysis. The tracing tool is built in the
 container for the pluggable deployment, whose namespace is
 Suspicious subgraphs with anomaly scores higher than thresh- the same as the host for sidecar whole-system-wide tracing.
olds will be tagged as candidates for potential network intrusions
and reported to human analysts for further analysis and processing. In large-scale clouds, analysts are usually fatigued by the B. Case Study
huge number of alerts. To address this issue, we propose three
strategies for better and more efficient alert analysis. To demonstrate the effectiveness of Retriever, we show two
 Alert aggregation: We leverage the graph embedding from practical attacks that can possibly occur in the open-source NOS
GIN in Section V-B to extract graph embedding eg from the (SONiC as an example). We show that existing work tracing the
alerted suspicious subgraphs as system calls will need more information for network operators
   to understand such network attacks.
 (k) (k)
 e(k)
 g = P h1 , h2 , . . ., hn
 (k)
 , (3) Case 1. spoofing attack: In the edge scenario, the NOS may
 face the public network, where adversary-in-the-middle (AitM)
where n is the number of nodes in the suspicious subgraph, P aims to spoof the NOS to obtain the opportunity for the following
is the pooling function used in the GIN model, and k denotes attacks [43]. Although neighbor spoofing attacks can occur in
the layer of the GIN model. After extracting the embedding for host devices, the kernel maintains such information and does not
each alerted suspicious subgraph, we perform alert aggregation send any to userspace applications. Existing work cannot detect
by embedding clustering. We divide the embeddings into several such attacks on the host since they only trace syscall. Fortunately,
clusters with l2 distance constraint less than d. For each cluster, spoofing attacks cause different behaviors in network operating
we report the representative one to the analyst. The analyst may systems, which need to synchronize the neighbor state to the
pre-define attack techniques by referring to ATT&CK. We can data plane. During the training phase, Retriever’s BCC collector
then match the alerted suspicious subgraphs with pre-defined traces the updated tables made by the kernel (using netlink mesattack techniques by the embedding distance. sage) and models its normal behaviors into SOED (e.g., encoded
 Feedback to update Retriever: The analysis from human with ARP new or delete actions with attributes including MAC
administrators will be the feedback to Retriever to improve address and address-family). These neighbor-related netlink
its future performance. In particular, we update the knowledge events triggered by newly discovered neighbors are sent by the
graph model MK and the GIN model MG in the following way. kernel and processed by SNOiC for rewriting the adjacency table
To update the knowledge graph model Mk , we embed unseen in the data plane (Fig. 1). During the detection phase, the kernel
entities from the feedback without influencing the former entity receives a malicious ARP message, and the unseen behavior of
embedding. To achieve this goal, we implement the inductive the ARP update will lead to an attribute mismatch (e.g., same IP
knowledge graph embedding method [52], [55] to generate address update with a different MAC address), which will trigger
embedding for the emerging entities. After the completion, the the Retriever to report a suspicious graph like Fig. 5(a). We show
neighborhood of the entity ei is defined as N (ei ), including that our proposed method can protect against network attacks for
all the entities having relations with ei . To update the GIN protocols other than TCP and UDP in the network layer.
model MG , we aim to distinguish new training samples without Case 2. traffic hijacking: Attackers who gained root access
forgetting prior training samples. Given the feedback samples, to the switch can modify the routing table for advanced netthe GIN model MG is fine-tuned with proper regularization on work attacks [44]. Suppose that the attacker gains access to
model parameters [34], [37] to avoid catastrophic forgetting. a white-box switch, and she/he wants to capture the packets
 that do not flow through the control plane (e.g., DNS packets
 VI. DEPLOYMENT EXPERIENCE that contain many fields and headers in which the attacker is
 interested). She/he generated a routing rule in CLI that the
A. Implementation destination of the DNS server will forward to the interface of the
 We implement Retriever on 50+ testing and production net- control plane. The updated rule will trigger the BGP to announce
work devices (white-box switches) with different network roles the new route. The peer switches receiving such a message
(including gateway and access switches) for anomaly detection may perform a route execution and update their routing table
testing. The reported sub-graphs of local machines are gathered to forward the DNS query to the compromised switch since it
via the gRPC tunnel and sent to the log service platform, which has a shorter length. Routing protocols have the characteristic
is like the Kafka service platform. The reported data are then that messages flow in one direction, and the traffic directed by
fed into the central causal analysis system that runs on (settings) them flows in the opposite direction. Without Retriever, network
data processing cluster with typically an Intel Xeon CPU with operators need much effort to find the root cause and may end
64 cores and 2.50 GHz and a memory of 256 GB. up finding the misconfiguration of the routing table. Using the
 We use BPF Compiler Collection (BCC) for building system local reports and global analysis of Retriever, we can present the
and network behavior collection. We developed 2K+ scalable suspicious subgraph like Fig. 5(b), which connects the anomaly
OU et al.: RETRIEVER: A DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR NOS-ENABLED NETWORKS 3337

Fig. 5. Case study of ARP spoofing and traffic hijacking.

 TABLE I
 OVERVIEW OF DATASETS

of malicious rules and corresponding route updates via BGP
connection. With this attack, a compromised switch can attract
network traffic from the whole network. Also, such an attack
can be achieved by not generating new routes but forwarding
the BGP message to another Autonomous System (i.e., BGP
leakage), which is more stealthy.
 Fig. 6. Attack steps distribution.

 VII. EVALUATION
 Our experimental evaluation for Retriever is done in red ten attacks containing 138 attack steps. Compared with existing
team vs. blue team engagement. We also evaluate Retriever compacts (e.g., DISTDET [11] and DARPA), we also include the
on public datasets for host intrusion detection and compare the first two tactics (i.e., reconnaissance and resource development),
detection accuracy with the state-of-the-art systems to evalu- where some attack steps target network devices. These attack
ate the anomaly detection effectiveness. Note that the existing steps are hard for the host intrusion system to detect, while
tagging and tracking datasets target detecting the interaction the attackers open the way for subsequent attacks through these
between the user and system (i.e., syscalls) while Retriever techniques.
targets to detect the network attacks. We customize the Retriever Public dataset: The DARPA Transparent Computing (TC)
to accommodate the detection of Advanced Persistent Threats Dataset is released by DARPA, aiming at earlier detection and
(APTs) in host-based anomaly scenarios. causal analysis of activities across an enterprise [9]. Engagement#5 is done in a complex scenario for evaluating the design
 of tracking and analysis provided by different performers in May
A. Evaluation Setup 2019 [10]. The DARPA TC Engagement 5 Dataset contains 12.7
 Private cloud dataset: We conduct a 3-week-long adversary billion events (∼ 2.70TB) for 18 hosts in 11 days. We use two
engagement rehearsal to evaluate the efficiency and effective- datasets (THEIA and CADETS) as the host dataset to compare
ness of our system. Due to the performance and transmission the attack performance with state-of-the-art systems. THEIA
overhead, we cannot collect the complete auditing logs for (Tagging and Tracking of Multi-Level Host Events for Transparthe production area since it will dramatically affect the critical ent Computing and Information Assurance) traces multi-level
performance for logging and transferring such logs. To compare system and application behaviors by instrumenting the Ubuntu
baseline systems that consume logs for anomaly detection, we Linux systems. CADETS (Causal, Adaptive, Distributed, and
collect the logs of one device for two days for baseline system Efficient Tracing System) collects data using DTrace from the
training and the segments of the logs during the whole attack FreeBSD systems. Table I shows the overview of the dataset.
process. In total, we collected nearly 2.6 billion (357 GB) system The APT attacks are performed in two to three days during the
and network events (as shown in the first row of Table I). The engagement. We convert the datasets into the Common Data
attacks from the red teams include host intrusion attacks and Format provided by DARPA TC tools for better understanding
specific attacks (e.g., routing spoofing and container attacks). and processing by Retriever. We split the dataset, using data from
Some attack steps can be mapped into the MITRE ATT&CK the first two days for baseline model training and knowledge
matrix [8], as illustrated in Fig. 6. The red team performed graph extraction. The remaining data from each host are then
3338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

processed for testing. Since the DARPA datasets also record TABLE II
 ATTACK DETECTION RESULTS ON DATASETS
frequent events (i.e., file read and write), we filter out these
events as if there is no reporting in the kernel (∼ 70% of the
dataset).
 Ground truth: We label the attacks through the behaviors
recorded by the red teams. We develop the scripts for labeling
the ground truth in raw event logs. The scripts take configuration
files as input according to the records of the red team (e.g., the
ground-truth report generated by DARPA during Engagement
5), which contains the timestamp, host ID, session ID, command
line, etc. We also analyze the network events in the ground truths
and label the corresponding configurations (IP address, port,
and direction) in the log files. Event labels are matched in the
reporting subgraph of Retriever for detection result judgment.
Note that we mark local and remote attacks separately, where detection rates. Our proposed system uses match-based anomaly
the remote attack is the network access (e.g., Lateral Movement detection and graph neural networks and can detect attacks
like ssh from the local network). under an unsupervised setting (normal data is obtained from
 Metrics: We evaluate Retriever in cost and attack detection the training data). We note that all the attack events are reported
performance. We mainly focus on CPU overhead and network from the network devices. The reported specious sub-graphs
transmission reduction to evaluate the cost of monitoring an indicate benign events and actual events. The unsupervised GIN
open-source network system. As for performance measurement, is based on the feature distance to output the assessment, which
we use precision, recall, accuracy, and F1-score to evaluate can detect all the attacks during the engagement.
attack detection performance because of the unbalanced number Performance of DARPA datasets: We also evaluate our alof attacks and benign sub-graphs. We consider the true positive gorithm on the DARPA datasets and compare it with the preas the sub-graph of final detection in the central analysis model vious state-of-the-art algorithm as baseline systems. Table II
containing a ground truth attack event and the false positive as (row 5 ∼ 12) shows the result in detecting host-based attack
the sub-graph with no attack events misclassified as an anomaly. events. DeepLog and DeepCase achieve poor attack detection
Precision measures the proportion of true positive detections performance, although they achieve relatively high detection
out of all positive detections made by the anomaly detection accuracy compared with that in industry settings. DeepLog has
system. Recall is the proportion of true positive detections out low precision, i.e., 8.97% for Theia and 5.48% for Cadets. This
of all actual attack instances. Accuracy measures the proportion means that they can detect few true positive events and miss
of both true positives and true negatives out of all instances. many attacks. DeepCase extends the capabilities of DeepLog
F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, providing by incorporating case-based reasoning and more sophisticated
a single metric that balances both concerns. techniques for handling anomalies. Thus, DeepCase achieves
 relatively high performance compared to DeepLog in precision
B. Overall Results and recall. However, the accuracy of DeepCase is relatively low
 We systematically conduct the entire processing pipeline in our experiment settings. One possible reason is the unbalanced
of Retriever to evaluate its effectiveness. Retriever performed data distribution, and DeepCase is more concerned about the
similarly in host intrusion detection scenarios and outperformed performance of detecting attacks. Unicorn can achieve nearly
state-of-the-art intrusion detection systems in attack detection optimal performance in host attack detection, and Retriever
accuracy in the industry network scenarios. can achieve comparable accuracy results as Unicorn. The high
 Performance of private cloud dataset: The testing environ- recall means the true threat samples can all be reported without
ment is complex. Deploying the baseline systems for real-time missing. Due to the number imbalance between the actual threat
detection on network devices may affect normal operations. For samples and the normal operations, the accuracy is a little
fair comparison, we reserve the subgraphs and raw logs of the affected by the false threat samples, but also above 99% in
victim devices from the network device during the attack for both datasets, which proves the algorithm’s effectiveness. The
offline comparison. The two-day-long raw logs of one device precision of Retriever on the Theia dataset is 93%, which means
are collected for SOED (Section IV) and GIN (Section V) that there would be a few false positives (But no more than 10 for
training. The same source is also trained for clustering and the entire 9-day-long compact). DeepLog and DeepCase have
deep neural network training of the baseline systems. Overall low precision in attack detection, indicating that deep learning
results are shown in Table II. DeepLog and DeepCase could directly on raw logs induces large false alarms.
detect anomalies from raw logs via sequence modeling the event Through the above analysis, event type-based anomaly deidentifier after parsing by Drain [26]. They could achieve a nearly tection directly on raw logs is insufficient in detection accuracy,
100% recall rate but low precision(i.e., high false alarm rate). especially in industry settings.
It is not affordable in practice, making many manual efforts to
decide real attacks. Unicorn also uses a provenance graph for
anomaly detection. Unicorn can detect 66% of the attacks in C. Cost of Retriever
industry settings. This indicates that in an insufficient data set- We evaluate the CPU and network overhead for the cost of
ting, traditional host intrusion detection systems suffer from low Retriever.
OU et al.: RETRIEVER: A DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR NOS-ENABLED NETWORKS 3339

 TABLE III
 OVERHEAD OF COLLECTING FOR OVER ONE HOUR

 TABLE IV
 LOCAL MACHINE PERFORMANCE AND ATTACK DETECTION RESULTS OF
 INDUSTRY DATASET WITH DIFFERENT KERNEL BPF WHITELIST Fig. 7. Performance analysis for different parameters of Retriever that affect
 reporting timeliness.

 Computation cost on device: The network devices are
performance-sensitive. Thus, the collecting and tracing function
on the endpoint NOS needs to be lightweight. We evaluate the
CPU overhead of the Linux Audit System and eBPF tracing tools
of Retriever. As illustrated in Table III, when collecting network
and process behaviors of NOS, the eBPF collector using the
 Fig. 8. Performance analysis for different parameters of Retriever.
BTF table for filtering is more efficient than the rule matching
of the Linux Audit System. Compared with the baseline (normal
workload of NOS, CPU: 6.14%, Memory: 4.03 GB), the over- Report interval t : Retriever will cache the anomaly events
head of Retriever (about 150 MB) is small. Direct comparison and trigger to analyze them for the sub-graph report. Fig.
of CPU cost is hard because we could not run all the systems 7(a) shows the performance with the time interval between
on one device at the same time [22]. From the table, we can the reports. Smaller report intervals will cause more separated
know that Retriever could achieve a largely low CPU utilization graphs and thus cause a large number of reports (up to 6
even with a higher average CPU on network devices. The eBPF times). Compared with the existing system (e.g., 5500 s for
is a subsystem within the Linux kernel, enabling direct and Unicorn [22]), our proposed system can detect the anomaly with
secure access to kernel structures and user data. By deploying a much smaller time interval. Within 30 seconds or 1 minute,
our safelist within the kernel and utilizing BPF tables, we can we can detect and report the alarms in a nearly real-time forreduce the communication between the kernel and userspace mat. With longer report intervals, local machines can aggregate
analysis tools. This reduction in communication consequently more normal and abnormal nodes. The reported sub-graph has
decreases CPU utilization. more branches and depth, making the central analysis more
 Network communication cost: Retriever will report the sus- accurate to detect the attack and benign activities, which means
picious subgraphs triggered by anomaly detection. On average, it has higher precision in the figure for a long report time of
there are 45 thousand subgraphs generated in a 3-week-long 10 minutes.
engagement on the private cloud, with 4.05 KB for subgraph size Decay parameters of local caching: We configured the decay
on average. The average network overhead is within 0.24 KB/s, parameters of caching based on the duration for which the SOED
which is subtle compared with its large background traffic flow retains the new leaves. Fig. 7(a) presents the results when the
(e.g, more than 1 MB/s from data plane to control plane). decay days are set to 0.1, 0.5, 1, 2, and 7, respectively. With a
 short decay time, the local machine will report anomaly graphs
D. Influence of Report Analysis of Local more frequently (up to 5,000 per day per machine), leading to
 numerous false alarms, i.e., low precision. Conversely, a longer
 The local machine reports the suspicious sub-graphs to the decay period will decrease recall, meaning that the local machine
central server for analysis. We now analyze the importance of will not report similar anomalies.
the local machine’s report interval and decay factors.
 Kernel Filtering Effect: To reduce computation and net-
 E. Influence of Graph Analysis of Central
work communication traffic, we utilize a kernel BPF table for
lightweight event collection. We design the first-layer safelist in The alarm of anomaly attacks is highly related to the central
an industry setting to filter out specific events. Table IV presents Graph Isomorphism Networks model. We now analyze the imthe CPU overhead and corresponding anomaly detection results portance of Retriever’s key parameters using industrial datasets
when no items are added and the number of items doubles. It in practice concerns.
is important to note that we need to define a few more regular Branch size b of sub-graph: Retriever aggregates the surexpressions to handle the new events. Without the kernel BPF rounding nodes to prepare the anomaly sub-graph for reporting.
table, the CPU and network overhead increase by 150% and Fig. 8(a) shows the anomaly detection results with different
800%, respectively. branch sizes. The recall of detection initially increases but
3340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE V from 56.25% to 100.00%, which means reducing the false threat
 PREDICTING RESULTS OF KNOWLEDGE GRAPH DATA
 samples and capturing the true threat samples.

 VIII. DISCUSSION
 Can Retriever defend resource exhaustion attacks? For resource exhaustion attacks like DDOS attacks, since they target
 exhausting the system resource rather brutally, they usually
 produce no malicious behavior. So, resource exhaustion attacks
 are out of our scope and can be prevented with conventional mitigation methods. Retriever can further combine the monitoring
 data on the CPU, memory, network, and FPGA usage for better
 TABLE VI defense against exhaustion attacks. It is exactly what the eBPF
 PREDICTING RESULTS WITH/WITHOUT LIFE-LONG LEARNING
 tools are born to do. In future research, we will explore integrating anomaly detection with machine performance observability
 to identify a broader range of network attacks.
 Can Retriever defend adaptive evasion attacks? Attackers
 who have dissected the system’s inner working mechanism may
 design adaptive attack methods to evade detection. For example,
then decreases as the branch size grows. This indicates that the attacker may replace the benign commands to pass the kernel
normal nodes can help detect anomalies. However, too many caching. Retriever tries to detect anomalies in three submodels
normal nodes will confuse the detection model, where more (process, file, network), and previously benign entities with unweight is placed on surrounding nodes and edges, resulting in seen behaviors (like the connect system call) might be reported.
under-reporting. We choose a branch size of 10 for efficient Also, the adversarial attacks researched in recent years [38], [59]
reporting and stable detection. may also guide the attackers to work on bypassing the graph
 Search depth d for reporting: For anomaly reporting, Re- learning model. It exceeds the dependency graph’s branch size
triever searches forward and backward from the unseen event to and depth, resulting in attack step isolation, which may spoof the
build the sub-graph. Fig. 8(b) illustrates the anomaly detection GNN model. The state-of-the-art AI model (i.e., Large Language
performance with different search depths. The larger depth of Model, LLM) can help to analyze such advanced attacks. Large
the graph enriches the graph connection of the surrounding language models can be experts in judging malicious commands
nodes, which will help to detect more anomalies (with increased from normal, benign ones after fine-tuning, which is promising
recall). When it exceeds 5, the larger depth of the report graph for network attack analysis.
has no further effect on anomaly detection performance. It is
reasonable because the most normal and attack process chain is
within this depth; thus, looking backward through the suspicious IX. CONCLUSION
node will usually have a maximum number of parent nodes. We present Retriever, the first practical, lightweight intrusion
 Knowledge Effect: We conduct an ablation study to validate detection system for white-box switches in large-scale producthe effectiveness of the knowledge graph model. We apply tion environments. By the multi-layer design of local anomaly
changes to the knowledge graph model dataset by reducing it detection and centralized alert assessment, Retriever provides
to 0%, 25%, 50%, and 75%. We show the results in Table V. real-time switch monitoring and general comprehensive risk
As shown in the table, we can see that the knowledge graph’s detection with high accuracy, saving the hard work of security
assistance mainly improves the threat detection precision by and operation engineers.
influencing the semantic-based anomaly assessment and graph- In conclusion, Retriever stands out by integrating efficient
based anomaly assessment effectiveness. The absence of the local and centralized mechanisms, ensuring anomaly identiprivate cloud data in 0% is because the model classifies no fication and ensemble feedback model response to potential
samples as the attack sample. threats.

F. Life-Long Learning REFERENCES
 In this part, we validate the life-long learning method results [1] M. Abubakar, A. Ahmad, P. Fonseca, and D. Xu, “SHARD: Fine-grained
when Retriever faces changes in the production scenario. We kernel specialization with context-aware hardening,” in Proc. Secur. Symp.,
 2021, pp. 2435–2452.
show the results in Table VI. We construct a business change [2] A.-A. Agape, M. C. Danceanu, R. R. Hansen, and S. Schmid, “Chartby introducing unseen entities and events into the private cloud ing the security landscape of programmable dataplanes,” 2018, arXiv:
dataset and evaluating the effectiveness of the normal algorithm. 1807.00128.
As seen in the table, the precision will drop rapidly because the [3] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
 investigation,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3005–3022.
unseen samples can easily be classified as threat samples. After [4] Ö. A. Aslan and R. Samet, “A comprehensive review on malware detection
forming the embedding for the unseen entities and events, the approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 6249–6271, 2020.
assessment models are retrained with the increased samples. [5] A. Bordes, N. Usunier, A. Garcia-Duran, J. Weston, and O. Yakhnenko,
 “Translating embeddings for modeling multi-relational data,” in Proc. Adv.
The results show that after life-long learning, the model can Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 2787–2795.
increase the precision from 75.00% to 84.62%, and the recall
OU et al.: RETRIEVER: A DISTRIBUTED INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM FOR NOS-ENABLED NETWORKS 3341

 [6] Broadcom-Inc, “Enterprise SONiC,” 2024. [Online]. Available: [32] G. Li et al., “IMap: Fast and scalable in-network scanning with prohttps://www.broadcom.com/products/ethernet-connectivity/software/ grammable switches,” in Proc. USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Des.
 enterprise-sonic Implementation, Renton, WA, USA, 2022, pp. 667–681.
 [7] Y. Chen et al., “Norma: Towards practical network load testing,” in Proc. [33] Z. Li et al., “A quantitative and comparative study of network-level
 USENIX Symp. Networked Syst. Des. Implementation 2023, pp. 1733– efficiency for cloud storage services,” ACM Trans. Model. Perform. Eval.
 1749. Comput. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–32, 2019.
 [8] M. Corporation, “ATT & CK,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://attack. [34] Z. Li and D. Hoiem, “Learning without forgetting,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
 mitre.org/ Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 2935–2947, Dec. 2018.
 [9] DARPA, “Transparent computing (Archived),” 2024. [Online]. Available: [35] H.-J. Liao, C.-H. R. Lin, Y.-C. Lin, and K.-Y. Tung, “Intrusion detection
 https://www.darpa.mil/program/transparent-computing system: A comprehensive review,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 36, no. 1,
[10] DARPA, “Transparent computing engagement 5 data release,” 2020. [On- pp. 16–24, 2013.
 line]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing [36] S. Y. Lim, B. Stelea, X. Han, and T. Pasquier, “Secure namespaced kernel
[11] F. Dong et al., “DISTDET: A cost-effective distributed cyber threat detec- audit for containers,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Cloud Comput., 2021, pp. 518–
 tion system,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. 532.
[12] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection [37] H. Liu, Y. Yang, and X. Wang, “Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 8653–
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298. 8661.
[13] Edge-core, “SONiC–Open networking software for enterprise data center,” [38] J. Ma, S. Ding, and Q. Mei, “Towards more practical adversarial attacks
 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.edge-core.com/sonic.php, on graph neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
[14] A. Febro, H. Xiao, J. Spring, and B. Christianson, “Edge security for pp. 4756–4766.
 SIP-enabled IoT devices with P4,” Comput. Netw., vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. [39] Q. Mao et al., “FeCoGraph: Label-aware federated graph contrastive learn-
 108698. ing for few-shot network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
[15] S. Forrest, S. Hofmeyr, and A. Somayaji, “The evolution of system- Security, vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025.
 call monitoring,” in Proc. Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2008, [40] R. Miao, H. Zeng, C. Kim, J. Lee, and M. Yu, “SilkRoad: Makpp. 418–430. ing stateful Layer-4 load balancing fast and cheap using switching
[16] A. R. Gad, M. Haggag, A. A. Nashat, and T. M. Barakat, “A distributed ASICs,” in Proc. Conf. ACM Special Int. Group Data Commun., 2017,
 intrusion detection system using machine learning for IoT based on ton-IoT pp. 15–28.
 dataset,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 548–563, 2022. [41] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “Poirot:
[17] A. Gehani and D. Tariq, “SPADE: Support for provenance auditing in Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber threat huntdistributed environments,” in ACM/IFIP/USENIX Distributed Systems ing,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2019, pp.
 Platforms and Open Distributed Processing. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1795–1812.
 2012, pp. 101–120. [42] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrishnan,
[18] J. T. Giffin, D. Dagon, S. Jha, W. Lee, and B. P. Miller, “Environment- “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious
 sensitive intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Recent Adv. Intrusion information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, pp. 1137–
 Detection, 2006, pp. 185–206. 1152.
[19] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t what [43] MITRE, “Adversary-in-the-middle, technique T1157,” 2020. [Online].
 you do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion detection Available: https://attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1557,
 systems,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. [44] MITRE, “Automated Exfiltration: Traffic duplication, sub-technique
[20] B. Gregg, Systems Performance: Enterprise and the Cloud, 2nd Edition. T1020.001,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/
 London, U.K.: Pearson Education, 2020. techniques/T1020/001
[21] S. Han et al., “Log-based anomaly detection with robust feature extraction [45] K. Neupane, R. Haddad, and L. Chen, “Next generation firewall for
 and online learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2300– network security: A survey,” in Proc. SoutheastCon, 2018, pp. 1–6.
 2311, 2021. [46] N. I. of Standards and Technology, “CVE-2023–25809,” 2023. [Online].
[22] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “UNICORN: Available: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2023-25809
 Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in [47] S. Oliveira, F. Soares, G. Flach, M. Johann, and R. Reis, “Building a bitcoin
 Proc. Netw. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–19. miner on an FPGA,” in Proc. South Symp. Microelectronics, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[23] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis [48] T. Pasquier et al., “Practical whole-system provenance capture,” in Proc.
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Symp. Cloud Comput., 2017, pp. 405–418.
 Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189. [49] T. Pasquier et al., “Runtime analysis of whole-system provenance,” in Proc.
[24] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1601–1616.
 automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., [50] T. L. M.-P. Project, “auditd — linux audit daemon (manual page),” 2025,
 2019, pp. 1–15. Accessed: Sep. 26, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://man7.org/linux/
[25] W. U. Hassan, M. A. Noureddine, P. Datta, and A. Bates, “OmegaLog: man-pages/man8/auditd.8.html
 High-fidelity attack investigation via transparent multi-layer log analysis,” [51] R. Sekar, H. Kimm, and R. Aich, “eAudit: A fast, scalable and deployable
 in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–16. audit data collection system,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024,
[26] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing pp. 87–87.
 approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2017, [52] B. Shi and T. Weninger, “Open-world knowledge graph completion,” in
 pp. 33–40. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2018, pp. 1957–1964.
[27] A. A. Heidari, H. Faris, S. Mirjalili, I. Aljarah, and M. Mafarja, “Ant lion [53] SONiC, “About SONiC,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
 optimizer: Theory, literature review, and application in multi-layer percep- //sonicfoundation.dev/about/
 tron neural networks,” Nature-Inspired Optimizers: Theories, Literature [54] Stordis, “SONiC-Powered networking for campuses: Making open net-
 Rev. Appl., vol. 811, pp. 23–46, 2020. working and PoE as easy as pie,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://stordis.
[28] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction com/open-networking/sonic-powered-networking-for-campuses/
 from COTS audit data,” in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2017, pp. 487–504. [55] P. Wang, J. Han, C. Li, and R. Pan, “Logic attention based neighborhood
[29] S. Ji, S. Pan, E. Cambria, P. Marttinen, and S. Y. Philip, “A survey on aggregation for inductive knowledge graph embedding,” in Proc. AAAI
 knowledge graphs: Representation, acquisition, and applications,” IEEE Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 7152–7159.
 Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 494–514, Feb. 2022. [56] Q. Wang, Z. Mao, B. Wang, and L. Guo, “Knowledge graph embedding:
[30] P. R. Kannari, N. S. Chowdary, and R. L. Biradar, “An anomaly-based A survey of approaches and applications,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng.,
 intrusion detection system using recursive feature elimination technique vol. 29, no. 12, pp. 2724–2743, Dec. 2017.
 for improved attack detection,” Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 931, pp. 56–64, [57] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural
 2022. networks?,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2018, pp. 1–17.
[31] R. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Tripathi, G. P. Gupta, S. Garg, and M. M. [58] C. Yagemann, M. A. Noureddine, W. U. Hassan, S. Chung, A. Bates,
 Hassan, “A distributed intrusion detection system to detect DDoS attacks and W. Lee, “Validating the integrity of audit logs against execution
 in blockchain-enabled IoT network,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 164, repartitioning attacks,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
 pp. 55–68, 2022. Secur., 2021, pp. 3337–3351.
3342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[59] X. Yin, W. Lin, K. Sun, C. Wei, and Y. Chen, “A2S2-GNN: Rigging Ming Tang is a senior technical expert at Alibaba In-
 GNN-Based social status by adversarial attacks in signed social networks,” frastructure. His research focuses on the development
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 206–220, 2022. of edge switches, hyper-converged gateway switches,
[60] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber and AI switches.
 threat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Privacy, 2022, pp. 489–506.
[61] M. Zipperle, F. Gottwalt, E. Chang, and T. Dillon, “Provenance-based
 intrusion detection systems: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no.
 7, pp. 1–36, 2022.

 Zhiming Ji received the BE degree in information en-
 Runmin Ou received the BE degree in Internet of gineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
 Things engineering and MS degree in software engi- in 2008. He currently works with Alibaba Cloud
 neering from Wuhan University, China in 2020 and as a Network Operations Engineer in the network
 2023, respectively. He is currently working towards research and development team. His primary focus
 the PhD degree with the College of Electrical En- is on ensuring the stability and security of the undergineering, Zhejiang University, China. He majors in lying network infrastructure in large-scale cloud data
 electronic information. His research interest includes centers through day-to-day operational activities.
 network security, machine learning security, and authentication system.

 Ennan Zhai is currently a Director of Network Research at Alibaba Cloud. Prior to joining Alibaba, he
 Yijie Bai received the BE degree from the Department was a Research Scientist and a Lecturer with Yale
 of Automation, Tsingshua University, China, in 2020 University. He received the PhD degree from Yale
 and the PhD degree from the College of Electrical University in 2015. His research focuses on building
 Engineering, Zhejiang University, China. He is cur- high-performance and reliable network systems for
 rently conducting research on large model security AI and Cloud, with a particular emphasis on network
 at Ant Group. His research interests include machine for AI and AI for network.
 learning security, data privacy, and federated learning.

 Dennis Cai photograph and biography not available at the time of publication.
 Yanjiao Chen (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 PhD degree in computer science and engineering
 from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, in 2015. She is currently a bairen researcher
 with Zhejiang University, China. Her research in- Wenyuan Xu (Fellow, IEEE) received the BS degree
 terests include computer networks, wireless system in electrical engineering from Zhejiang University, in
 security, cloud computing, and network economy. 1998, the MS degree in computer science and engineering from Zhejiang University, in 2001, and the
 Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering
 from Rutgers University, in 2007. She is currently a
 professor with the College of Electrical Engineering,
 Zhejiang University. Her research interests include
 wireless networking, network security, and IoT se-
 Bingchuan Tian received the PhD degree from the
 curity. She received the NSF Career Award in 2009,
 Department of Computer Science and Technology,
 a CCS best paper award in 2017, and an ASIACCS
 Nanjing University, China, in 2021. His research
 best paper award in 2018. She was granted tenure (an associated professor) with
 interests include network verification and network
 the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of South
 monitoring.
 Carolina, U.S. She has served on the technical program committees for several
 IEEE/ACM conferences on wireless networking and security, and she is an
 associated editor of TOSN.