IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026 333

 Revisiting the Intrusion Detection in
 In-Vehicle Networks
 Muhammad Asif Khan , Senior Member, IEEE, Hamid Menouar, Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Mohamed Abdallah , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—An in-vehicle network (IVN) is the internal commu- real-time, multi-attack environments. This study addresses
nication network that connects all sensors and control units in these limitations by proposing a practical, generalizable, and
an autonomous vehicle. Sensors and control units use the IVN to adaptive IDS design tailored for deployment in real-world
send perception-related messages and control commands for the
normal and safe operation of the vehicle. However, the IVN, by autonomous vehicle platforms.
design, is vulnerable to network attacks due to a lack of adequate An IVN connects various electronic control units (ECUs),
security mechanisms. This paper presents a Dynamic Windowing sensors, and actuators, facilitating real-time communication for
Intrusion Detection System (DWIDS) that adapts its detection autonomous driving functions.
window in real-time based on observed anomalies, enabling The Controller Area Network (CAN) [4] is a communiaccurate and responsive attack detection. Unlike prior methods
that focus on static configurations or single-attack detection, cation protocol for in-vehicle networks developed by Bosch
DWIDS supports multi-label classification and real-time tuning in the 1980s. CAN allows the various sensors and electronic
of detection parameters. The system is evaluated using two public control units (ECUs) in a vehicle to communicate with each
benchmark datasets (CHD and IVN-IDS challenge) which fea- other via a single two-wire system. CAN is also used in
ture diverse and imbalanced attack types. Experimental results industrial automation, medical equipment, and other fields.
demonstrate high performance across key metrics (e.g., >98%
precision, >97% recall and F1-score), including for rare attacks. The CAN bus protocol was not designed with security
The findings confirm DWIDS’s practicality and robustness for in mind and thus has some intrinsic attributes that make
deployment in real-world autonomous vehicle environments. it vulnerable to attacks. Although alternative communication
 Index Terms—Attacks, autonomous vehicles, CAN bus, ECU, protocols have been developed to address its shortcomings.
in-vehicle network, IVN, intrusion detection. CAN-FD (Flexible Data-rate CAN) [3] offers higher bandwidth and supports longer payloads, allowing for the inclusion
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 of cryptographic checksums and authentication fields. FlexRay

A UTONOMOUS vehicles (AVs) are becoming commonplace in today’s transportation system, revolutionizing
the way people and goods move. These vehicles leverage
 [3], another alternative, provides fault tolerance, deterministic
 timing, and improved electromagnetic interference resistance,
 making it suitable for safety-critical applications. However,
advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence, machine widespread adoption of these protocols is limited due to cost,
learning, computer vision, and sensor fusion to perceive their compatibility issues, and increased system complexity. As a
environment and make real-time decisions without human result, practical IDS solutions that operate over legacy CAN
intervention. AVs promise to enhance road safety by min- systems remain highly relevant for the near-term deployment
imizing accidents caused by human error, improve traffic in autonomous vehicles. First, CAN does not have builtefficiency through smart routing, and reduce carbon emis- in mechanisms for authentication, and any malicious node
sions by promoting eco-friendly driving patterns. However, connected to it can send messages (susceptible to spoofing
the widespread adoption of AVs also presents challenges, attacks) [5]. Second, CAN is a broadcast network, and all
including cybersecurity concerns, particularly related to nodes connected to it receive every message. Thus, a malicious
in-vehicle networks (IVNs) [1], [2], [3]. Intrusion detection node can inject a message to affect the entire network. Third,
in IVNs is a critical safety requirement, yet existing solutions messages on the CAN bus are not encrypted, thus a malicious
often rely on unrealistic assumptions or lack scalability for node connected to it can see all messages sent by all other
 Received 10 December 2024; revised 10 July 2025; accepted 31 Octo- nodes.
ber 2025. Date of publication 12 December 2025; date of cur- The commonly known attacks on IVN are Denial of Service
rent version 26 December 2025. This publication was made possible by TUBITAK-QNRF joint Funding Program (Tubitak-QNRF 4th
 (DoS), Distributed DoS (DDoS), fuzzy, spoofing, and replay
Cycle grant # ICC04-0812-210017) from the Qatar National Research attacks. DoS attacks are caused by flooding messages on the
Fund (a member of Qatar Foundation). The findings herein reflect communication bus, saturating the network and thus blockthe work, and are solely the responsibility of the authors. The Asso- ing normal traffic. DDoS attacks DoS attacks that originate
ciate Editor for this article was A. Amditis. (Corresponding author:
Muhammad Asif Khan.) from multiple origins i.e., electronic component units (ECUs),
 Muhammad Asif Khan and Hamid Menouar are with Qatar Mobility leading to more effective communication disruptions. The AV
Innovations Center, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar (e-mail: asifk@ieee.org).
 Mohamed Abdallah is with Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar.
 under a DoS/DDoS attack fails to perform normal functions
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2025.3628885 e.g., brake control, leading to catastrophic incidents. In fuzzy
 1524-9050 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
334 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 A S UMMARY OF R ELATED W ORK ON IDS FOR IVN

attacks, the attacker transmits random or deliberately crafted • A novel Dynamic Windowing Intrusion Detection System
messages to cause errors or unusual behavior, such as disabling (DWIDS) that adapts detection granularity in real-time
safety-critical systems. Though fuzzy attacks can overwhelm based on observed metrics (Section III);
the IVN similar to DoS attacks causing communication dis- • Implementation of both single-frame and multi-frame
ruption, their primary goal is to analyze the behavior of one models, including multi-label classification;
or more ECUs to fuzzy attacks to craft more sophisticated • Extensive evaluation on two public datasets with imbalexploits. In spoofing attacks, the attacker impersonates a legit- anced attack distributions, demonstrating superior perforimate ECU by injecting malicious messages into the network. mance across detection metrics (Section IV).
A spoofing attack typically performs a specific malicious The results of the evaluation are critically discussed
function e.g., triggering an emergency stop, disabling the and compared against earlier works (Section V). Interesting
brakes, etc. In replay attacks, the attacker captures valid IVN conclusions are drawn and directions for future work are
messages and replays them later. These can cause out-of- highlighted in Section VI.
context abnormal behavior e.g., locking the doors or altering
speed control. Replay attacks are also called Man-in-the-
 II. R ELATED W ORK
Middle (MiM) attacks.
 There are a couple of recent surveys [1], [3], [6], [7], [8] A. Methods for Developing Ids
on intrusion detection in CAVs. A closer look at these surveys Earlier works on IDS used signature-based methods and
and some related works (Table I), highlights an interesting traditional machine-learning methods [20] to detect malicious
observation i.e., merely all these works report a significantly frames in IVNs. For instance, [21] use Recursive least squares
high detection performance over several metrics. Such an (RLS) and cumulative sum (CUSUM) algorithms to detect
ideal performance can indicate two possibilities; First, the attacks that use fake time stamps. Similarly, [22] uses the
intrusion detection problem in IVN is easy in general, and historic frame arrival rates using the sliding window technique
simple off-the-shelf machine learning models can be used to to detect malicious/fake frames. However, since these methods
detect anomalies and attacks on the IVN. Second, the publicly rely on frame timestamp data, they often fail to classify
available datasets used in most of these works are smaller in aperiodic messages correctly.
size and lack complexity, and the problem can be difficult and Recently, more advanced deep learning architectures such
complex in real-world scenarios. as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [12], [23], Long
 Short Term Memory (LSTM) [11], [12], [13], [24], [25],
A. Contribution and Organization and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [9], [26] are
 The contribution of this work is as follows: used. CNNs work well on images to automatically extract
 • A critical analysis of current IDS methods in IVNs, spatial features from data. Since CAN bus data is sequential
 revealing their limitations in generalization and real-world and single-dimensional (1D), most works applying CNNs on
 feasibility (Section II); CAN bus data transform the 1D CAN message frames to
KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS 335

two-dimensional (2D) spatial data (frames). LSTM [27] is to extract patterns in CAN IDs and represented as a 2D image
a type of recurrent neural network (RNN) designed to learn (called CAN image) using a one-hot encoder. Authors consider
and retain long-term dependencies in sequential data. LSTM different input sizes in the range of 32-128 CAN IDs to form
was developed to handle the vanishing gradient problem of the CAN image. Since each CAN frame is separately labeled
standard RNNs [11]. LSTM defines a window to segment a in the original dataset as normal/attack, the CAN image is
continuous data stream into fixed-length intervals or sequences labeled as “attack” if at least one CAN ID in the CAN image
and feed it as input to the LSTM model. A sliding window belongs to an attack frame. Then a GAN model is trained on
technique is then used to create overlapping sequences, allow- the CAN images to detect intrusions. In [10], authors used the
ing the model to maintain context as it processes the data. The survival analysis method to classify CAN frames as normal
window size is an important parameter for IDS to measure the or attack. The authors defined chunks of different sizes in the
response time of the model to potential attacks. range of 50-300 frames using only the CAN ID of the frame.
 Song et al. [17] proposed an IDS system based on deep Recently, [14] proposed an IDS system based on statistical
CNN (DCNN). Since CNN works best on 2D grids (e.g., characteristics of CAN frames using a window-based method
images), the sequential frames are stacked together to form to classify chunks of CAN frames. Window sizes in the range
2D grids (frames). These frames are then fed to an Inception- of 50-1000 are used, whereas CAN ID is used as a feature. The
ResNet CNN network. The network reports F1 score of higher method efficiently detects fuzzy, merge, and denial-of-service
than 99.9% on car-hacking dataset [28]. Baldini [18] proposed (DoS) attacks.
a CNN-based IDS system for IVN. The CAN bus messages A summary of these works is presented in Table I. Different
are converted into histograms and features are extracted using than the above methods, [23] uses CNN to identify the CAN
correlations of histograms and fed to 1D CNN. The per- message source using the physical characteristics of the CAN
formance is evaluated using the standard metrics, reporting bus channel. Reference [26] used GANs to detect bus-off,
accuracy higher than 99% and car-hacking [28] and ROAD spoofing, masquerade, replay, fuzzy, and same origin method
[29] datasets. Hanselmann et al. proposed CANet [11] to execution (SOME) attacks. Reference [33] proposed authencombine LSTM with autoencoders [30]. CANet uses multiple tication between electronic control units to secure the CAN
independent LSTM models for each CAN ID to capture the bus. Reference [34] used anomaly detection method based on
temporal patterns in CAN bus data to generate outputs that are Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) to detect frame-level attacks
aggregated and then fed to an autoencoder for final anomaly without using labeled data. A closely related work is [35], in
detection CANet achieves a high true negative rate (TNR which the authors proposed a two stage IDS for IVN. In the
>0.99). However, the use of separate LSTM models for each first stage, the model predicts the traffic as normal and attack.
CAN ID is almost an impractical approach. Although the In the second stage, the model identifies the type of attack.
authors in [11] used only 13 CAN IDs in their evaluation, Some recent works have also used large language models
it will require a huge number of LSTM sub-networks to (LLMs) such as BERT [36], but these models are not suitable
implement a fully-fledged IDS system to scan all CAN IDs. for real-time performance due to the high computational loads.
For instance, in standard CAN (ISO [4]), the CAN ID is an While many recent IDS studies report high accuracy (often
11-bit identifier allowing for a total of 211 = 2048 possible >99%), most rely on narrow evaluation settings e.g., single
CAN IDs. Similarly, in extended CAN [4], the CAN ID is a dataset (often balanced), static window sizes, or single attack
29-bit identifier, allowing for a total of 229 = 536, 870, 912 types, and lack analysis of model generalizability or realpossible CAN IDs. time feasibility. For instance, most 2D-CNN-based models
 Khan et al. [13] proposed an IDS based on bidirectional- [12], [23] incur high computational laod due to the deeper
LSTM evaluated on the UNSWNB-15 dataset [31] and car architectures used in them and are not lightweight enough
hacking dataset (CHD) [28] reporting accuracy of 98.88% for embedded deployment. LSTM-based architectures [12],
and 99.11%, respectively. They also compared the results [13] show strong temporal modeling but scale poorly when
against other methods including SVM, NB, DT, and ANN. The applied per CAN ID. GAN-based methods [26] are effective in
Bi-LSTM outperformed all methods. ANN (on CHD) achieved detecting unseen patterns but lack interpretability and exhibit
the second-highest recall and F1 score. The work however unstable training. LLM based methods [36], [37], [38] incur
neither describes the architecture of the LSTM model, nor huge computational load and are not feasible for real-time
the window size. Zhang et al. [12] proposed a Convolution- inference. In contrast, our DWIDS is model-agnostic, supports
LSTM evaluated on CHD [28] with a reported accuracy of multi-label detection, and uses adaptive windowing, making
higher than 99% on all attacks. The results are compared it more suitable for real-world latency-sensitive deployment.
against MobileNetV3 [15], EfficientNet [16], and CANet [11] Unlike most earlier works that used a single dataset or a single
and showed higher accuracy scores than all models. Like vehicle model (Table I), this paper validates the performance
[13], the study does not provide details about the window over cross-vehicle datasets.
size used in the LSTM model. Reference [32] also proposed
an encoder-decoder network (CNN as decoder and LSTM as B. Analysis
decoder) for IDS, reporting 99% accuracy and 0.32% false- The review of the aforementioned works notes some imporpositive rate on ROAD dataset [29]. Authors in [9] propose a tant observations;
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) for intrusion detection 1) Choosing Features: Some earlier studies used timesin CAN bus data. The CAN IDs from CAN frames are used tamps to derive frames’ inter-arrival times, whereas most
336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

 3) Choosing Evaluation Metrics: Most of these works
 report performance evaluation over several classification metrics including accuracy, precision, recall, F1 score, and false
 positive rate (FPR), without explicitly investigating their
 importance in the context of the dataset used and the available
 attack scenario. By definition, some of these metrics are not as
 useful measures as others. For example, most of the datasets
 for IVN are imbalanced datasets with a huge number of normal
 and few attack messages. Thus, achieving a higher accuracy
 score is merely due to the large number of normal messages
 and is not an indication of the model detection of attacks.
 Thus, it is important to use the appropriate metrics for a given
 attack model. Additionally, some authors e.g., [35] proposed
 two stage detection. We believe such models will incurs huge
Fig. 1. Intrusion detection in IVN: The ECUs transmit unencrypted sensor processing and the inference delay encountered will not be
data frames over the CAN bus. The IDS monitors the CAN bus transmissions
to detect malicious frames before they trigger an action at the AV controller. suitable for real-time applications like in autonomous vehicles.

 III. P ROPOSED S CHEME
recent studies use only CAN ID as a feature. The reason to We first evaluate the two formal approaches i.e., (i) single
use only timestamps in earlier studies is that these studies are frame intrusion detection, and (ii) multi-frame (chunk) intruusing signature techniques e.g., the inter-arrival time of frames sion detection, with few modifications to achieve high model
are compared against historical frames to detect abnormalities. generalization, and then present a novel approach that best
The motivation to use CAN IDs is that they are attributes suit real-world implementations in autonomous vehicles. Fig. 2
of different ECUs and reflect the transmission patterns of depicts the two approaches (single frame and multi-frame) for
individual ECUs in a chunk of frames. The payload (data) developing an IDS for IVNs. To implement the IDS, the CAN
field is often not used as a feature because the content of bus data need the following pre-processing steps to train any
data fields is associated with the individual manufacturers. The ML/DL model.
exclusion of the payload field is thus an attempt to develop
universal models that are free and can be deployed in cross- A. Pre-Processing
platform vehicles. However, the payload field contains the
most important information that can be used to train a model, In both approaches, the raw frames are first pre-processed
which can effectively enhance the model’s performance. to extract the training dataset (or data for inference during
 2) Choosing Sample Size: An important aspect is the chunk production). An ML/DL model is then trained using the train
size. Some studies use IDS that classify each individual frame. sets. Some common pre-processing steps involved are: In case
However, many studies use only the CAN ID field as a feature of separate datasets for each type of attacks, the datasets for
by combining CAN IDs from multiple frames into chunks and each attack are merged. The timestamps are removed. The
label each chunk as normal or attack chunks. This approach is CAN IDand Datafields are converted to decimal values and
completely disintegrated from the earlier approaches because then to tensors. The attack label Tis first replaced by [N, D,
using CAN ID only as a feature can not be used in single- F, G, P]to denote Normal, DoS, Fuzzy, Gear, and RPM
frame prediction. The size of this chunk (obtained via sliding spoofing frames. Then the labels are mapped to integer values
window) varies across studies. Intuitively, this is a modeling [0,1,2,3,4]respectively.
aspect and should be carefully chosen. For example, in a DoS
attack, the attacker sends a large number of dummy frames, B. Method 1: Per-Frame Detection Analysis
and thus a longer window may be needed to identify the DoS In this analysis, the processed dataset is used directly, such
attack pattern. Spoofing attacks are typically intermittent or that each frame serves as a single sample. The individual
involve sporadic messages. A shorter chunk may help detect frame labels are used to evaluate the performance over the
sudden changes in communication quickly. Replay attacks five metrics. In this analysis, we assumed two scenarios; first
typically involve repeating specific patterns. The chunk size when the CAN ID is used as a feature alongside the Data field,
needs to be long enough to capture enough instances of and second when the CAN ID is not used as a feature (only the
these patterns. Therefore, the chunk size should be large Data field). Although it does not make any sense to drop the
enough to capture the normal variation in traffic but short CAN ID from the feature space if it plays a role in improving
enough to detect anomalies promptly (single frame ideally). A the accuracy because it is always visible in CAN frames, the
shorter window provides quicker detection of anomalies but purpose of dropping the CAN ID in the latter approach is to
may increase false positives. It can be more responsive to investigate if there is a strong dependency of the accuracy on
sudden changes or transient attacks. A longer window offers the CAN ID or not. In other words, it ensures that the model
better context and may reduce false positives by considering is not learning or overfitting to a single feature (CAN ID) and
more data, but they might delay the detection of fast-moving would be able to generalize to malicious frames with different
attacks. CAN IDs.
KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS 337

Fig. 2. The proposed scheme showing a 1D multi-class ML/DL model (top) and multi-label classification using 2D-CNN model (bottom) for IDS.

C. Method 2: Frame Sequence Analysis Algorithm 1 Process CAN Data for Multi-Label Classification
 1: Input: CAN data (DataFrame), time slot (column), labels
 In this analysis, CAN frames (in the original order) are
stacked to form a single sample. The frame stacking is (0-4)
 2: Output: 2D heatmaps, 3D RGB images, multi-labels
typically done using the timestamp value i.e., Starting with
 3: Initialize empty lists: heatmaps, images, labels
the first frame, the frames are stacked in chunks such that all
 4: for each chunkin DataFrame do
frames are transmitted during the time window (e.g., 0.5s) and
are extracted to form one sample. The process is repeated until 5: chunk_data← Extract rows from DataFrame based
it reaches the last chunk. on timeslot (0.5s)
 The frames in each chunk are then arranged to form square 6: X← chunk_data.iloc[:, 1:10].Columns 1 to
2D images (a single-channel heatmap and a 3-channel RGB 9
image). Since the CAN frames are not transmitted using a fixed 7: y←chunk_data.iloc[:, label_column].Extract
frequency, the number of frames in each chunk is different. labels
Thus, padding is applied while creating square images. If 8: if size of Xcannot be transformed into square then
the dataset does not have timestamps, fixed-sized chunks are 9: padding_size← Calculate required padding
extracted to form squared heatmaps and images, and padding 10: X← Pad Xwith zero-values to make it square
is used in the last chunk. All chunks are then labeled carefully. 11: end if
Since in the original dataset, each frame is independently 12: heatmap← Convert Xto 2D heatmap
labeled, it is fairly possible a chunk (sample) will contain more 13: image← Convert Xto 3D RGB image
than one type of attack frame in addition to normal frames. 14: Initialize multi_label← np.zeros(5) .For 5 classes
The goal is to train all possible attacks in a given chunk (which 15: for each lin np.unique(y) do
represents a fixed time window). This process in presented in 16: multi_label[l]← 1 .Set index to 1 if class is
Algorithm 1. present
 17: end for
 18: Append heatmapto heatmaps
D. The Proposed Dynamic Windowing Ids (DWIDS) Scheme 19: Append imageto images
 We propose a dynamic windowing IDS (DWIDS) method 20: Append multi_labelto labels
in which the size of the window adapts based on the type of 21: end forreturn heatmaps, images, labels
traffic or detected anomalies. This can provide more flexibility
and improve detection performance. The proposed method
regularly assesses the trade-offs between detection speed and
accuracy by monitoring metrics like false positives, false
negatives, and detection latency to fine-tune the window size. alarms). The system relies on real-time analysis and opti-
More specifically, these metrics are used in a feedback loop mization techniques, such as heuristics or machine learning,
to fine-tune the window size dynamically, ensuring that the to make data-driven decisions about window adjustments. The
IDS maintains a balance between fast detection (to prevent proposed DWIDS is presented in Algorithm 2 and is explained
further attacks) and accurate identification (to reduce false as follows:
338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Algorithm 2 Dynamic Windowing Intrusion Detection System TABLE II
(DWIDS) CH DATASET [28] S TATISTICS
 1: Initialize window size W ← W0 .Start
 2: Set thresholds: FPmax , FNmax , Lmax .Max acceptable
 metrics
 3: Initialize performance metrics: FP, FN, L ← 0
 4: while IDS is active do
 5: Chunks collected using window W
 6: Analyze data and detect anomalies
 7: if Anomaly detected then
 8: W ← max(Wmin , W − ∆W) .Reduce W
 9: else
10: W ← min(Wmax , W + ∆W) .Expand W
11: end if datasets is motivated by their widespread use in recent IDS
12: Update metrics: FP, FN, L. research, their availability in standard CAN frame format, and
13: if FP > FPmax or FN > FNmax or L > Lmax then the inclusion of multiple attack types (e.g., DoS, fuzzy, spoof-
14: Fine-tune W ← W ± ∆W .Adjust W ing, and replay). These characteristics allow for reproducible
15: end if benchmarking and compatibility with both single-frame and
16: Wait for the next monitoring interval chunk-based detection models. However, the datasets also have
17: end while few limitations. First, they are collected from a limited set of
 vehicles and may not generalize to all vehicle types or brands.
 Second, the attacks use synthetic or replayed attack traffic that
 The window size W is initialized with W0 . Environment- may not fully reflect adversarial behavior in real-world CAN
specific thresholds are defined for false positives (FP), false bus scenarios. Third, environmental and driving context data
negatives (FN), and latency (L). The IDS collects traffic data (e.g., speed, weather, driver state) are typically absent, which
chunks within the current window (W) and performs anomaly limits holistic behavioral analysis.
detection. If an anomaly is detected, the window size is 1) HCRL Car-Hacking [28]: The car hacking (CH) dataset
reduced to allow more precise monitoring. If no anomaly is is constructed from CAN traffic collected via the OBD-II port
detected, the window size is expanded to enhance efficiency. from a real vehicle. Four different attack messages are injected
At the end of each detection, the performance metrics (FP, including DoS attacks, fuzzy attacks, gear spoofing attacks,
FN, and L) are updated. If these metrics exceed predefined and RPM gauge spoofing attacks. The dataset contains 300
thresholds, the window size is fine-tuned further to balance intrusions, each 3 to 5 seconds long. In DoS attacks, a message
accuracy and speed. The system waits for the next monitoring with CAN ID: 0 00000 is injected every 0.3 milliseconds. In
interval and continues the process. fuzzy attacks, messages with random CAN ID are injected
 To ensure real-time applicability in AV environments, every 0.5 milliseconds. In spoofing attacks, messages with
DWIDS was designed to be model-agnostic and compati- specific CAN ID related to RPM/gear information are injected
ble with lightweight architectures. Our experiments included every 1 millisecond. The dataset is publicly available as
efficient implementations such as 1D-CNN and MLP, which comma-separated value (CSV) files. Each CSV file contains
achieved high detection performance with low latency. These CAN messages in a specific format given as follows:
models can be deployed on embedded automotive platforms
 2) HCRL Intrusion Detection Challenge: The Intrusion
with constrained resources, supporting the practical feasibility
 Detection Challenge dataset [10] is a rich dataset of CAN
of DWIDS without requiring heavy computational loads. The
 bus data collected from HYUNDAI Sonata, KIA Soul, and
DWIDS framework is designed with deployment feasibility
 CHEVROLET Spark. The dataset contains three types of
in mind. Compared to state-of-the-art models that require
 attacks including Fuzzy, Malfunction, and Replay. The dataset
per-CAN ID LSTM instances or large CNN backbones,
 contains (i) timestamp, (ii) CAN ID, (iii) Data length code,
DWIDS supports compact classifiers (e.g., 1D-CNN, MLP)
 (iv) Data, and (v) Label. The fuzzy attacks consist of randomly
that can execute within the memory and latency constraints
 generated CAN messages. Both the CAN IDs and Data fields
of automotive-grade ECUs (e.g., 10–50 ms inference time on
 are randomly generated. The CAN IDs in attack frames ranged
NVIDIA Jetson Nano). Moreover, the dynamic windowing
 from 0×000 to 0×7FF and contained both actual CAN IDs of
mechanism can be tuned for different latency-accuracy tradethe vehicle and non-existing CAN IDs (which do not belong
offs depending on application criticality (e.g., braking vs.
 to the same vehicle). The malfunction attacks used selected
infotainment subsystems).
 CAN ID from the same vehicle, with a simulated Data field.
 Replay attacks involved injecting past normal data from the
 IV. E XPERIMENTS AND E VALUATION
 same vehicle into the CAN bus.
A. Datasets The dataset is further analyzed in Table III.
 We used two datasets namely HCRL car-hacking (CHD) There is no Flag field in the dataset to identify attack
[28] and intrusion detection challenge (IVN-IDS) [10] in this messages. However, messages with CAN ID: ‘00000 indicate
study. The selection of the CHD [28] and IVN-IDS [10] a DoS attack, and CAN ID: 0 0x1640 indicated impersonation
KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS 339

 TABLE III attacks (both Gear and RPM spoofing) involve the injection of
 IVN IDS C HALLENGE DATASETS [10] S TATISTICS frames with the specific ID of the particular ECU responsible
 for controlling gear and RPM sensors. Intuitively, the former
 two attacks (DoS and fuzzy) can be detected by modeling
 the data in sequences whereas the latter two attacks (gear and
 RPM) need to be detected by analyzing each (single) frame
 because even a single spoofing frame can cause the attack to
 alter the AV response/action.

 C. Metrics
 The proposed IDS system is evaluated using standard classification metrics i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, and false
 positive rate (FPR) used throughout the related works. These
 metrics are calculated as follows 1:
 8 9
 ˆ
 ˆ Accuracy (Ac) = T P+TT N+FP+FN
 P+T N
 >
 >
 = TP
 ˆ >
 ˆ
 ˆ
 ˆ Precision (Pr) T P+FP
 >
 >
 >
 < Recall / TPR (Re) = T P
 ˆ >
 =
 T P+FN (1)
 ˆ
 ˆ FPR = FP+T N
 FP
 >
 >
 TNR (1-FPR) = T N+FPTN
 ˆ
 ˆ >
 >
 ˆ
 ˆ >
 >
 F1 score (Fs) = 2 × Pr+Re
 Pr×Re
 ˆ
 : >
 ;

 where, TP, FP, TN, and FN denote true positive, false positive,
 true negative, and false negative. Accuracy is the proportion
 of all samples (TP+TN+FP+FN) correctly detected (TP+TN).
 Precision is the proportion of correctly predicted positive
 samples (TP) among all positive predictions (TP+FP). Recall
 is the proportion of true positive predictions among all positive
 samples i.e., it measures the proportion of actual positives
 that are correctly identified. It is also called sensitivity or
 True Positive Rate (TPR). FPR is the proportion of actual
 negatives (FP+TN) that are incorrectly identified as positives
 (FP). TNR is the proportion of actual negatives that are
 correctly identified. TNR is also called specificity. The F1
 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. A low F1
 score suggests that either precision or recall (or both) are poor.
 Accuracy can be misleading in imbalanced datasets where one
 class dominates. Precision focuses on the quality of positive
 predictions, penalizing false positives (FP). Recall focuses on
 capturing all actual positives, and penalizing false negatives
 (FN). High precision means few false positives, whereas high
 Recall means most positive samples are identified. As you
Fig. 3. Histogram of CAN IDs in car-hacking dataset. increase precision (fewer false positives), Recall might drop
 (more false negatives), and vice versa. FPR gives a trade-off
 between identifying true positives and avoiding false positives.
attacks. The traffic with timestamps between 0 sec - 250 sec FPR and Recall highlight the balance between detecting posare all attack-free messages, whereas all traffic after 250 sec itives and avoiding false positives. TNR is complementary to
contains attack messages mixed with normal traffic. Fig. 3 FPR since, T NR = 1 − FPR.
shows the distribution of CAN IDs in both datasets. In the context of attacks on IVNs, the metrics should be
 carefully chosen. For example;
B. Threat Model • Attack messages are typically rare i.e., the datasets are
 In this study, we use the four common attacks (i.e., DoS, imbalanced, and thus high accuracy is often due to the
Gear Spoofing, RPM Spoofing, Fuzzy) used in several studies large number of normal samples, and not the model’s
and available in the existing datasets. Fig. 4 depicts the raw ability to detect attacks.
CAN frames from the car-hacking dataset [28]. It can be • Precision is crucial to avoid false alarms, whereas Recall
observed that the DoS attack is when a bulk of messages are is critical to detect actual attacks. In IDS, missing an
injected with high-priority CAN ID (0000) either at regular or actual attack is usually more dangerous than flagging a
varying intervals. The fuzzy attack is also the injection of bulk few non-attacks. Thus, recall is a more critical metric than
frames with random CAN IDs. On the other hand, the spoofing precision.
340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 4. Raw CAN frames showing normal frames (white background) and attack frames (red background).

 • TNR (how the model detects normal samples) is also trees. XGBoost has high speed and accuracy, particularly
 a less critical metric. However, FPR (i.e., 1-TNR) can on structured/tabular data. It can handle missing data and is
 be critical for system trustworthiness. A high FPR (low relatively less prone to overfitting.
 TNR) means too many normal messages are incorrectly 4) Multilayer Perceptron: Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs)
 flagged as attacks. The IDS will thus incorrectly detect a is a class of artificial neural networks (ANNs) that are fully
 DoS attack. connected and consist of multiple layers of neurons. MLPs
 work well on small to medium-sized tabular datasets and
D. Baselines for Single-Frame Intrusion Detection can model complex non-linear relationships. However, MLPs
 are sensitive to hyperparameters, prone to overfitting, and
 1) Decision Trees: A decision tree (DT) is a tree-like model computationally intensive.
where each internal node represents a decision on a feature,
 5) Convolution Neural Networks: Convolution Neural Neteach branch represents an outcome of the decision, and each
 works (CNNs) are a class of deep learning models, primarily
leaf node represents a class label or regression value. A DT
 used for spatial data (e.g., images, video, and audio). CNNs
splits data into branches, each branch represents a decision
 typically require large amounts of data to avoid overfitting.
rule based on feature values, leading to a final prediction at the
 They use parameter sharing to reduce the number of parameleaf nodes. DTs are highly interpretable, simple to implement,
 ters and computational cost.
and computationally inexpensive to train. DTs do not require
 6) Log-Short Term Memory Network: LSTM (Long Shortfeature scaling and can handle both numerical and categorical
 Term Memory) is a special type of Recurrent Neural Network
data. However, DTs are prone to Overfitting, especially when
 (RNN) designed to handle long-term dependencies in sequenusing deep trees.
 tial data (e.g., time series, natural language, speech, and
 2) Random Forest: Random Forest (RF) is an ensemble
 video), where the order of the elements matters. RNNs (and
learning method that combines multiple decision trees to
 LSTM) use outputs from the previous time step and fed back
improve predictive performance and control overfitting. It coninto the network along with the current input. Vanilla RNNs
structs a “forest” of trees by training them on random subsets
 are the simplest forms of an RNN, where each time step
of the data and features. RF uses bootstrapping (sampling
 is treated identically, and the hidden state is updated using
with replacement) to train each tree on a different subset of
 a fixed activation function (e.g., tanh). LSTMs can process
the data. RF, compared to a DT, is less prone to overfitting.
 sequences of varying lengths. They are typically slow to train
They are also relatively more accurate and robust to noise
 and complex to tune.
and outliers. However, they are more complex to implement
and computationally intensive (takes much longer to train and
predict). V. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
 3) Extreme Gradient Boosting: Extreme Gradient Boost- We first analyzed the number of CAN IDs in both datasets.
ing (XGBoost) is an ensemble method that builds a strong These are depicted in Fig. 3. The analysis shows that both
model by combining the predictions of multiple decision datasets have a large number of CAN IDs available to allow
KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS 341

Fig. 5. Performance comparison of six baseline models on the CH dataset [28] for single-frame intrusion detection, showing accuracy, precision, recall,
F1-score, and FPR with and without the CAN ID feature.

models to learn from other features and not to overfit to a We further analyzed these results to investigate if the high
single feature (CAN ID). Thus, CAN ID can serve as an scores are due to the high number of normal cases, but on the
effective feature in the training of ML/DL models for IDS. contrary, the models have correctly predicted attack classes
 too, as depicted in the confusion matrices in Fig. 6 and 7.
 The confusion matrix shows that in the case of CAN ID is
A. Single Frame Attack Detection
 included in the feature set, most models (except DT which was
 We first trained the six baseline models on both datasets relatively) accurately identifies DoS, gear, and RPM spoofing
separately. The analysis in Table II and III shows that the attacks with close to 100% accuracy. However, a few instances
datasets are imbalanced (large difference in number of each of fuzzy attacks were wrongly predicted. On the other hand,
attack and normal frames), thus we used class-weights so that in the case when CAN ID is not included in the feature set,
the model is not biased toward the majority class. We used the number of misclassified fuzzy attacks further increased.
quite simple settings (mostly default settings) for each model, It shows that the CAN ID plays a role in the detection.
since the focus is not to extensively finetune the models, but to The gear and RPM spoofing attacks use the same CAN ID
judge the IDS task in general using off-the-shelf models. The throughout the dataset. Thus are more accurately detected.
decision tree (DT), random forest (RF) are implemented in Fuzzy attacks use different CAN IDs (a total of 2048 CAN
Scikit-learn, XGBoost is implemented using xgboost library, IDs are used across fuzzy attacks and the CAN IDs are also
whereas the MLP, CNN, and LSTM models are implemented used in normal frames) and the data fields contain different
using PyTorch (trained up to 10 epochs). The models are values even for the same CAN ID in different fuzzy attack
trained on fixed size of the train set (70%) and tested on test frames. The detection of fuzzy attacks is thus non-trivial and
set (30%) and the results are computed across all metrics. more relatively challenging.
The detailed evaluation is depicted in Fig. 5. The results show
that all models fairly achieve very high performance over all
metrics. Surprisingly, we repeated the experiments for two B. Multi-Frame Attack Detection
separate cases (i) with CAN ID, and (ii) without CAN ID, to In this section, the proposed DWIDS model is evaluated
understands whether the CAN IDs are responsible for the high over the car-hacking dataset and IVN-IDS challenge datasets,
accuracy and may lead to overfitting. However, interestingly and results are reported in Table IV and V, respectively.
for both cases, the very high performance scores were achieved The model achieved high performance across all classes on
for all metrics. Notably, slightly lower performance (still both datasets, with average precision, recall, and F1 scores in
acceptable) are achieved for some methods e.g., RF in few the 0.96-0.98 range. The model also performed consistently
cases. well for both majority (“Normal,” 72% in car-hacking and
342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

Fig. 6. Confusion Matrix using single-frame intrusion detection (without inclding CAN ID used as a feature).

Fig. 7. Confusion Matrix using single-frame intrusion detection (with CAN ID included as a feature).

78% in IVN-IDS challenge) and minority classes (e.g., “DoS” class imbalance. The weighted average scores in both tables
and “Fuzzy”, “Replay”), demonstrating robustness against further highlight the model’s effectiveness in handling the
KHAN et al.: REVISITING THE INTRUSION DETECTION IN IN-VEHICLE NETWORKS 343

 TABLE IV can provide a layered defense approach, balancing anomaly
 M ULTILABEL C LASSIFICATION U SING DWIDS ON detection with message integrity.
 C AR -H ACKING DATASET [28])
 R EFERENCES
 [1] W. Wu et al., “A survey of intrusion detection for in-vehicle networks,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 919–933, Mar. 2020.
 [2] M. Han, A. Wan, F. Zhang, and S. Ma, “An attribute-isolated secure
 communication architecture for intelligent connected vehicles,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Vehicles, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 545–555, Dec. 2020.
 [3] M. Almehdhar et al., “Deep learning in the fast lane: A survey on
 advanced intrusion detection systems for intelligent vehicle networks,”
 IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol., vol. 5, pp. 869–906, 2024.
 [4] Road Vehicles–Controller Area Network (CAN)—Part 1: Data Link
 Layer and Physical Signalling, Standard 11898-1:2024, 2015.
 [5] C. Shang, J. Cao, J. Liu, Y. Zhang, B. Niu, and H. Li, “CEAMP: A
 cross-domain entity authentication and message protection framework
 for intra-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25,
 TABLE V no. 7, pp. 6780–6795, Jul. 2024.
 [6] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “A survey of deep learning-based intrusion
 M ULTILABEL C LASSIFICATION M ETRICS (IVN-IDS detection in automotive applications,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 221, Jul.
 C HALLENGE DATASET [10]) 2023, Art. no. 119771.
 [7] O. Ajibuwa, B. Hamdaoui, and A. A. Yavuz, “A survey on AI/ML-driven
 intrusion and misbehavior detection in networked autonomous systems:
 Techniques, challenges and opportunities,” 2023, arXiv:2305.05040.
 [8] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski,
 G. Madzudzo, and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for
 in-vehicle networks: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11,
 pp. 1–40, Feb. 2023.
 [9] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion
 detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf.
 Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2018, pp. 1–6.
 [10] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh.
 Commun., vol. 14, pp. 52–63, Oct. 2018.
 [11] M. Hanselmann, T. Strauss, K. Dormann, and H. Ulmer, “CANet: An
 unsupervised intrusion detection system for high dimensional CAN bus
 data,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58194–58205, 2020.
dataset’s distribution. Unlike traditional IDS models that are [12] A. Zhang, K. Wang, B. Wang, and Y. Wu, “LiPar: A lightweight parallel
limited to single-label classification or fixed window detec- learning model for practical in-vehicle network intrusion detection,”
tion, DWIDS enables simultaneous identification of mixed 2023, arXiv:2311.08000.
 [13] I. A. Khan, N. Moustafa, D. Pi, W. Haider, B. Li, and A. Jolfaei, “An
attack types within short temporal windows. This enhances enhanced multi-stage deep learning framework for detecting malicious
responsiveness and reliability in real-world driving conditions activities from autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
where multiple attack vectors may manifest concurrently. vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 25469–25478, Dec. 2022.
 [14] J. Khan, D.-W. Lim, and Y.-S. Kim, “Intrusion detection system
The consistent performance across two imbalanced datasets CAN-bus in-vehicle networks based on the statistical characteristics of
confirms DWIDS’s robustness and generalization capability. attacks,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 7, p. 3554, Mar. 2023.
 [15] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), CA, CA, USA, Oct. 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
 VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK [16] M. Tan and Q. V. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for
 convolutional neural networks,” 2019, arXiv:1905.11946.
 This study proposes DWIDS, a dynamic, adaptive intrusion [17] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion
detection system for IVNs, designed for real-time, multi- detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun.,
 vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198.
attack, and resource-constrained environments. The system [18] G. Baldini, “In-vehicle network intrusion detection system using conoutperforms conventional IDS models across key metrics, even volutional neural network and multi-scale histograms,” Information,
in imbalanced and multi-label scenarios. These results suggest vol. 14, no. 11, p. 605, Nov. 2023.
 [19] S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, and K. Ahmed, “Deep transthat DWIDS is a practical and scalable solution for securing fer learning based intrusion detection system for electric vehicular
next-generation autonomous vehicles. In future work, several networks,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 14, p. 4736, Jul. 2021.
promising directions can be pursued to enhance the practicality [20] A. S. Bin Shibghatullah, “Mitigating developed persistent threats (APTs)
 through machine learning-based intrusion detection systems: A compreand robustness of IDS for IVNs. First, evaluating DWIDS hensive analysis,” SHIFRA, vol. 2023, pp. 17–25, Mar. 2023.
on datasets with rare or stealthy attack types, such as low- [21] K.-T. Cho and K. G. Shin, “Fingerprinting electronic control units
rate spoofing or gradual replay attacks to assess robustness for vehicle intrusion detection,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur. Symp.
 (USENIX Secur.), 2016, pp. 911–927.
in edge cases. Second, integrating temporal context from [22] A. Taylor, N. Japkowicz, and S. Leblanc, “Frequency-based anomaly
external traffic data (e.g., GPS, driver behavior) may improve detection for the automotive CAN bus,” in Proc. World Congr. Ind.
attack attribution and reduce false positives. Third, lightweight Control Syst. Secur. (WCICSS), Dec. 2015, pp. 45–49.
 [23] W. Jeong, S. Han, E. Choi, S. Lee, and J.-W. Choi, “CNN-based adaptive
versions of DWIDS should be developed for deployment on source node identifier for controller area network (CAN),” IEEE Trans.
embedded ECUs with limited computational resources. Fourth, Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 13916–13920, Nov. 2020.
adversarial robustness should be examined to ensure the IDS [24] S. Longari, D. H. Nova Valcarcel, M. Zago, M. Carminati, and S. Zanero,
 “CANnolo: An anomaly detection system based on LSTM autoencoders
can defend against crafted attack inputs. Lastly, combining the for controller area network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage.,
DWIDS with in-vehicle authentication and encryption schemes vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1913–1924, Jun. 2021.
344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS, VOL. 27, NO. 1, JANUARY 2026

[25] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, Hamid Menouar (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 and A. Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder the Ph.D. degree from the Esteemed French School
 architecture for discovering anomalous events from intelligent trans- Telecom Paris Tech in 2008. He is the Principal
 portation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, Research and Development and the Innovation Lead
 pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021. of Qatar Mobility Innovations Center (QMIC). In
[26] J. Qin, Y. Xun, Z. Deng, and J. Liu, “GPIDS: GAN assisted contextual his role, he spearheads the design and development
 pattern-aware intrusion detection system for IVN,” IEEE Trans. Veh. of cutting-edge solutions aimed at enhancing the
 Technol., vol. 73, no. 9, pp. 12682–12693, Sep. 2024. quality of life. His leveraging state-of-the-art tech-
[27] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural nologies like AI and the IoT, he focuses on creating
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. smart, efficient, and sustainable cities. He possesses
[28] Hacking and Countermeasure Research Lab, car-hacking dataset for the extensive expertise in AI, the IoT, connected and
 intrusion detection, Korea Univ., Seoul, South Korea, 2021. automated mobility, and uncrewed aerial vehicles (UAV) or drones. His
[29] M. E. Verma, M. D. Iannacone, R. A. Bridges, S. C. Hollifield, B. Kay, research endeavors have yielded a remarkable collection of scientific research
 and F. L. Combs, “Road: The real ornl automotive dynamometer con- publications, both in esteemed international conferences and journals, along
 troller area network intrusion detection dataset (with a comprehensive with multiple patents. Several of his innovative solutions have played a pivotal
 can IDS dataset survey & guide),” 2020, arXiv:2012.14600. role in the success of Qatar FIFA World Cup 2022.
[30] P. Baldi, “Autoencoders, unsupervised learning, and deep architectures,”
 in Proc. ICML Workshop Unsupervised Transf. Learn., 2012, pp. 37–49.
[31] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set for
 network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data set),”
 in Proc. Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf. (MilCIS), Nov. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[32] H. Alqahtani and G. Kumar, “A deep learning-based intrusion detection
 system for in-vehicle networks,” Comput. Electr. Eng., vol. 104, Dec.
 2022, Art. no. 108447.
[33] J. Cui et al., “Lightweight encryption and authentication for controller
 area network of autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
 vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 14756–14770, Nov. 2023.
[34] J. Cao et al., “Anomaly detection for in-vehicle network using selfsupervised learning with vehicle-cloud collaboration update,” IEEE
 Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 7454–7466, Jul. 2024.
[35] S. Almutlaq, A. Derhab, M. M. Hassan, and K. Kaur, “Two-stage
 intrusion detection system in intelligent transportation systems using
 rule extraction methods from deep neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Intell.
 Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 15687–15701, Dec. 2023.
[36] M. Fu, P. Wang, M. Liu, Z. Zhang, and X. Zhou, “IoV-BERT-IDS:
 Hybrid network intrusion detection system in IoV using large language
 models,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 1909–1921, Feb.
 2025.
[37] S. Yang et al., “Large language models for network intrusion detection
 systems: Foundations, implementations, and future directions,” 2025,
 arXiv:2507.04752.
[38] E. Nwafor and H. Olufowobi, “CANBERT: A language-based intrusion
 detection model for in-vehicle networks,” in Proc. 21st IEEE Int. Conf.
 Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), Dec. 2022, pp. 294–299.

 Muhammad Asif Khan (Senior Member, IEEE)
 received the B.Sc. degree in telecommunication
 engineering from the University of Engineering and
 Technology, Peshawar, Pakistan, in 2009, the M.Sc.
 degree in telecommunication engineering from the
 University of Engineering and Technology, Taxila, Mohamed Abdallah (Senior Member, IEEE)
 Pakistan, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the
 engineering from Qatar University in 2020. He is University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA,
 currently a Research Scientist at Qatar Mobility in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is currently a
 Innovations Center (QMIC), Doha, Qatar. He pub- Professor and the Associate Dean of undergradulished more than 50 peer-reviewed journal articles, ate studies and quality assurance with the College
conference papers, and book chapters. He also served as a TPC member of of Science and Engineering, Hamad Bin Khalifa
numerous conferences, including NeurIPS, ICCV, ICC, Globecom, CCNC, University, Ar-Rayyan, Qatar. He has authored or
VTC, ICCE, BigData, Sensors, and GEM. He was awarded the Post-Doctoral co-authored more than 220 articles, contributed to
Research Award (PDRA) from Qatar National Research Fund (QNRF) for four book chapters, and holds four patents. His
his research work as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at Qatar University, research interests include AI for communications,
Doha. He served as an Associate Editor for IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON 6G networks, wireless security, electric vehicles, and smart grids. His recogni-
N EURAL N ETWORKS AND L EARNING S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON tions include a Research Fellow Excellence Award at Texas A&M University
C ONSUMER E LECTRONICS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON T ECHNOLOGY AND at Qatar in 2016 and multiple IEEE Best Paper Awards. He was also a Nortel
S OCIETY, and IEEE S IGNAL P ROCESSING L ETTERS. Networks Industrial Fellow from 1999 to 2003.