1076 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 RISK-4-AUTO: Residually Interconnected and
 Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks for
 Automotive Network Traffic Classification
 Anurag Dutta , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Sangita Roy , Member, IEEE,
 and Rajat Subhra Chakraborty , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—In modern automobiles, a Controller Area Network reliability, and the ability to present a consistent system-
(CAN) bus facilitates communication among all electronic state snapshot to all ECUs [3]. The CAN data frame format
control units for critical safety functions, including steering, and the protocol for the CAN-bus communication schemes
braking, and fuel injection. However, due to the lack of
security features, it may be vulnerable to malicious bus traffic- ensure excellent message integrity, and thus CAN is very wellbased attacks that cause the automobile to malfunction. Such suited for environments with inherently high electromagnetic
malicious bus traffic can be the result of either external interference and electrical noise, e.g., vehicles and industrial
fabricated messages or direct injection through the on-board production environments.
diagnostic port, highlighting the need for an effective intru- However, the protocol lacks any in-built cryptographic
sion detection system to efficiently identify suspicious network
flows and potential intrusions. This work introduces Residually mechanism to ensure message confidentiality and sender
Interconnected and Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks authenticity [3]. As a result, the communication between ECUs
(RISK-4-AUTO), a set of four deep neural network architec- is vulnerable to being hijacked by any attacker, resulting in
tures for intrusion detection targeting in-vehicle network traffic severe automobile malfunctions, sufficient to wreak havoc on
classification. RISK-4-AUTO models, when applied on three the road, and posing a threat to lives and infrastructures.
hexadecimally identifiable sequence-based open-source datasets
(collected through direct injection in the on-board diagnostic Malicious CAN messages capable of causing malfunction of
port), outperform six state-of-the-art vehicular network intrusion the ECUs can be generated in two major ways [3]:
detection systems (as per their accuracies) by ≈1.0163% for 1) Through direct physical injection of fabricated CAN
all-class classification and ≈2.5535% on focused (single-class) messages [4] on the CAN-bus via the on-board diagnosmalicious flow detection. Additionally, RISK-4-AUTO enjoys a tic port of the vehicle, or,
significantly lower overhead than existing state-of-the-art models,
and is suitable for real-time deployment in resource-constrained 2) via fabricated messages injected to the CAN-bus by a
automotive environments. telematics device [5] capable of wireless communication
 with external agents. This threat is exacerbated by the
 Index Terms—Controller area network (CAN), in-vehicle security, Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN), network forensics, existence of wireless communication technology and
network traffic classification. standards (e.g., IEEE 802.11p [6], [7]) for vehicular
 communication.
 A modern vehicle has an extensive attack surface with numer-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ous and diverse attack vectors. For example, it has been
 ODERN automobiles depend entirely on embed- recently demonstrated that Android infotainment units etc. can
M ded electronic devices, commonly termed Electronic
Control Units (ECUs) [1] for critical functions like steering,
 also serve as attack vectors [8].
 To counter these threats, efficient and accurate Intrusion
fuel injection, braking, etc. These ECUs communicate through Detection System (IDS) needs to be deployed, which monitors
Controller Area Network (CAN) bus systems following the the CAN-bus in real-time, and in case of any suspicious
ISO 11898 standard [2]. The communication over a CAN- traffic, immediately quarantines (or flushes, if needed) such
bus follows a broadcast mechanism to ensure efficiency, data frames. Efficient specialized IDS for vehicular network
 traffic have been proposed in several recent works. Tariq et al.
 Received 14 January 2025; revised 12 June 2025 and 5 October 2025; combined the heuristics of Reinforcement Learning with
accepted 22 October 2025. Date of publication 24 October 2025; date Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) [9], and later in another
of current version 29 December 2025. The associate editor coordinating
the review of this article and approving it for publication was Y. Diao.
 work made use of Convolutional Long Short-Term Memory
(Corresponding author: Rajat Subhra Chakraborty.) (Conv-LSTM) network for classification of network traf-
 Anurag Dutta and Rajat Subhra Chakraborty are with the Department fic on a CAN-bus [10]. Similarly, Song et al. suggested
of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, India (e-mail: anuragdutta@ieee.org;
 using Deep Convolutional Neural Network (DCNN) [3], and
rschakraborty@cse.iitkgp.ac.in). Javed et al. hybridized Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
 Sangita Roy is with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, with Attention-based Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [11].
Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala 147004, India (e-mail:
sangita.roy@thapar.edu).
 Seo et al. added to the pool by using Generative Adversarial
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3625404 Network (GAN) for data augmentation, and further improving
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO 1077

 Further, we evaluated the models (on each of the three
 datasets) for their ability to distinguish between injected
 and normal flow of traffic from every malicious flow category (focused detection), where for each of those attacks
 corresponding to the three HCRL datasets, one or more RISK-
 4-AUTO models achieved a perfect (i.e., 100% accurate)
 classification.
 The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
 presents some notable works from the existing literature that
 aligns the research problem, and our contributions. Section III
 discusses the preliminaries necessary for proposing the RISK-
 4-AUTO Intrusion Detection Systems for automotive network
 classification. Section V presents the supervised framework,
 the adopted mini-FlowPic algorithm for histogram generation,
 the three HCRL datasets and the four proposed deep neural
 network architectures. Section VI describes the experimental
Fig. 1. Some examples of the generated two-dimensional visual represen- setup, and the experimental results to evaluate the effectiveness
tation of spatial and temporal characteristics of in-vehicle network traffic of the RISK-4-AUTO IDS models. Finally, Section VII
from the HCRL-Car Hacking Dataset. The horizontal axis represents
normalized frame arrival timestamps (in seconds), and the vertical axis concludes the research.
representing the corresponding frame sizes (in bytes).

the prediction efficiency [12]. Ashraf et al. proposed a II. R ELATED W ORKS AND O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS
novel architecture, LSTM-Autoencoder-IDS (LSTMIDS) [13], This section reviews some works from the existing literature
which to the best of our knowledge, reports the best classifi- on the topic under consideration, some of which have been
cation performance till date. mentioned already in Section I.
 In this paper, we introduce Residually Interconnected and Tariq et al. combined reinforcement learning-based adaptive
Superimposed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks (RISK-4- threshold adjustment with rule-based heuristics (e.g., message
AUTO), a novel combination of four deep learning-based IDS. rate, ID validity) with a Recurrent Neural Network to learn
RISK-4-AUTO models combines Residual Neural Network temporal attack signatures [9]. They also suggested using a
(ResNet) [14], [15], [16] and Kolmogorov-Arnold Network reward-driven fine-tuning to update anomaly thresholds online,
(KAN) [17], [18], [19], for malicious in-vehicular network thus improving the adaptability, and generalizability to new
traffic classification, in particular those resulting from direct (unidentified) traffic patterns. One major limitation of this
injection attacks. The RISK-4-AUTO IDS models make use of technique is the complexity of reward shaping, as poorly
visual classification techniques to distinguish among different designed reward functions can lead to increased false positive
frames for a given network flow. rates. Also, from a practical point of view, training RNNs for
 Fig. 1 exemplifies such a visual representation for three automotive intrusion detection typically requires substantial
classes (one benign, two malicious) from the HCRL-Car volumes of labeled data, which makes both the turn-around
Hacking Dataset (in-vehicle network traffic), with the time, and developmental cost high. In a follow-up work [10],
horizontal axis representing normalized frame arrival times- they proposed CAN-Transfer, where pre-trained Convolutiontamps (in seconds), and the vertical axis representing the LSTM (Conv-LSTM) was used on CAN dataset. Herein,
corresponding frame sizes (in bytes). It can be observed the Convolutional layers extracted spatial feature patterns
visually from the figure that the benign flow of traffic is from CAN message representations, and the LSTM captured
densely, uniformly, and more importantly periodically well- temporal dependencies. Although it achieved the-then state-ofdistributed, whereas the injected flow is either sparsely (due to the-art accuracy in intrusion detection, the accuracy depends
anomalous timing characteristics) or non-uniformly distributed on the volume of data available for fine-tuning the modules;
(due to sudden spikes in message size, frequency, etc). The in case of scarce data availability, performance degrades.
deep learning models learn the underlying patterns from Song et al. suggested using Deep Convolutional Neural
these visual representations in a supervised manner. Later, the Network (DCNN) [3] for mapping CAN frames to 2D
trained models are applied to distinguish between different images (time vs. ID axes), eliminating the need for manclasses of in-vehicle network traffic flows. Fig. 2 depicts the ual feature engineering and ensuring low false negative
three phases. and therefore lower overall error rates. This technique’s
 All of the four proposed models under RISK-4-AUTO effectiveness was significantly influenced by the volume
achieved superior performance compared to the state-of-the- and quality of labeled training data available for training
art (S-O-T-A), when applied on the HCRL network traffic the network. Further, the underlying network architecture
datasets [20], [21], [22]. For example, the best classification under this DCNN involves large depth of convolutional
accuracy achieved by RISK-4-AUTO was 99.76% for distin- layers, which increases the inference time, compared to
guishing five (four malicious and one benign) different types shallow-networks. Javed et al. proposed CANIntelliIDS [11],
of network flows of the HCRL-Car Hacking Dataset, where they hybridized Convolution Neural Network (CNN)
compared to the previous best-reported accuracy of 99.01%. with Attention-based Gated Recurrent Unit (AGRU). The
1078 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 2. Pictorial demonstration for the workflow of the RISK-4-AUTO framework. The methodology has three phases: (I) capturing the CAN bus traffic
session from the ECUs of any automobile; (II) employing a “Session Plotter” (Algorithm 1) for generation of two-dimensional histograms, and annotating
them based on the “Flag” field present in the session header, and, (III) finally, the malicious traffic classification is performed in a supervised manner using
Kolmogorov-Arnold Network.

CNN backbone performed spatial feature extraction, and a very large volume of data, in contrast to [9], [10]. They
Attention-augmented GRU focused on class-specific salient map the time-series to histograms (refer to Algorithm 1),
features. They further reported ≈10% improvement on increasing information gain per data-instance. Besides, unlike
mixed-attack benchmarks, compared to prior models. Despite state-of-the-art models which have very-deep networks
achieving state-of-the-art accuracy, a major shortcoming of for classification [3], RISK-4-AUTO models have limited
CANIntelliIDS was its memory overhead during inference residually-connected convolutional layers (one-two; refer to
due to attention mechanisms. Seo et al. proposed GIDS [12], Fig. 3) and thus offers faster inference, with no memory
where the CAN traffic data was augmented using spectral- or computational overhead arising from additional model
normalized GAN. It further increased the model robustness complexity (like attention mechanism [11], coordinationto noise and often generalizable to newer samples, without latency [23] etc). Additionally, RISK-4-AUTO achieves
explicit training. However, GAN based augmentation may (in ≈1.0163% improvement for all-class classification, and
some instances) generate unrealistic samples (as the generation ≈2.5535% on focused (single-class) malicious flow detecis unconstrained), which cause the training to be unstable. tion, besides relatively low inference time, in comparison
Additionally, the synthetic samples make the detection module to lightweight detection systems from the literature
vulnerable to rote-learning, by memorizing the GAN generated like [10], [24]. This is also one of most important
patterns. Yang et al. proposed MTH-IDS [23] (a three-tier requirement for implementation of any model on a
detection architecture) combining signature-based filtering at resource-constrained environment.
the edge, anomaly detection in fog, and global correlation in
the cloud. It hybridizes a lightweight rule-based check with
a deep-autoencoder and random-forest as an ensemble model III. BACKGROUND : V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION OF
balancing speed and detection depth. It is also vulnerable to N ETWORK T RAFFIC , R ES N ET AND KAN
communication latency due to multi-tier coordination. A. FlowPic for Visual Representation of Network Packets
 Araujo-Filho et al. [24] implement a machine learning-
 “FlowPic” [25], [26] was one of the early contributions
based Intrusion Prevention System (IPS), using isolation
 towards visual representation-based techniques for network
forest algorithms on CAN frame payload data to achieve
 traffic identification. Shapira et al. in their contribution
real-time attack detection and prevention within timing condevised a methodology to convert network traffic time series
straints on resource-constrained hardware. Ashraf proposed
 (continuous) data to their (discrete) visual representation,
LSTM-Autoencoder-IDS (LSTMIDS) [13], trains an LSTMas histograms. By normalizing both arrival times and sizes
autoencoder on benign CAN sequences (only), and flags the
 into a fixed [0, # MTU − 1] range and binning into an
frames whose reconstruction error exceeds a threshold as
 (# MTU × # MTU) grid, FlowPic yields a grayscale image
anomalies. Till date, it achieves state-of-the-art accuracy with
 capturing spatiotemporal traffic patterns. In their seminal
≈99% accuracy on select benchmark datasets.
 work, Shapira et al. considered MTU = 1500, which
 was updated to 64, 128, 256 respectively in their follow-
A. Our Contributions up work, mini-FlowPic [27]. Inspired by the performance
 The proposed RISK-4-AUTO models outperform the limi- boost, we inherit mini-FlowPic with dimension 64 × 64
tations of the existing state-of-the-art, as they do not require in Section V.
DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO 1079

Fig. 3. Proposed architectures of RISK-4-AUTO Intrusion Detection Systems for malicious automotive traffic classification through visualization.

B. Residual Neural Network (ResNet) C. Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (KAN)
 AlexNet [28] was the first CNN-based architecture that got Kolmogorov Arnold Network (KAN) was introduced in [17]
mass attention, particularly after it’s astonishing performance to overcome the limitations of the existing Multi-layer
at the ImageNet 2012 competition [29], [30], [31]. Perceptrons (MLPs). MLPs decide the numerical values of
Subsequently, every other model that aimed to outperform the node weights using fixed activation functions, whereas
AlexNet relied on using more layers of computation as a KAN updates the weights using trainable activation functions.
measure to overcome the margin of error, but this came up Inheriting from the “Universal Approximation Theorem”, for
with a trade-off. Adding more layers introduced the Vanishing MLPs any function y = f (x) can be approximated as in eqn. (2)
Gradient (gradient tends to zero) [32], and Exploding Gradient 
(gradient tends to infinity) [33] problems in the deep neural y= a[Ω · x + β] (2)
networks. Residual Blocks came to the rescue, by enabling where a[ · ] is the fixed activation function (e.g., ReLU,
the deeper neural networks to train on a given dataset with tanH, etc.), and (ωi,j ∈ Ω, βj ∈ β) are the model
lower experimental error. Residual Blocks introduced Skip weights, and bias respectively. Contrary to that, inheriting
Connection that connects activations from non-adjacent layers from the “Kolmogorov-Arnold Representation Theorem”, the
by skipping layers in between. This enables the network approximation (for KAN) can be made as in eqn. (3)
to skip any layer by regularization if that layer contributes   
to degrading performance of the model. Mathematically, y= Φ φ[x] (3)
the Residual Block operation is represented as in
eqn. (1): where φi,j ∈ φ are the real-valued functions (trainable,
 specifically B-Splines), and Φ ∈ Φ is the mapping (composition) function of th layer. Further, the real-valued functions
 x → a[x] + x (1) are defined as:
   K
 
 (b) xi (s)
where a[x] refers to the activation from any neural layer with φi,j [xi ] = μi,j · + μ i,j · λi,j ,k · Bk [xi ] (4)
 1 + e −xi
input feature x. k =1
 Since our proposed RISK-4-AUTO models solely depend and the composition functions as:
on learning patterns from FlowPic images generated for auto- ⎡ ⎤
 φ,1,1 φ,1,2 · · · φ,1,L
motive network traffic flow, the vanishing gradient problem ⎢ φ,2,1 φ,2,2 · · · φ,2,L ⎥
may adversely affect the precision of the IDS. Hence, we have ⎢ ⎥
 Φ = ⎢ . .. .. .. ⎥; φ,i,j ≡ φi,j (5)
made Residual Blocks an integral part of the proposed RISK- ⎣ .. . . . ⎦
4-AUTO models. φ,L,1 φ,L,2 · · · φ,L,L
1080 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Histogram Generation Algorithm 1) Linear KAN (L IN -KAN) is the most simple, and
Require: n, T , and Π  T , Π are n-dim vectors lightweight classifier of all the RISK-4-AUTO IDS
Ensure: Hi,i ∈ H  H is the 2-D Histogram models. It takes a visual histogram of dimension (64
 1: function S ESSION P LOTTER(n, T , Π) × 64) as input, then rearranges (through a Flatten
 2: Initialize vectors T~ , Π̃ with NULL entries. Layer) the entire feature set from the two-dimensional
 3: for i = 0 to n − −1do histogram into a single one-dimensional array consisting
 4: T˜i ← Tn−1Ti −T0
 −T0 · # MTU  Normalization of of 4096 features, and inputs it to the KAN layer in
 packet arrival times  batches of 32 features each. The KAN layer further
 5: Π̃i ← ΠΠ i −Π0
 n−1 −Π0
 · # MTU  Normalization of learns from the underlying features, such that for any
 packet sizes input feature set, it maps the set (through Softmax
 6: end for Activation Layer) to any one of the network traffic
 7: Initialize H(# MTU×# MTU) ← 0(# MTU×# MTU) classes (five in our case).
 8: for j = 0 to n − −1 do 2) Residual KAN (R ES -KAN) is the next model in the
 9: H   ˜ ← H   ˜ + 1  Increment cluster. It has an incremental architecture on the L IN -
 Πj ,Tj Πj ,Tj KAN model, wherein before channelizing the feature
10: end for vectors to the KAN layers, they are passed through
11: return H two consecutive sequences of Residual Layers, and
12: end function MaxPool2D (with kernel size 2 × 2) for better extraction of the spatio-temporal feature. The first network
 (b) (s) maps between ninput = 1 and noutput = 5, while
where, (μi,j , μi,j ) are the weights for the “biological” the second network maps between ninput = 5 and
term (Swish), and “spline” term (λi,j ,k being the spline noutput = 25. Afterwards, the model retraces the
coefficients). computational path as followed by L IN -KAN.
 3) Batch-Normalized Residual KAN (R ES -KAN BN ) is sim-
 IV. P ROPOSED S OLUTION
 ilar to the R ES -KAN model, the only difference being
 This section, describes the supervised framework, the an additional learnable BatchNorm2D layer after each
adopted mini-FlowPic algorithm for histogram generation and of the Residual Layers. The BatchNorm2D layers
the four classifier model architectures constituting RISK-4- scale and shift the normalized activations from the
AUTO. respective predecessors, improve the flow of features and
 gradients between the corresponding layers, and counter
A. The Supervised Framework the internal Covariate Shift.
 This framework (refer to Fig. 2) considers sequential data 4) Dual-Residual-KAN (R ES -KAN II ), which is the beststream (from the CAN bus) consisting of standard network performing model in the cluster. It again has an
parameters in the form, {Timestamp (in UTC), CAN message incremental architecture on the R ES -KAN model, with
Identifier (in Hexadecimal), Number of packets (n), n packet two KAN layers for feature extraction and mapping.
arrival time stamps (normalized form: T ), n tuples of packet This way, the extraction is smoother than its predecessizes (normalized form: Π, in bytes)} and a “Flag”}. sors, thus retaining and transmitting deep features, which
 The “Flag” field represents the status of the message in turn makes the classification more accurate.
under consideration, i.e., either the message is injected on The rationale behind the choice of specific model paramthe CAN bus, or it is evolving originally. The time-series eters is as follows; Firstly, the output histograms generated
corresponding to aforementioned set of five (excluding “Flag”) by Algorithm 1 are of dimension 64 × 64. Consequently,
features are mapped to form a two-dimensional histogram the input histograms to the RISK-4-AUTO model retain the
(as per Algorithm 1), which is then further used for the same dimensions. These histograms are grayscale, with gray
classification (both multi-class and binary) using supervised values normalized to the range [0, 255], and, being spread
learning algorithms. Algorithm 1 constructs a 2D histogram across a single channel, correspond to a total of 4096 features.
that captures the joint distribution of (normalized) packet Secondly, the first residual network layer in each of the RISKarrival times and their sizes within a network session. First, 4-AUTO models is configured with ninput = 1 and noutput =
both packet arrival times (T ) and sizes (Π) are normalized to 5, while the subsequent layer uses ninput = 5 and noutput =
a fixed resolution (as constrained by the definition of # MTU). 25. As the input histogram is represented as a two-dimensional
These normalized values are then used to index into the 2D grayscale image, where the intensity at each pixel corresponds
histogram grid H, incrementing the count at the corresponding to the frequency of specific features, this setup effectively
location for each packet, which enables visualization of spatial captures unimodal information (ninput = 1). The choice of
and temporal characteristics of the network traffic. noutput = 5 ensures that the input is expanded into multiple
 feature maps, facilitating the extraction of spatial relationships
B. RISK-4-AUTO: Residually Interconnected and in the histogram. This design aligns conceptually with (a
Superimposed Kolmogorov Arnold Networks maximum of) five network traffic classes, as is the upper bound
 This subsection describes the four classifier model archi- for most of the automotive network traffic datasets. But if
tectures constituting RISK-4-AUTO, as depicted pictorially in needed, the dimension can be expanded based on require-
Fig. 3. ments. The subsequent layer, configured with ninput = 5 and
DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO 1081

 TABLE I
noutput = 25, maintains a scaling ratio of five, consistent with A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL-C AR H ACKING DATASET
the preceding layer. Finally, the use of MaxPool2D with a
kernel size of 2 × 2 allows for downscaling the features while
retaining most of the relevant information. A kernel size of
two is a commonly adopted choice for smaller image samples.
 Additionally, the KAN layer had the following hyperparameters: grid-size = 10 (complexity of the network),
spline-order = 3, that determines the order of the
trainable activation functions – B-Splines (here degree-three
polynomials), noise-factor = 10−2 (for regularization, TABLE II
 A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL CAN W ITH F LEXIBLE
and to prevent overfitting). These values were initialized DATA R ATE DATASET
randomly, and 10% data was left out for validation during
model training to determine the effective parameter values.
Subsequently, these parameter values were updated through
cross-validation.

 V. E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY
 TABLE III
 This section presents the datasets and the methodology A N OVERVIEW OF THE HCRL B-CAN DATASET
(experimental setup) used for validating the proposed RISK-
4-AUTO models.

A. Dataset
 In this research, for experimentation, three open-source
CAN traffic based datasets made available by the “Hacking
and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL)” were chosen.
The datasets include Car-Hacking Dataset (HCRL-CHD) [20],
CAN with flexible data rate Dataset (HCRL-CAN-FD) [21]
and Bus-type topology CAN (HCRL-B-CAN) [22] Dataset
were chosen. These datasets (as reported in the data collection methodology by HCRL) were collected through
direct-injection in the on-board diagnostic port. The reason
behind the choice of these datasets is the large number of
data points available with these datasets. Besides, existing
literature mostly considers these datasets (as a whole, or in
sets), which enabled us to compare state-of-the-art with the
proposed framework. Refer to Table I, II and III for the dataset
details. Each of these three datasets is a hexadecimally identifiable sequence-based dataset consisting six main attributes, Fig. 4. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
 the HCRL-CHD.
as discussed in Section IV-A. The three datasets have the
following characteristics:
 1) The Car-Hacking Dataset [20] covers five types of CAN out on a system with 16 GB main memory, Intel Core
 traffic of which one is for benign flow, and the remaining i7-1065G7 @1.30 GHz processor and an NVIDIA
 four are: (I) DoS attack, (II) Fuzzy attack, (III) Gear GeForce MX330 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) with 2
 spoofing attack, and (IV) RPM spoofing attack. GiB in-built memory. Existing literature mostly performs an
 2) CAN with flexible data rate Dataset [21] covers three all-class classification, but to the best of our knowledge,
 types of CAN traffic: (I) Flooding attack, (II) Fuzzy no other published work has reported intra-class detection
 attack, and (III) Malfunction. for each class of these attacks. We have made the codes
 3) Finally, the Bus-type topology CAN Dataset [22] covers and processed data (2D histograms, some selected instances)
 three types of CAN traffic of which one is for benign open-sourced at [34] for reproduction.
 flow, and the remaining two are: (I) DDoS attack, and
 (II) Fuzzy attack. VI. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
 This section describes in detail, the obtained results
B. Experimental Setup (Section VI-A) from the experiments mentioned in
 The RISK-4-AUTO deep learning models were imple- Section V-B, and also performs an ablation study
mented in Python using the PyTorch (v. 2.4) (Section VI-B) on different components of the RISK-4-AUTO
framework, and were evaluated on three open-source datasets model, and their influence (overall) on the intrusion detection
as discussed in Section V-A. All experiments were carried efficiency.
1082 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
 T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-C AR H ACKING DATASET

 TABLE V
 C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
 T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-CAN W ITH F LEXIBLE DATA R ATE DATASET

 TABLE VI
 C OMPARISON OF P ERFORMANCE B ETWEEN D IFFERENT IDS M ODELS FOR All-Class-Classification (M ULTI -C LASS ) OF N ETWORK
 T RAFFIC ON THE HCRL-B US -T YPE CAN DATASET

 TABLE VII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 DoS-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD

A. Results
 Since this work is related to classification, common
performance metrics – Accuracy, Precision, Recall, and
 Fig. 5. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
F1-Score are considered for evaluating the models. The the HCRL CAN-FD.
three datasets (as mentioned in Section V-B) are subjected
to a 80:10:10 train-test-validation ratio for the experiments.
Additionally, the Time-to-Train (TTTr), and Time-to-Test The following S-O-T-A IDS were considered as baseline
(TTTe) were measured to present the computational overhead (mentioned along with their respective publication venues in
of the proposed models, alongside comparing them to the chronological order by their publication years), (I) LSTM
temporal dependencies of the pre-existing models. From a Autoencoder based IDS (LSTMIDS) [13], (II) GAN based IDS
practitioner’s point of view, the high training time might seem (GIDS) [12], (III) CNN and Attention-based Gated Recurrent
like a trade-off for achieving more accuracy, but note that Unit (GRU) CAN IDS (CANintelliIDS) [11], (IV) Deep
training the model is a one-time process. Once the model Convolutional Neural Network IDS (DCNN) [3], (V) Transfer
has been trained and saved, the same model can be Learning based IDS (CANTransfer) [10], and (VI) Heuristic
queried any number of times with very little computational RNN IDS (RNN+Heuristics) [9]. Tables IV, V, and VI present
overhead (Time-to-Test). the all-class classification (five classes in HCRL-CHD, and
DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO 1083

 TABLE XII
 C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD

 TABLE XIII
 C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 Malfunction-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD

Fig. 6. Confusion Matrices for all-class-classification of network traffic on
the HCRL-B-CAN.

 TABLE VIII
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD TABLE XIV
 C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 DDoS-Attack F ROM HCRL-B-CAN

 TABLE IX
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 TABLE XV
 Gear-Spoofing-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD
 C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 Fuzzy-Attack F ROM HCRL-B-CAN

 TABLE X
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE )
 RPM-Spoofing-Attack F ROM HCRL-CHD
 The best set of results corresponding to each stratum of
 multi-class classification have been highlighted in bold font.
 Drawing from the experimental observations from the aforementioned tables, for HCRL-CHD, the best of the proposed
 RISK-4-AUTO models outperformed the best from the stateof-the-art by 0.7576%; even the base variant of the proposed
 models –R ES -KAN outperforms by 0.6568%. Alongside to
 TABLE XI reprove the overfitting issues, their confusion matrices have
C OMPARISON ON C LASSIFYING (B INARY- Injected, OR Normal M ESSAGE ) also been reported (refer to Fig. 4). Similarly, for HCRL-
 Flooding-Attack F ROM HCRL CAN-FD CAN-FD and HCRL-B-CAN, the best of the proposed models
 outperformed the best from the state-of-the-art by 0.4523%,
 and 1.8398% respectively; and the base variant of by 0.3920%,
 and 0.3393% respectively. The respective confusion matrices
 for the HCRL-CAN-FD and HCRL-B-CAN have also been
 reported in Fig. 5, and 6. Apart from all-class classification,
 this research also presents the focused single-class attack
 detection (i.e., whether the attack is performed by injected,
 or normal message flow). Corresponding to each of the
three classes each in HCRL-CAN-FD, and HCRL-B-CAN) of four malicious flows in HCRL-CHD the single-class attack
the network flows, compared to six state-of-the-art intrusion detection results have been presented in Table VII, VIII, IX,
detection systems. and X. Similarly, Tables XI, XII, and XIII presents the
1084 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE XVI
 I MPLICATIONS OF D IFFERENT C OMPUTATIONAL L AYERS FOR THE C LASSIFICATION P ROCESS

focused single-class attack detection metrics for HCRL-CAN- VII. C ONCLUSION
FD (three malicious flows); and Tables XIV, and XV presents We have proposed RISK-4-AUTO, a collection of four
the focused attack detection metrics for HCRL-B-CAN (two deep-learning-based models for the classification of in-vehicle
malicious flows). For each of the tables, one can observe, that network traffic. The models under RISK-4-AUTO combine the
they outperform the state-of-the-art models when evaluated novel Kolmogorov-Arnold Network (enabling trainable actisingle-class by ≈2.5535% on an average, with a deviation of vation functions) with the Residual Network architecture. The
0.4596. models were applied on the open source HCRL Datasets, and
 when evaluated based on their performance compared to other
 state-of-the-art intrusion detection systems, an ≈1.0163%
 improvement on an all-class classification, and ≈2.5535%
B. Ablation Study improvement on focused malicious flow detection was
 We performed an ablation study to judge the impact of observed. Additionally, these models can be extended to
the different computational layers in the neural networks other in-vehicle networks, e.g., Automotive Ethernet, Serial
considered by us. Table XVI presents the layer-wise ablation Peripheral Interface, Safety Systems, etc.
study with respect to the accuracy (validation), TTTr (sec.), Although the proposed set of RISK-4-AUTO models can
TTTe (sec.) and the model size (kB). Although it is common work well for the ten different attacks across three datasets, it
practice to present the model sizes in terms of the number cannot be generalized for completely out-of-the-box attacks.
of parameters, we feel that from an implementation point of To the best of our knowledge, except GIDS [12], no other
view, model size (in kB) would enable the practitioner to models are generalizable beyond the attacks they have been
make a better choice of the model based on their requirements. trained for, and even in GIDS the GAN-based augmentation
Prioritizing on the model accuracy (as a primary decider), has been reported to work well on attacks, similar to those
a color-code of green , yellow , and red is adopted on which the models have been trained. Our future research
denoting significant improvement, negligible changes, and will be directed towards detecting fabricated message based
degradation respectively. attacks.
 Further, the collection of four different models allows the
practitioner to make an informed choice of the model they
might need, based on requirements. If the need of the hour R EFERENCES
is achieving more accuracy, without much constraints on the [1] M. Kaiser, U. Schaefer, and G. Haaf, “Electronic control
spatiotemporal requirements of the model, complex variants unit,” in Automotive Mechatronics: Automotive Networking, Driving
(Batch-Normalized Residual KAN (R ES -KAN BN ) and Dual- Stability Systems, Electronics. Wiesbaden, Germany: Springer, 2014,
 pp. 18–43.
Residual-KAN (R ES -KAN II ) should be considered. But, if it
 [2] G. M. Smith. “What is can bus (controller area network) and how it
is needed to implement a robust, lightweight system, Residual compares to other vehicle bus networks.” Accessed: Dec. 2024. [Online].
KAN (R ES -KAN) can be thought of. Available: https://dewesoft.com/blog/what-is-can-bus
DUTTA et al.: RISK-4-A UTO 1085

 [3] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion [26] T. Shapira, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is as
 detection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun.
 vol. 21, Jan. 2020, Art. no. 100198. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2019, pp. 680–687.
 [4] L. B. Othmane, L. Dhulipala, M. Abdelkhalek, N. Multari, and [27] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification
 M. Govindarasu, “On the performance of detecting injection of fab- with mini-flowpic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas.
 ricated messages into the can bus,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
 Comput., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 468–481, Jan./Feb. 2020. [28] M. Z. Alom et al., “The history began from AlexNet: A comprehensive
 [5] A. Anwar, A. Anwar, L. Moukahal, and M. Zulkernine, “Security survey on deep learning approaches,” 2018, arXiv:1803.01164.
 assessment of in-vehicle communication protocols,” Veh. Commun., [29] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
 vol. 44, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 100639. with deep convolutional neural networks,” Commun. ACM, vol. 60, no. 6,
 [6] F. Arena, G. Pau, and A. Severino, “A review on IEEE 802.11p for pp. 84–90, 2017.
 intelligent transportation systems,” J. Sens. Actuat. Netw., vol. 9, no. 2, [30] K. He, R. Girshick, and P. Dollár, “Rethinking ImageNet prep. 22, 2020. training,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019,
 [7] Y. Wang, A. Ahmed, B. Krishnamachari, and K. Psounis, “IEEE 802.11p pp. 4918–4927.
 performance evaluation and protocol enhancement,” in Proc. IEEE Int. [31] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition chal-
 Conf. Veh. Electron. Safety, 2008, pp. 317–322. lenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 115, pp. 211–252, Dec. 2015.
 [8] A. R. Bharadwaj, M. K. Akhilesh, H. A. Abhiram, and R. Ravish, [32] S. Hochreiter, “The vanishing gradient problem during learning recurrent
 “Popcorn attack: Intrusion into can remotely through android application neural nets and problem solutions,” Int. J. Uncertainty, Fuzziness Knowl.
 of infotainment system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Knowl. Eng. Commun. Syst. Based Syst., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 107–116, 1998.
 (ICKECS), vol. 1, 2024, pp. 1–6. [33] G. Philipp, D. Song, and J. G. Carbonell, “The exploding gradient
 [9] S. Tariq, S. Lee, H. K. Kim, and S. S. Woo, “Detecting in-vehicle CAN problem demystified-definition, prevalence, impact, origin, tradeoffs, and
 message attacks using heuristics and RNNs,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Inf. solutions,” 2017, arXiv:1712.05577.
 Oper. Technol. Secur. Syst., 2019, pp. 39–45. [34] A. Dutta et al. “RISK-4- AUTO codebase.” Accessed: Dec. 2024. https://
[10] S. Tariq, S. Lee, and S. S. Woo, “CANTransfer: Transfer learning based github.com/Anurag-Dutta/RISK-4-Auto,
 intrusion detection on a controller area network using convolutional
 LSTM network,” in Proc. 35th Annu. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., 2020,
 pp. 1048–1055.
[11] A. R. Javed, S. Ur Rehman, M. U. Khan, M. Alazab, and T. Reddy,
 “CANintelliiDS: Detecting in-vehicle intrusion attacks on a controller
 area network using CNN and attention-based GRU,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1456–1466, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
[12] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion Anurag Dutta (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 detection system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. received the bachelor’s degree in computer science
 Privacy, Security Trust (PST), 2018, pp. 1–6. and engineering from the Government College of
[13] J. Ashraf, A. D. Bakhshi, N. Moustafa, H. Khurshid, A. Javed, Engineering and Textile Technology, Serampore,
 and A. Beheshti, “Novel deep learning-enabled LSTM autoencoder India. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
 architecture for discovering anomalous events from intelligent trans- with the Department of Computer Science and
 portation systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, Engineering, IIT Kharagpur. His research interests
 pp. 4507–4518, Jul. 2021. include time-series forecasting, computer vision,
 image processing, and the applications of artificial
[14] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
 intelligence in digital forensics.
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2016,
 pp. 770–778.
[15] H.-K. Lim, J.-B. Kim, J.-S. Heo, K. Kim, Y.-G. Hong, and
 Y.-H. Han, “Packet-based network traffic classification using deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Inf. Commun. (ICAIIC), 2019,
 pp. 46–51.
[16] C. Su, Y. Liu, and X. Xie, “Fine-grained traffic classification based
 on improved residual convolutional network in software defined
 networks,” IEEE Latin America Trans., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 565–572, Sangita Roy (Member, IEEE) received the
 Apr. 2023. B.Tech. degree from the West Bengal University
[17] Z. Liu et al., “KAN: Kolmogorov-Arnold networks,” 2024, of Technology and the M.Tech. degree from
 arXiv:2404.19756. the Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology,
[18] A. D. M. Ibrahum, Z. Shang, and J.-E. Hong, “How resilient are Bhubaneswar, and the Ph.D. degree from IIT Patna.
 Kolmogorov–Arnold networks in classification tasks? A robustness She is currently an Assistant Professor with the
 investigation,” Appl. Sci., vol. 14, no. 22, 2024, Art. no. 10173. Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
[19] M. Abd Elaziz, I. A. Fares, and A. O. Aseeri, “CKAN: Convolutional Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology,
 Kolmogorov–Arnold networks model for intrusion detection in IoT Patiala, India. Her research interests include comenvironment,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 134837–134851, 2024. puter network, network security, image processing,
[20] H. K. Kim et al. “HCRL-car hacking dataset.” 2020. Accessed: and deep learning.
 Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/
 car-hacking-dataset
[21] H. K. Kim. “HCRL-can with flexible data rate dataset.” 2022. Accessed:
 Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/
 can-fd-intrusion-dataset
[22] H. Kim. “HCRL-B-can dataset.” 2022. Accessed: Dec. 2024. [Online].
 Available: https://ocslab.hksecurity.net/Datasets/b-can-intrusion-dataset,
[23] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered Rajat Subhra Chakraborty (Senior Member,
 hybrid intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet IEEE) is a Professor with the Department of
 Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022. Computer Science and Engineering, IIT Kharagpur.
[24] P. F. De Araujo-Filho, A. J. Pinheiro, G. Kaddoum, D. R. Campelo, His area of research is hardware security, VLSI
 and F. L. Soares, “An efficient intrusion prevention system for can: design, and digital content protection through water-
 Hindering cyber-attacks with a low-cost platform,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, marking. He is a Senior Member of ACM.
 pp. 166855–166869, 2021.
[25] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021.