3646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 RL-ACID: Reinforcement Learning-Optimized
 Adaptive Causal Discovery for Robust Anomaly
 Detection in Industrial Systems
 Hechen Yang , Yu Yao , Member, IEEE, Licheng Yang , and Wei Yang

 Abstract—Anomaly detection is essential for the security
of industrial control systems. However, dynamic operating conditions introduce nonstationarity and time-varying
causal structures, degrading performance and undermining interpretability. To address this, we propose RL-ACID,
a lightweight reinforcement learning framework for adaptive causal discovery. It reformulates anomaly detection
as sequential causal discovery, introducing the first unified architecture that integrates lightweight reinforcement
learning-based search with causal clustering to resolve Fig. 1. Causal structure evolution of sensors V1 –V5 across operational
the adaptability, efficiency, and interpretability tradeoff. Our conditions (HIL-HAI dataset, PCMCI+ algorithm). Edge thickness deframework employs a joint time-frequency encoder to ex- notes causal strength. (V1 : Boiler flow; V2 : Pressure; V3 : Valve; V4 :
 Vibration; V5 : Water flow).
tract and construct candidate causal graphs. Building upon
this, we design the causal reinforcement learning-based
lightweight search algorithm, which formulates graph ex- to system reliability and security emerge. In ICS, anomalies
ploration as a sequential decision process under sparsity and acyclicity constraints, enabling iterative causal and faults may originate from equipment degradation, malicious
structure optimization. To further enhance adaptability in attacks, or operational mistakes. These disturbances have the podynamic environments, we introduce a causal clustering tential to rapidly propagate across interdependent components,
module that softly assigns time-varying graphs to latent with the consequence of significant system failures [1].
operational modes through structural experts, thereby In order to ensure the stable operation of ICS, it is essential
distinguishing normal operational fluctuations from true
anomalies. Extensive experiments on multiple industrial to accurately identify and interpret abnormalities, which have
benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of RL- become pivotal tasks. In recent years, data-driven methods have
ACID. Our framework not only achieves higher accuracy made significant progress in anomaly detection, primarily based
than baselines but also provides interpretable anomaly on machine learning and deep learning models, which show
analysis through causal path tracing. better detection performance [2]. However, such approaches still
 Index Terms —Anomaly detection, causal discovery, in- face significant challenges in industrial real-world scenarios.
dustrial control system (ICS), reinforcement learning (RL). The majority of models are predicated on statistical correlation
 between system variables, with the underlying causal relationships being ignored. This reduces interpretability and obstructs
 I. INTRODUCTION
 root cause analysis.
 NDUSTRIAL control systems (ICS) are an essential compo-
I nent of modern infrastructure. They facilitate the automated
control and monitoring of intricate physical processes in vital
 Furthermore, it is noteworthy that varying operating conditions in ICS often lead to dynamic changes in the underlying
 causal structure [3]. We investigated this with the hardwaresectors, such as energy, manufacturing, and transportation. How- in-the-loop based augmented industrial control system security
ever, as ICS environments grow in scale and complexity and in- (HAI) dataset [4], which contains data from a boiler, a turbine,
tegrate more deeply with information networks, new challenges and a water treatment system. We applied the Peter–Clark
 momentary conditional independence plus (PCMCI+) [5] algorithm to perform causal discovery analysis, focusing on five
 Received 31 October 2025; revised 12 December 2025; accepted 30
December 2025. Date of publication 27 January 2026; date of current representative sensors (V1 to V5 ) across three operational modes
version 6 May 2026. Paper no. TII-25-7720. (Corresponding author: to illustrate causal drift. As shown in Fig. 1, both the causal
Yu Yao.) connections and their strength, indicated by edge thickness,
 Hechen Yang, Yu Yao, and Licheng Yang are with the College of Computer Science and Engineering, Northeastern University, changed substantially across different operating modes. These
Shenyang 110169, China (e-mail: 2490267@stu.neu.edu.cn; yaoyu@ changes reflect system-wide adaptive behavior. Our observamail.neu.edu.cn; 2310749@stu.neu.edu.cn). tions were consistent with sensor descriptions documented in
 Wei Yang is with the College of Software, Northeastern University,
Shenyang 110169, China (e-mail: yangwei@mail.neu.edu.cn). the HAI literature, confirming that causal drift is a common
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2026.3650787 rather than an isolated phenomenon.
1941-0050 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3647

 Most current anomaly detection models assume that train- effectiveness in resource-constrained systems like ICS, espeing and monitoring data are independent and identically dis- cially for sustained anomaly detection tasks, remains limited.
tributed [6]. However, real ICS exhibit nonstationary behavior Based on the above analysis, we identify three major chaldue to their complex structure and variable load conditions. This lenges in current research: M1: Causal drift: Conventional
distribution drift compromises model robustness and generaliza- static models and anomaly detection methods cannot adapt to
tion. Therefore, it is essential to develop adaptive models that dynamic industrial settings. Time-varying causal relationships
can track causal changes over time to enable reliable anomaly among sensors reduce model robustness and lead to performance
detection in dynamic ICS environments. degradation in complex ICS. M2: High computational cost:
 Current anomaly detection approaches fall into statistical and Methods such as causal discovery and RL require substantial
machine learning categories [7]. Traditional statistical meth- computational resources. This makes them difficult to deploy
ods identify anomalies by measuring deviations from normal in practical industrial anomaly detection scenarios where effibaselines using standard deviation, distance, or density metrics. ciency is critical. M3: Lack of interpretability: Most models rely
Techniques like wavelet analysis perform well in periodic sim- on statistical correlations, which fail to capture the underlying
ulations but struggle with the high-dimensional, nonstationary causal mechanisms of anomalies. This limitation hinders the
nature of ICS data, making it difficult to capture the complex understanding of anomaly propagation and root cause analysis
sensor interactions inherent to such environments. in complex systems.
 Deep learning advances ICS anomaly detection through neu- To overcome these limitations, we propose reinforceral networks and convolutional architectures that capture com- ment learning-optimized adaptive causal discovery for robust
plex temporal patterns [8]. However, these models learn sta- anomaly detection (RL-ACID), a lightweight and adaptive
tistical correlations rather than causal mechanisms, limiting causal discovery framework for industrial systems. As illustrated
interpretability and constraining the ability to explain anomaly in Fig. 2, our framework comprises three key components. First,
generation and propagation. we design a sparsity-aware time-frequency transformer encoder
 Graph-based methods leverage graph neural networks to cap- to capture both transient dynamics and long-range periodic
ture interdependencies among sensors [9]. Recent advances have dependencies in sensor data. This encoder generates compact
introduced dynamic line graphs [10] and federated contrastive multiscale representations, which are then processed by a probaframeworks [11] to enhance intrusion detection in network sys- bilistic decoder to produce an initial weighted adjacency matrix.
tems, focusing on topological interactions. These approaches This matrix serves as a data-informed prior for subsequent causal
are effective at modeling topological interactions for network search (see Section III-A).
intrusion detection. However, in dynamic industrial control en- Second, we introduce the causal reinforcement learning-based
vironments where causal relationships evolve with operational lightweight (CaRLite) algorithm, a lightweight RL-based causal
conditions, a key challenge remains in adaptively discovering search mechanism. It formulates graph exploration as a sethe underlying time-varying graph structures from data, rather quential decision process, guided by a reward function that
than relying on predefined or static assumptions. promotes data fidelity, acyclicity, and sparsity. Through hier-
 Causal discovery methods have gained attention for en- archical experience replay and causal drift detection, CaRLite
hancing interpretability in anomaly detection. While tradi- efficiently mitigates causal drift (M1) while maintaining high
tional constraint-based [12] and score-based approaches like computational efficiency (M3) (see Section III-B).
the PCMCI+ algorithm infer causality from correlations un- Finally, to further handle time-varying dependencies, we deder strong assumptions, they typically presume static causal sign a causal clustering module that monitors structural drift by
structures—limiting their applicability in dynamic industrial maintaining a set of representative causal graphs learned across
environments. Recent work by Chen et al. [13] introduced a root different operating modes. A causal inference-based anomaly
cause identification method using causal graphs and maximum detection module quantifies deviations from expected behavior
spanning trees, while Qiu et al. [14] proposed a knowledge graph and traces causal paths, offering interpretable insights into root
and causal mining approach for root cause analysis. However, causes (M3) (see Section III-C).
these methods often rely on static causal models, which may The main contributions of this article are as follows.
miss evolving relationships and lead to undetected anomalies. 1) Novel integration paradigm: We propose RL-ACID, the
Furthermore, within ICS, large-scale combinatorial searches and first framework that integrates RL-based causal discovery with
repeated statistical evaluations on high-dimensional data result sparse attention for industrial anomaly detection, enabling synin high computational costs. ergistic adaptation between temporal patterns and structural
 In recent years, reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged constraints.
as a promising approach for dynamic environments due to its 2) Lightweight causal discovery: We design CaRLite, a
inherent capacity for sequential decision-making and adapta- constrained RL algorithm that achieves 68% efficiency gains
tion [15]. This makes it particularly well-suited for scenarios through intelligent experience management, resolving the
where the underlying system properties evolve over time [16]. complexity-deployability tradeoff in causal learning.
However, the RL methods often focus on myopic optimiza- 3) Dynamic adaptation: We develop a causal clustering modtion at each step, which demands substantial computational ule that autonomously distinguishes structural drift from normal
resources through iterative feedback and can hinder their abil- fluctuations, enabling continuous adaptation to evolving indusity to track long-term structural dynamics. Consequently, their trial processes.
3648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

Fig. 2. Architecture of the RL-ACID model.

 4) Theoretical-practical validation: Extensive experiments TABLE I
 COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ANOMALY DETECTION METHODS AGAINST KEY
demonstrate RL-ACID’s comprehensive superiority in detection REQUIREMENTS FOR DYNAMIC ICS (BOLD VALUES HIGHLIGHT RL-ACID AS
accuracy, interpretability, and computational efficiency, con- THE PROPOSED METHOD)
firming robust performance under dynamic ICS conditions.

 II. PROBLEM STATEMENT, MOTIVATION, AND NOVELTY
A. Problem Formulation
 Dynamic industrial environments present three fundamental
challenges for reliable anomaly detection: causal drift (M1),
computational constraints (M2), and interpretability demands
(M3). As illustrated in the example of Fig. 1, where sensor
relationships evolve with operational modes, these challenges
necessitate reformulation anomaly detection as a time-varying
causal discovery and adaptive learning problem.
 Formally, we consider a nonstationary multivariate time series by the comparative analysis of existing methods presented in
X ∈ RT ×D , collected from an ICS with D sensors over T Table I.
time steps. This time series exhibits inherent nonstationarity Statistical methods assume stationarity and capture only cordue to dynamic operating conditions. The objective of this relations, failing to address the M1. Deep learning approaches
work is twofold. First, we aim to learn a time-varying causal operate as opaque models without causal reasoning, lacking
graph Gt = (V, Et ) that captures dynamic dependencies among M3. Graph neural networks typically rely on static graph strucsensors, where V denotes the set of sensor nodes and Et repre- tures, while static causal discovery methods cannot handle timesents the time-evolving causal edges. Second, we seek to derive varying causality. Although dynamic causal models incorporate
a lightweight and interpretable detection function f (X, Gt ), temporal dynamics, they suffer from M2 and linearity conwhich reliably distinguishes true anomalies from normal op- straints. RL methods demonstrate adaptability but lack causal
erational fluctuations while providing causal explanations for interpretability and exhibit high computational costs. The critiits decisions. cal research gap identified through this analysis is the absence of
 This formulation leads to three key requirements that address methods that can simultaneously achieve adaptive causal discovchallenges M1–M3. Adaptive causal discovery (R1) requires ery, computational efficiency, and interpretable reasoning. This
tracking the evolution of Et over time without relying on sta- limitation directly motivates the development of our framework
tionarity assumptions, thereby addressing causal drift. Computa- to bridge these interdependent requirements.
tional efficiency (R2) necessitates a lightweight learning framework suitable for resource-constrained ICS edge environments. C. Novelty
Interpretable inference (R3) entails that anomaly decisions be
 The novelty of the RL-ACID framework is defined not merely
explainable through causal paths in Gt to support root cause
 by enhanced accuracy, but by its integrated causal architecture
diagnosis.
 that systematically resolves the three intertwined challenges
 (R1–R3) in a unified, adaptive manner.
B. Research Motivation
 Architectural integration: RL-ACID represents the first
 The primary motivation for this work arises from a systematic framework that integrates lightweight reinforcement learninglimitation observed in current methods: their inability to ful- based causal search (CaRLite), time-frequency causal encodfill requirements R1–R3 concurrently. As demonstrated by the ing, and causal clustering into an end-to-end pipeline. This
analysis in Section I and illustrated in Fig. 1, this shortcoming holistic design consciously addresses adaptation, efficiency, and
remains a persistent challenge, despite advances reported in interpretability as interdependent objectives rather than optimizindividual aspects of prior studies. This gap is further illustrated ing them in isolation.
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3649

 Technical innovations: At the component level, we introduce
three key innovations. For adaptive causal discovery (R1), we
develop a causal clustering module with structural experts and
soft assignment that enables unsupervised identification and
smooth switching between time-varying causal regimes. For
computational efficiency (R2), we design structured sparse attention [lightweight industrial sparse attention for time-series
modeling (LISA)] and prior-constrained RL search (CaRLite)
to achieve algorithmic-level optimizations suitable for edge
deployment. For interpretable inference (R3), the framework
centers on causal graphs as intermediate representations, incorporating causal path tracing to transition from anomaly detection
to root-cause diagnosis.
 The subsequent section details the methodological implementation of the RL-ACID framework, building upon these
foundational contributions.

 Fig. 3. Architecture of the encoder–decoder model for causal structure
 modeling.
 III. RL-BASED ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK FOR
 CAUSAL DISCOVERY
A. Data Coding and Feature Representation
 In causal discovery tasks, high-quality time-series representations are crucial for ensuring the accuracy of structural searches.
In ICS time series, it has been shown that combining timedomain and frequency-domain features enhances feature extraction [17]. To more effectively capture both temporal and spectral
characteristics in multivariate industrial time series, we propose
a time-frequency enhanced transformer encoder–decoder architecture as a unified framework for causal feature modeling and
causal graph generation. By integrating a self-attention mechanism with directed acyclic graph (DAG) structural constraints,
the architecture effectively reveals potential causal relationships Fig. 4. Architecture for causal discovery with reinforcement learningoptimized dynamic structure learning.
among variables.
 Encoder: Time–frequency causal feature extraction. To enhance the characterization of anomalous causal pathways, we spectral features are concatenated with the time-domain repintroduce a hybrid encoder that integrates time–frequency anal- resentations, yielding a unified time–frequency feature vector
ysis with temporal modeling. Raw multivariate sensor signals that provides causally informative input to the transformer.
are segmented into local blocks Xt ∈ RW ×D using a sliding LISA: Industrial monitoring data exhibit quasi-periodic patwindow. Each block is transformed into the frequency domain terns and response delays, with most causal influences confined
via fast Fourier transform, producing a complex-valued rep- to short temporal neighborhoods and only a few long-cycle
resentation F(t) ∈ CW ×D . The amplitude spectrum |F(t)| is effects at characteristic lags. Conventional self-attention capnormalized to improve robustness to temporal misalignments tures these dependencies at high computational cost—scaling
and capture global spectral structures. Such time–frequency as O(W 2 D2 ) for long windows or many sensors. To reduce
representations have been shown to complement time-domain complexity, LISA employs a structurally guided sparse selffeatures by modeling long-range dependencies and dynamic attention mechanism [see Fig. 3(a)]. For each token (t, i), a
couplings in nonstationary industrial processes [18]. The re- binary mask M restricts attention to (i) a local temporal band
sulting spectral representation is fused with temporal features of radius r around t for short-term causal interactions and (ii)
to form a hybrid encoding. This joint representation enhances dilated sampling points with stride Δ for delayed and long-range
multiscale feature characterization while preserving both tempo- periodic effects.
ral dynamics and spectral regularities, providing a stronger basis Formally, the input features H ∈ Rn×d are projected into
for identifying stable periodic causal relationships essential for query, key, and value matrices using learnable weight matridownstream inference in complex industrial environments. ces WQ , WK , WV , where WQ , WK ∈ Rd×dK and WV ∈
 Subsequently, a multiscale frequency-domain convolutional Rd×dV . The sparse self-attention for the ith head is then commodule extracts discriminative spectral features, emphasizing puted as
  
oscillatory patterns and multivariable interactions through hi- Qi K
 Headi = Softmax √ i
 + log Mi Vi (1)
erarchically stacked convolutional operations. The extracted dK
3650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

where log Mi assigns 0 to valid entries and −∞ to masked po- Algorithm 1: CaRLite: Lightweight Causal Structure
sitions so excluded interactions are not included in the softmax. Search.
 With band radius r, dilated count K, and optional subsampling stride p, LISA ensures that each query attends to
at most B ≈ (2r + K) + W/p keys—typically B W D.
This reduces the computational complexity from O(W 2 D2 ) to
O(W DB) while retaining the ability to capture both immediate
causal dynamics and delayed periodic effects that are characteristic of nonstationary industrial environments and critical for
downstream causal discovery.
 Decoder: Causal graph structure generation: The specialized
decoder module [see Fig. 3(b)], built upon a time-frequency
encoder for multivariate ICS, generates causal structures from
the encoded representations. Unlike traditional decoders used
for regression or classification tasks, this module generates
directed edges directly between variables to construct a directed
DAG that drives RL optimization. This design ensures a tight
coupling between causal modeling and data representation. The
decoder efficiently converts the joint time-frequency representation into causal relationships to form the initial causal graph
G = (V, E). Although not based on traditional causal discovery
algorithms, the graph represents plausible causal relationships
because the edges encode directional dependencies inferred
from time-frequency features. Subsequent optimization using
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and linear parent-child framework comprises three core components: an environment
modeling further supports interpreting this graph as a causal model, an agent model, and the causal RL-based structure search
structure. (CaRLite) algorithm. Integrating them via hierarchical experi-
 Given the encoder outputs [Enc1 , Enc2 , . . ., Encn ], which en- ence management, CaRLite achieves a 68% gain in computacode both temporal and frequency-domain dependencies across tional efficiency through intelligent reuse.
variables, the decoder estimates pairwise causal relations via a 1) Environment model: The RL environment models the adapneural scoring mechanism. For any variable pair (i, j), the edge tive causal discovery process as a dynamic agent-environment
existence probability is computed as interaction (Algorithm 1, line 3–6). Within this framework,
   
 Aij = Bernoulli σ u tanh(W1 Enci + W2 Encj ) (2) the agent iteratively explores and refines candidate DAGs, receiving feedback after each structural change. To enable stable
where W1 , W2 are learnable linear transformation matrices,
 and efficient policy learning, the environment provides a wellu is the causality score vector, and σ(·) denotes the Sigmoid
 structured state representation (Algorithm 1, line 3) and a reward
function. This process models the probability for each edge in
 mechanism (Algorithm 1, line 6) that guides the agent toward
the adjacency matrix A. To enforce acyclicity, a smooth DAG
 uncovering causal relationships that are both fine-grained and
constraint [19] is applied during training. After training, we
 reflective of the current process.
retain the top-k edges with the highest probabilities and project
 State-space construction (Algorithm 1, line 3) integrates the
them onto an acyclic graph. This produces a high-confidence
 candidate adjacency matrix with edge-level descriptors φij ,
coarse causal graph that not only confines the initial search
 which combine structural features, score-based metrics, decoder
space for the subsequent RL but also significantly enhances
 priors, and DAG constraints. This design provides the agent with
computational efficiency without compromising detection peressential structural and statistical cues while keeping per-step
formance. This decoder also acts as the policy model in the
 computation tractable.
RL framework, whose edge probabilities define a structured
 Reward mechanism (Algorithm 1, line 6): When the agent
action space and are optimized via policy gradient methods to
 modifies the graph structure, the environment returns a commaximize a reward function combining causal plausibility and
 posite reward that balances model fit (BIC score), sparsity (0 -
detection performance (see Section III-B).
 norm), and acyclicity (NOTEARS metric). The reward leverages
 BIC decomposability for efficient local rescoring, delivering im-
B. RL-Based Causal Structure Search mediate feedback while maintaining computational efficiency.
 We formulate causal discovery under dynamic industrial con- 2) Agent model: The agent iteratively refines a DAG by
ditions as a sequential decision process. To tackle causal drift selecting edge operations (addition, deletion, retention) based on
and computational complexity, the proposed RL framework is the structured state (Algorithm 1, line 5). We employ a compact
built around a structured environment, a sparsity-aware reward, hierarchical policy network that preserves structural information
and an experience replay system, which collectively enable an while avoiding redundant computation, complemented by an
adaptive and efficient search (see Fig. 4 and Algorithm 1). The adaptive temperature-decay mechanism (Algorithm 1, line 10)
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3651

that dynamically balances exploration and exploitation through- relationships and is subsequently passed to downstream modules
out training. for causal clustering and anomaly detection.
 3) CaRLite algorithm: Algorithm 1 outlines the complete
causal structure search procedure, implementing an efficient RL C. Causal Clustering Module and Anomaly Detection
process for causal discovery. The algorithm accepts an initial
 To address causal drift under varying system conditions, we
DAG G0 from the encoder–decoder module, a candidate edge
 introduce a distribution routing mechanism that encodes each
pool E0 , and a local BIC oracle, and returns a refined DAG Ĝ as
 causal graph into a low-dimensional structural embedding and
output.
 softly assigns it to M latent causal experts. Each expert captures
 The procedure initializes the policy network πϑ , a hierara distinct structural regime, and their outputs are weighted and
chical experience buffer B, and the temperature parameter λ
 fused to support robust inference.
(line 1). The main search loop (line 2) iterates until convergence,
 Distribution router: Each RL-generated adjacency matrix
with each iteration executing the following steps in sequence.
 Ĝ ∈ {0, 1}d×d is first flattened and encoded by a two-layer MLP
First, a structured state representation is constructed by comto produce a structural embedding
bining the current adjacency matrix with edge-level descriptors
(line 3). Based on this state, the policy network samples an zt = MLP(Flatten(Ĝ)) ∈ Rd . (5)
edge-modification action (line 4), which is applied to update the The resulting structural embedding zt ∈ R is projected to
 d
graph while enforcing acyclicity constraints (line 5). Following M latent structural experts using a lightweight two-layer gating
each structural change, a composite reward is computed using network
the BIC score and structural penalties (line 6). To manage
 Ht = U2 · ReLU(U1 · zt ) ∈ RM (6)
past experiences effectively, an experience replay mechanism
 dh ×M
is employed (lines 7–8). This mechanism stores transitions in a where U1 ∈ R d×dh
 and U2 ∈ R are learnable parameters.
tiered buffer according to their learning stability and retrieves Here, d is the dimension of the structural embedding, dh is the
them for policy updates based on the detected magnitude of hidden dimension of the gating network, and M denotes the
causal drift. Subsequently, the policy parameters are updated number of structural experts.
using the REINFORCE algorithm with a baseline (line 9), The model then computes a sparse routing distribution over
while the temperature parameter λ is annealed to balance ex- the top-K selected experts via a masked softmax, assigning a
 (i)
ploration and exploitation (line 10). Convergence is detected normalized weight wt to each expert based on its compatibilwhen no performance improvement occurs for L consecutive ity with the current causal graph. This deterministic approach
steps (lines 11–13), at which point the search terminates. Fi- clusters time-varying structures without stochastic reparameternally, nonpositive edges are pruned while preserving acyclicity, ization, improving stability and interpretability in nonstationary
yielding the optimized DAG Ĝ. environments.
 The policy maximizes the expected return under the compos- Expert prediction and aggregation: Each expert Ei maintains
ite reward R(G) = −[SBIC (G) + Φ(G)]. Here, SBIC (G) penal- a linear mechanism fi (·) to predict the target variable xj from
izes model complexity while assessing fit, given by its parent set paj
 d    (i) (i) (i)
 RSSi x̂j = wj · paj + bj (7)
 SBIC (G) = m log + dθ log m (3)
 m
 where wj ∈ R|paj | is the expert-specific weight vector and bj
 i=1 (i) (i)

where RSSi = m k=1 (xki − x̂ki ) is the residual sum of squares
 2
 is a learnable bias term.
 d
for node i, and dθ = i=1 |Pa(i)| is the total number of parent The final prediction is the weighted sum of expert outputs
nodes across the graph. The structural penalty Φ(G) is defined 
 K
 (i) (i)
as x̂j = wt · x̂j . (8)
 / DAGs) + λ2 h(A) + μ A 0
 Φ(G) = λ1 I(G ∈ (4) i=1
 This expert-driven routing and fusion strategy allows the
where h(A) = trace(eA ) − d enforces the DAG constraint
 model to adapt to time-varying causal structures, enhancing
through a smooth acyclicity metric, and the 0 -norm A 0
 robustness, and interpretability under nonstationary dynamics.
promotes sparsity.
 After the RL search converges and yields the final causal graph
 The policy network employs a lightweight structure compris-
 Ĝ, the anomaly detection module is trained separately. Given
ing only 3–4 layers with cross-layer feature pathways, designed
 the discovered graph, the reconstruction network predicts future
to preserve multiscale structural cues while maintaining effi- (Ĝ)
ciency. Training is stabilized by an adaptive temperature-decay sensor values X̂t+1 , and the prediction loss is defined as
mechanism λ, which ensures a smooth transition from explo- 1 
 N
 (Ĝ) 2
ration to exploitation as the policy converges. Lpred = X̂t+1 − Xt+1 2 . (9)
 N t=1
 This structured approach enables CaRLite to achieve a 68%
gain in computational efficiency through intelligent experience This term measures the sum of squared prediction errors across
reuse, while directly promoting the discovery of sparse, acyclic, all sensors between predicted and observed sensor readings and
and high-fidelity causal graphs for dynamic industrial envi- is used only to train the anomaly detection MLP and the causal
ronments. The resulting DAG Ĝ captures time-varying causal clustering experts.
3652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

D. Theoretical Foundations and Analysis TABLE II
 DATASET CHARACTERISTICS AND OPERATIONAL COMPLEXITY
 To establish a rigorous mathematical foundation for RL-
ACID, we formulate its core objective as a constrained multiobjective optimization problem that jointly learns time-varying
causal structures {Gt } and the anomaly detection function f
 min E[Ldet ] + λ1 Gt 0 + λ2 RDAG (Gt ) + λ3 Ω(f ). (10)
 {Gt },f

 In this formulation, Ldet quantifies the reconstruction error for
detection accuracy, the 0 -norm enforces graph sparsity, RDAG
represents the NOTEARS constraint ensuring acyclicity, and WADI: A large-scale water distribution system with 123 vari-
Ω(f ) controls model complexity. The coefficients λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ≥ 0 ables and 16 days of data (14 normal, 2 attack). Its higher dimenformally balance the inherent tradeoffs among these objectives, sionality and dynamic conditions pose challenges for consistent
which correspond to the core challenges M1–M3. It is important modeling in multistage environments.
to note that in our framework, these tradeoffs are intrinsically HIL-HAI: A hardware-in-the-loop ICS simulation with four
addressed through dedicated algorithmic designs rather than coupled processes and 59 variables. It includes 10 days of normal
manual tuning of independent parameters. data and 5.5 days of attack scenarios. Its frequent condition
 This formulation provides the basis for three key theoretical changes demand strong adaptability to structural variations.
innovations in RL-ACID. First, causal discovery is reformulated Version 1.0 is used.
as a constrained RL problem, where an agent’s policy explores PSD: Phasor measurement unit (PMU) traces from a benchthe space of DAGs by optimizing a reward derived from the mark power grid with 37 operating scenarios covering normal
negative of the cost terms in (10). This approach avoids the com- operation, natural disturbances and three types of cyber-physical
binatorial explosion inherent in traditional score-based searches, attacks. For our study, these scenarios are grouped into normal
directly addressing the efficiency challenge (M2). Second, the and abnormal to perform binary anomaly detection.
integration of the LISA sparse attention mechanism with causal TE: A highly nonlinear and tightly coupled chemical process
graph learning induces a synergistic coregularization effect. The simulation with 52 variables and 21 diverse fault types, including
attention mechanism focuses on salient temporal dependencies step changes, slow drifts, and valve failures. It provides a longto inform the structural prior, while the evolving causal graph horizon and imbalanced benchmark for evaluating anomaly
provides feedback to refine attention patterns. This synergy detection in complex industrial environments.
enhances the model’s adaptability to temporal dynamics (M1). Baseline: To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of
Third, the causal clustering module addresses nonstationarity the proposed RL-ACID framework, we compare it with repby modeling the data as a mixture model of distinct operational resentative baselines from both anomaly detection and causal
regimes. This allows the model to identify invariant causal mech- discovery. For anomaly detection, we include Deep Robust
anisms, P (Y |PA(Y )), across regimes, providing a principled One-Class Classification (DROCC) [24], a semisupervised
method to distinguish true anomalies from operational drift. deep model that learns a compact decision boundary around
 These theoretical guarantees collectively provide the analyti- normal samples; Graph Deviation Network (GDN) [25], a
cal foundation for the empirical results in Section IV, confirming graph-neural-network-based detector modeling neighborhood
that RL-ACID’s performance stems from its principled design dependencies among sensors; Graph-Augmented Normalizing
rather than empirical coincidences. Flow (GANF) [26], Multivariate Time series anomaly detection via dynamic Graph and entityaware normalizing Flow
 IV. EXPERIMENTS (MTGFlow) [27], and a Graph Mixture of Experts (Graph-
 MoE) [28], which represent state-of-the-art unsupervised graph-
A. Experiments Settings based anomaly detectors; and Anomaly Root Cause Analy-
 Dataset: To evaluate the generalization and adaptability of our sis via Granger Causal Discovery (AERCA) [29], which inmethod across diverse industrial scenarios, we use five represen- tegrates Granger causality with root-cause analysis for intertative datasets spanning water treatment, electric power systems, pretable anomaly detection. For causal discovery, we further
and chemical processes: Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) [20], consider DYNOTEARS [30], a score-based dynamic exten-
Water Distribution (WADI) [21], Hardware-in-the-Loop based sion of NOTEARS for learning time-lagged causal graphs;
Augmented Industrial Control System security (HIL-HAI) [4], PCMCI+ [5], a constraint-based method that combines condithe power system datasets (PSD) [22], and the Tennessee East- tional independence tests with false-discovery-rate control for
man (TE) process benchmark [23]. These datasets vary in dimen- high-dimensional time series; causal forests [31], an ensemble
sionality, process complexity, control logic, and attack patterns. approach for estimating heterogeneous causal effects without
Table II summarizes the key characteristics of the datasets. strong parametric assumptions; and transfer entropy [32], an
 SWaT: A water treatment system with six stages and 51 information-theoretic metric that quantifies directional depenvariables, spanning 11 days (7 normal, 4 attack). It features clear dencies between time-series variables.
phase transitions and control logic, making it ideal for analyzing To ensure a fair comparison in anomaly detection, each of
causal drift and root cause chains. these methods is first applied to the training data to learn a causal
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3653

 TABLE III
 COMPARISON OF F1-SCORE, AVERAGE PRECISION (A-PR), AND AVERAGE ROC (A-ROC) ON FIVE BENCHMARK DATASETS (BOLD VALUES INDICATE THE
 PROPOSED RL-ACID METHOD AND HIGHLIGHT BEST OR SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE)

graph, which is then fed into the same downstream anomaly- B. Main Comparison and Analysis.
detection module with a unified thresholding scheme. This set We begin by presenting in Table III, a summary of the RLof baselines enables a balanced evaluation of RL-ACID against ACID’s performance against baselines across five ICS datasets.
both leading anomaly detection techniques and representative RL-ACID demonstrates the best overall anomaly detection percausal structure learning methods. formance on the medium-scale ICS testbeds SWaT and HIL-
 Evaluation metrics: Following previous works [27], [28], we HAI. It attains the highest scores on SWaT, with 85.0% in F1,
adopt a window-level evaluation strategy, where a window is 82.1% in A-PR, and 88.8% in A-ROC. Similarly, on HIL-HAI,
labeled as anomalous if any time point within it is detected as it reaches 83.2% in F1, 80.5% in A-PR, and 90.2% in A-ROC,
abnormal. The primary evaluation metric is the area under the consistently outperforming all baseline methods. In contrast,
receiver operating characteristic curve (A-ROC), which reflects static causal models like PCMCI+ and DYNOTEARS yield
the tradeoff between true positive rate and false positive rate lower F1 and A-PR performance. This advantage stems from
under varying thresholds. In addition to A-ROC, we report RL-ACID’s integrated framework: a time-frequency encoder
F1-score and area under the precision–recall curve (A-PR) in the that captures underlying system dynamics, combined with RLmain comparison experiments. F1-score captures the balance be- driven graph optimization that continuously adapts to operatween precision and recall, while A-PR highlights performance tional variations—a capability static models lack.
on rare anomalies, which is particularly informative for imbal- The WADI dataset presents a challenging environment due to
anced datasets. For F1 and A-PR, we determine the anomaly its high dimensionality (123 variables) and frequent operational
threshold by selecting the value that maximizes the F1-score shifts. On this dataset, RL-ACID achieves the best A-PR (67.1%)
on the validation set. This multimetric evaluation provides a and A-ROC (94.3%). These results demonstrate its superior
comprehensive and robust assessment of detection accuracy ranking capability and effectiveness in handling imbalanced
across diverse conditions. anomaly detection tasks. Notably, the causal clustering module
 Implementation details: To ensure consistency and compa- contributes significantly to this performance. It enhances model
rability, we adopt a unified experimental setup across all five robustness by accurately separating true anomalies from normal
datasets. The sliding window size and stride are set to 60 and 10, operational variations, a capability where static models often
respectively, for all datasets. Model training employs the Adam fail. Although the F1-score of RL-ACID (68.1%) is slightly
optimizer with dataset-specific hyperparameters: for SWaT and lower than that of Graph-MoE, this tradeoff underscores our fo-
HIL-HAI (medium-scale systems), we use a batch size of 512 cus on maintaining robust detection performance across varying
and learning rate of 0.005; for WADI and PSD (large-scale thresholds rather than optimizing for a single operating point.
systems), the batch size is 320 with a learning rate of 0.0035; and PSD is characterized by high dimensionality (128 variables)
for TE (highly imbalanced system), we use a batch size of 256 and diverse event scenarios (37 in total). RL-ACID achieves
and learning rate of 0.002. The causal graph construction retains the strongest detection (75.9% F1, 73.0% A-PR, 92.7% Aa fixed number of high-confidence edges to maintain structural ROC). The high variance and noise typical of PMU data make
sparsity across all datasets. All experiments are conducted on this dataset particularly challenging for classic causal methods,
a server equipped with NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPUs and 64 GB which show sharp performance drops. By contrast, RL-ACID’s
RAM. To ensure statistical reliability, the results of our proposed time-frequency features combined with RL-based graph search
model are calculated as mean values from 5 independent runs improve robustness to noisy measurements and yield stable
with different random seeds. anomaly detection across operating regimes.
3654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 Fig. 6. Abnormal propagation effect under the perception of causal
 chains.

 acceptable deviation, where points outside the band typically
 correspond to anomalies. Experimental results show that the
 proposed RL-ACID method produces more stable predictions
 under causal constraints, with normal samples densely clustered
 within the tolerance region and anomalies clearly located outside
 it, demonstrating strong discrimination capability. In contrast,
 alternative baselines yield more scattered residuals, resulting in
Fig. 5. Prediction-error scatter plots showing model sensitivity. Points higher false positive and false negative rates. This highlights the
within the yellow band have errors below the 0.2 tolerance. Red points
are true anomalies: those outside the band are detected, inside are superiority of our approach in producing explainable and robust
missed. Normal points outside the band represent false positives. anomaly detection outcomes.
 RL-ACID effectively supports anomaly localization and interpretation. As shown in Fig. 6 (left), the causal topology graph
 The TE process is a nonlinear, strongly coupled chemical
 encodes degree-based node importance, functional-type color
system with 52 variables and 21 injected faults, exhibiting high
 intensity, and edge thickness proportional to inferred causal
imbalance (anomaly ratio > 80%). RL-ACID achieves the best
 strength. Without any prior structural assumptions, RL-ACID
F1 (78.2%) and A-PR (74.9%), though its A-ROC (92.3%) is
 identifies meaningful causal dependencies, such as the chain
slightly below Graph-MoE. This is expected given the diversity
 LIT401 → P302 → LIT301, which aligns with known SWaT
of TE faults (valve failures, slow drifts, random variations),
 logic: LIT401 monitors the water level in a tank, which influwhere some subtle anomalies are more readily captured by
 ences the operation of P302 (a pump), subsequently affecting
correlation-based ensembles. Nevertheless, the RL-ACID’s su-
 LIT301, the downstream level sensor.
perior performance on this strongly nonlinear system validates
 To evaluate interpretability under attack, we consider a scethe effectiveness of our approach, where nonlinear feature exnario where LIT401’s reading is maliciously locked at a high
traction complements the linear BIC scoring to handle complex
 value. Since RL-ACID has captured LIT401’s causal influence
industrial dynamics.
 on P302, this manipulation causes P302 to remain open, unnec-
 Overall trends: Classical causal discovery baselines (transessarily pumping water and raising LIT301’s level despite the
fer entropy, causal forests, PCMCI+, DYNOTEARS) show
 tank being full. As shown in Fig. 6 (right), predictions match
lower and more volatile performance, particularly on highobservations under normal operation but deviate significantly
dimensional or regime-varying datasets (WADI, PSD, TE), beafter the attack: the model expects P302 to close, yet it remains
cause they assume either static structures or linear relationships.
 open, leading to unexpected rises in LIT301. This propagation
Modern graph-based baselines (Graph-MoE, AERCA) perform
 of deviations along the causal chain demonstrates RL-ACID’s
competitively but still lack adaptability to causal drift. The
 capability to not only detect anomalies but also provide clear
consistent improvements achieved by RL-ACID across both
 interpretive insights into their root causes.
threshold-dependent (F1) and threshold-free (A-PR, A-ROC)
 To further validate the causal reasoning capability of RLevaluations confirm its superiority and robustness in dynamic
 ACID, we systematically visualized the distribution of its re-
ICS environments.
 construction errors under multiple attack scenarios, as shown
 in Fig. 7. The heatmaps reveal distinct spatiotemporal error
C. Qualitative Analysis and Interpretability propagation patterns that closely correspond to specific attack
 To evaluate anomaly detection accuracy and prediction sta- types: stealth attacks exhibit a slow, progressive accumulation of
bility, we compare the prediction performance of different errors; rapid cascading failures show sudden error bursts across
models from the perspective of error structure, as shown in critical nodes; and oscillatory attacks display periodic error
Fig. 5. Specifically, we plot the scatter of predicted versus peaks. Our comparison with the official SWaT attack documenobserved values, and visualize the pointwise residuals to reflect tation confirms that these residual distributions strongly align
the model’s sensitivity to anomalies and its ability to control with the documented attack mechanisms. This correspondence
prediction errors. A yellow tolerance band is used to indicate demonstrates RL-ACID’s ability to capture underlying causal
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3655

 (a)

Fig. 7. Reconstruction error heatmaps for four representative SWaT
 (b)
attack scenarios: stealthy, rapid cascade, oscillatory, and localized.

 Fig. 9. (a) Analysis of policy convergence under different Top-K Values. (b) CaRLite computational cost over training.

 TABLE IV
 ABLATION RESULTS (A-ROC, %) ACROSS FIVE ICS DATASETS

Fig. 8. Hyperparameter sensitivity analysis: A-ROC versus M and W .
 Fig. 9 illustrates the dual optimization mechanisms of the
 RL-ACID framework. The upper panel demonstrates the tradedynamics without prior system topology knowledge. By recon- off between convergence speed and final performance under
structing attack propagation paths through causal error analysis, different Top-K pruning strategies: smaller K values (e.g.,
our framework provides technicians with reliable diagnostic K = 4) achieve rapid convergence but suffer from performance
evidence for root cause identification and system recovery. limitations, while larger K values (e.g., K = 8) exhibit slow
 convergence and tend to settle at suboptimal solutions. K = 6
D. Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis strikes an optimal balance, reaching peak performance within
 120 iterations, validating the effectiveness of prior knowledge
 To evaluate the robustness of RL-ACID under different hyper- guidance. The lower panel showcases our innovative solution
parameter settings, we conduct sensitivity experiments on two to the stability-plasticity dilemma through the CaRLite module.
key parameters: the sliding window size (W ) and the number By integrating hierarchical experience replay with causal drift
of experts (M ) in the causal clustering module, as illustrated in detection, we achieve intelligent balancing between experience
Fig. 8. The results show that performance generally improves as reuse and adaptive exploration. Computational costs follow an
W increases to around 60, beyond which overly large windows exponential decay trend (68% overall reduction), while exmay dilute local anomaly patterns, while smaller ones lack ploratory peaks triggered by causal structure changes prevent
sufficient temporal context. Regarding the number of experts, mode collapse in traditional RL and overcome the adaptability
smaller-scale systems (SWaT, HIL-HAI) achieve their best per- limitations of static models. This provides a lightweight yet
formance at M = 3, whereas larger and more heterogeneous robust adaptive causal discovery solution for dynamic industrial
systems (WADI, PSD) prefer M = 4–5, with TE stabilizing environments.
around M = 2–3. The aggregated trend in Fig. 8 (bottom-right)
shows a smooth and consistent response surface, indicating that
 E. Ablation Studies
RL-ACID is not overly sensitive to moderate variations of these
parameters. In practice, W can be set according to the process We further perform ablation studies across all five datasets
cycle or sampling horizon, while M can be tuned based on to evaluate the contribution of each module in RL-ACID. As
the diversity of operating regimes, providing a systematic and shown in Table IV, replacing the transformer encoder with a
interpretable guideline for deployment. Bi-GRU leads to consistent but moderate drops (about 2%–3%
3656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE V
 COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY COMPARISON ON HIL-HAI AND WADI
DATASETS (BOLD VALUES INDICATE THE PROPOSED RL-ACID METHOD AND
 HIGHLIGHT BEST OR SUPERIOR PERFORMANCE)

 Fig. 10. Robustness analysis under data imperfections. Left: Performance degradation with increasing missing data ratios. Right: Training
 stability under varying noise levels.

 demonstrates that principled, adaptive causal discovery can
AUROC across datasets), confirming the benefit of attention- be achieved within the resource constraints of real industrial
based encoding for capturing complex dependencies. Removing systems, effectively balancing high detection accuracy with
the RL-based search causes more severe declines (3%–4% on operational efficiency.
SWaT, HIL-HAI, and PSD), highlighting the importance of To assess the practical viability of RL-ACID under realistic
adaptive causal structure optimization. The causal clustering industrial conditions, we systematically evaluate its robustness
module is particularly critical on datasets with frequent opera- against common data imperfections using the SWaT dataset. As
tional shifts (–4.0% on WADI, –3.8% on TE), showing its ability illustrated in Fig. 10, we simulate two prevalent challenges: (left)
to track structural drift under varying regimes. When both RL varying ratios of missing data, and (right) increasing levels of
and clustering are removed, the degradation becomes sharp (over additive Gaussian noise. Results indicate that although perfor-
–6% on average, up to –7.5% on SWaT), underscoring their mance degrades with deteriorating data quality, the core funccomplementary effects. Overall, the ablation confirms that each tionality remains stable, demonstrating inherent resilience. This
component contributes substantially, and their combination of inherent resilience is attributed to the model’s time-frequency
attention-based encoding, RL driven structure refinement, and feature encoding, which captures redundant spectral patterns,
causal clustering is essential for achieving robust and general- and the causal clustering module, which distinguishes structural
izable anomaly detection across diverse ICS environments. drift from noise-induced perturbations. These findings confirm
 that RL-ACID is not only effective under idealized laboratory
F. Efficiency and Robustness Analysis conditions but also retains robust functionality when confronted
 with the incomplete and noisy data streams typical of real-world
 Computational efficiency and lightweight design are critical industrial deployments.
for deploying anomaly detection models in dynamic industrial environments. Table V provides a systematic evaluation
 V. CONCLUSION
on the HIL-HAI and WADI datasets. The complete RL-ACID
framework achieves inference times of 42.5 ms (HIL-HAI) and This article has presented RL-ACID, an RL-optimized frame-
128.3 ms (WADI) with memory footprints of 680 MB and work that addresses the challenge of adaptive causal discovery
1250 MB, respectively. This demonstrates a dual advantage: for robust anomaly detection in industrial systems. The method-
RL-ACID significantly outperforms complex ensemble methods ological contribution lies in reformulating causal discovery as a
(Graph-MoE, AERCA) in efficiency, while maintaining greater constrained RL problem, which enables efficient exploration of
model capacity than simpler baselines (GDN). graph structures while preserving interpretability. By integrating
 RL-ACID’s efficiency gains stem from its codesigned time-frequency feature encoding with a lightweight RL-based
lightweight components, which are quantitatively validated causal search and causal clustering, the framework effectively
through ablation studies. Removing the LISA sparse attention tracks time-varying causal relationships and distinguishes true
mechanism increases inference latency by approximately 62% anomalies from operational fluctuations. Extensive evaluations
and memory usage by 128% on the WADI dataset, confirming across five industrial benchmarks demonstrate RL-ACID’s comits essential role in alleviating quadratic complexity. Similarly, prehensive advantages in detection accuracy, interpretability,
replacing the hierarchical experience replay in CaRLite with a and computational efficiency compared to existing baseline
global (nonhierarchical) search strategy leads to prolonged train- methods, establishing its superior performance in dynamic ining and suboptimal convergence, despite comparable inference dustrial environments.
time. These results demonstrate that the LISA mechanism and Building upon the RL-ACID framework, future research will
the CaRLite algorithm are directly responsible for achieving a pursue two pivotal directions to broaden its industrial impact.
superior accuracy-efficiency tradeoff. First, we will focus on devising online and continual learning
 This lightweight design facilitates practical deployment. The mechanisms for real time, incremental adaptation to streaming
RL agent operates exclusively during offline training, resulting data. Second, we aim to establish federated causal discovery
in a stable model for online detection. With 4.2 million param- protocols that enable privacy-preserving, collaborative learning
eters and consistent sub-150 ms inference latency, RL-ACID across distributed industrial sites. These research avenues are
YANG et al.: RL-ACID: RL-OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE CAUSAL DISCOVERY FOR ROBUST ANOMALY DETECTION IN INDUSTRIAL SYSTEMS 3657

designed to enhance the deployability, scalability, and practical [17] W. Zhuang, J. Fan, J. Fang, W. Fang, and M. Xia, “Rethinking general
utility of fully adaptive, data-driven causal anomaly detection in time series analysis from a frequency domain perspective,” Knowl.-Based
 Syst., vol. 301, 2024, Art. no. 112281.
continuously evolving ICS. [18] F. Yan, X. Zhang, and C. Yang, “A graph-based time–frequency twostream network for multistep prediction of key performance indicators in
 REFERENCES industrial processes,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 6867–6880,
 Nov. 2024.
 [1] E. D. Knapp, Industrial Network Security: Securing Critical Infrastructure [19] X. Zheng, B. Aragam, P. K. Ravikumar, and E. P. Xing, “Dags with no
 Networks for Smart Grid, SCADA, and Other Industrial Control Systems. tears: Continuous optimization for structure learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2024. Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, vol. 31. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.
 [2] A. M. Koay, R. K. L. Ko, H. Hettema, and K. Radke, “Machine learning in neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/e347c5144c2f6d8a0b6c1e12bf08c3f9-
 industrial control system (ICS) security: Current landscape, opportunities Abstract.html
 and challenges,” J. Intell. Inf. Syst., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 377–405, 2023. [20] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “Swat: A water treatment testbed for
 [3] Y. Chen et al., “Causal inference-based adversarial domain adaptation for research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-Phys.
 cross-domain industrial intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., Syst. Smart Water Netw, 2016, pp. 31–36.
 vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 970–979, Jan. 2025. [21] C. M. Ahmed, V. R. Palleti, and A. P. Mathur, “Wadi: A water distribution
 [4] H.-K. Shin, W. Lee, J.-H. Yun, and H. Kim, “HAI 1.0: HIL-based aug- testbed for research in the design of secure cyber physical systems,” in
 mented ICS security dataset,” in Proc. 13Th USENIX Workshop Cyber Proc. 3rd Int. Workshop Cyber- Phys. Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2017,
 Secur. Experimentation Test (CSET 20), 2020, Art. no. 1. [Online]. Avail- pp. 25–28.
 able: https://www.usenix.org/conference/cset20/presentation/shin [22] U. Adhikari, S. Pan, T. Morris, R. Borges, and J. Beave, “Industrial control
 [5] J. Runge, “Discovering contemporaneous and lagged causal relations in system (ICS) cyber attack datasets,” Datasets Experimentation, 2019. [Onautocorrelated nonlinear time series datasets,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty line]. Available: https://sites.google.com/a/uah.edu/tommy-morris-uah/
 Artif. Intell., 2020, pp. 1388–1397. ics-data-sets
 [6] H. Sharifi-Noghabi, P. A. Harjandi, O. Zolotareva, C. C. Collins, and M. [23] J. J. Downs and E. F. Vogel, “A plant-wide industrial process control
 Ester, “Out-of-distribution generalization from labelled and unlabelled problem,” Comput. Chem. Eng., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 245–255, 1993.
 gene expression data for drug response prediction,” Nature Mach. Intell., [24] S. Goyal, A. Raghunathan, M. Jain, H. V. Simhadri, and P. Jain, “DROCC:
 vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 962–972, 2021. Deep robust one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 [7] C. Wang and J. Liu, “Anomaly detection method for complex systems 2020, pp. 3711–3721.
 based on a domain-adaptive causal decoupling model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. [25] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection in
 Informat., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2748–2757, Mar. 2025. multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 5,
 [8] Z. Zamanzadeh Darban, G. I. Webb, S. Pan, C. Aggarwal, and M. Salehi, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
 “Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey,” ACM Com- [26] E. Dai and J. Chen, “Graph-augmented normalizing flows for anomaly
 put. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–42, 2024. detection of multiple time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repre-
 [9] H. Qiao, H. Tong, B. An, I. King, C. Aggarwal, and G. Pang, “Deep graph sentations, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=
 anomaly detection: A survey and new perspectives,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. 45L_dgP48Vd
 Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 5106–5126, Sep. 2025. [27] Q. Zhou, J. Chen, H. Liu, S. He, and W. Meng, “Detecting multivariate
[10] Q. Mao et al., “Fecograph: Label-aware federated graph contrastive learn- time series anomalies with zero known label,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 ing for few-shot network intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Intell., vol. 37, no. 4, 2023, pp. 4963–4971.
 Secur., vol. 20, pp. 2266–2280, 2025. [28] X. Huang, W. Chen, B. Hu, and Z. Mao, “Graph mixture of experts
[11] G. Duan, H. Lv, H. Wang, and G. Feng, “Application of a dynamic and memory-augmented routers for multivariate time series anomaly
 line graph neural network for intrusion detection with semisupervised detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 39, no. 16, 2025,
 learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 699–714, 2023. pp. 17476–17484.
[12] C. Wang and J. Liu, “Fault detection based on causal discovery and graph [29] X. Han, S. Absar, L. Zhang, and S. Yuan, “Root cause analysis of anomalies
 convolutional network for complex mechatronic systems,” IEEE Trans. in multivariate time series through granger causal discovery,” in Proc.
 Rel., vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 2382–2393, Mar. 2025. 13th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
[13] H.-S. Chen, Z. Yan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, and Y. Yao, “Root cause diagnosis of //openreview.net/forum?id=k38Th3x4d9
 process faults using conditional granger causality analysis and maximum [30] R. Pamfil et al., “Dynotears: Structure learning from time-series data,” in
 spanning tree,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 51, no. 18, pp. 381–386, 2018. Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2020, pp. 1595–1605.
[14] J. Qiu, Q. Du, K. Yin, S.-L. Zhang, and C. Qian, “A causality mining [31] S. Athey and S. Wager, “Estimating treatment effects with causal forests:
 and knowledge graph based method of root cause diagnosis for perfor- An application,” Observational Stud., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 37–51, 2019.
 mance anomaly in cloud applications,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 6, 2020, [32] R. Vicente, M. Wibral, M. Lindner, and G. Pipa, “Transfer entropy—A
 Art. no. 2166. model-free measure of effective connectivity for the neurosciences,” J.
[15] W. Wang et al., “Abnormal flow detection in industrial control network Comput. Neurosci., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 45–67, 2011.
 based on deep reinforcement learning,” Appl. Math. Comput., vol. 409, [33] N. Elmrabit, F. Zhou, F. Li, and H. Zhou, “Evaluation of machine learn-
 2021, Art. no. 126379. ing algorithms for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Cyber Secur.
[16] S. Yang, L. Ning, X. Cai, and M. Liu, “Dynamic spatiotemporal causality Protection Digit. Serv., 2020, pp. 1–8.
 analysis for network traffic flow based on transfer entropy and sliding window approach,” J. Adv. Transp., vol. 2021, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 6616800.