IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026 4985

 Robust Malicious Network Traffic Detection
 Framework With Automated Drift Detection,
 Identification, and Adaptation
Xueying Han , Member, IEEE, Jian Qin, Student Member, IEEE, Changzhi Zhao , Weike Fang , Junrong Liu ,
 Weihang Wang, Bo Jiang , Susu Cui , Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu

 Abstract—The rise in network attacks has made robust mali- However, the growing complexity and dynamism of network
cious traffic detection crucial. However, the dynamic nature of traffic have introduced the challenge of concept drift, posing
network traffic causes concept drift, undermining the efficacy significant difficulties for robust detection [3]. Specifically,
of traditional detection methods, which often rely on a static
i.i.d data environment and struggle to adapt to new patterns. To existing malicious traffic detection methods [4], [5], [6] are
overcome these limitations, we propose Argus, a novel framework based on the assumption that training and testing data are
for malicious traffic detection that operates in a comprehensive, independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.). However, in
automated, and adaptive manner. Argus tackles three core chal- open-world environments, changes in legitimate users’ behavlenges: accurately classifying known traffic while detecting drift, ior patterns [7] and the advancement of attackers’ techniques
automatically identifying malicious drifting traffic, and maintaining performance through continuous updates. To address these [8] often cause traffic distributions to diverge from the original
challenges, Argus integrates a contrastive learning-based module data. This phenomenon, known as concept drift, undermines
to produce compact representations of traffic and implements the effectiveness of these methods and increases false positive
a fine-grained drift detection method using category-specific and negative rates.
reconstruction loss distributions. For drifting traffic, Argus uses Several solutions have been proposed to address the issues
clustering-based automated identification to detect attacks without human intervention. Furthermore, a distance-constrained caused by concept drift. However, they fall short of proupdate mechanism ensures smooth model adaptation, preserving viding a comprehensive, automated, and adaptive approach
stability and accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that for malicious traffic detection in the presence of drifting
Argus achieves superior performance, with an average F1 score traffic. Existing solutions can be divided into three approaches:
exceeding 95% under various conditions and retaining robust (1) One approach is to periodically update the model by incorperformance even under extreme drift scenarios.
 porating new labeled data to enhance the model’s ability to
 Index Terms—Malicious traffic detection, concept drift, con- adapt to novel traffic [9], [10]. However, this method requires
trastive learning, drift identification, model adaptation. a large amount of labeled drifting data, which is difficult and
 costly to obtain. Moreover, concept drift at test time is inher-
 I. I NTRODUCTION ently relative to the training data, meaning that retraining the
 model cannot fully address the underlying issue. (2) Another
I N RECENT years, network attacks have become increasingly prevalent, making robust malicious traffic detection
a critical component of maintaining network security [1], [2].
 approach focuses on enhancing model robustness through
 feature augmentation [2], [11], [12], [13] and pretraining [14],
 [15]. Their goal is to make the model insensitive to variations
 Received 7 May 2025; revised 22 December 2025, 16 March 2026,
and 26 April 2026; accepted 9 May 2026. Date of publication 18 May
 or perturbations. However, they can only handle minor drifts
2026; date of current version 26 May 2026. This work was supported in and cannot manage significant drifts resulting from the emerpart by the National Key Research and Development Program of China gence of new attack techniques. (3) Drift detection has also
under Grant 2023YFC2206402; in part by the Youth Innovation Promotion
Association Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) under Grant 2021156; in
 emerged as a promising strategy [16], [17], [18], [19], which
part by the Program of Key Laboratory of Network Assessment Technology, identifies changes in traffic patterns by evaluating confidence
CAS; and in part by the Program of Beijing Key Laboratory of Network scores or sample distances. However, these methods can only
Security and Protection Technology. The associate editor coordinating the
review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Simone Soderi.
 detect the presence of drift. Determining the characteristics of
(Corresponding authors: Bo Jiang; Susu Cui.) drift traffic, specifically whether it is generated by malicious
 Xueying Han, Jian Qin, Changzhi Zhao, Junrong Liu, Bo Jiang, activities, still requires manual intervention. When drift alerts
Susu Cui, Zhigang Lu, and Baoxu Liu are with the Institute of
Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
 occur frequently, this places a heavy burden on operational
100093, China, and also with the School of Cyber Security, University staff, leading to fatigue and increasing the risk of overlooking
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: real threats [20]. Furthermore, although some methods provide
hanxueying@iie.ac.cn; qinjian@iie.ac.cn; zhaochangzhi@iie.ac.cn; liujunrong@iie.ac.cn; jiangbo@iie.ac.cn; cuisusu@iie.ac.cn; luzhigang@iie.ac.cn;
 adaptation to drifting traffic, they still require manual selection
liubaoxu@iie.ac.cn). and labeling of samples for adaptation [19], [21].
 Weike Fang and Weihang Wang are with the University of Southern To provide a comprehensive, automated, and adaptive
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA (e-mail: weikefan@usc.edu; weihangw@usc.edu).
 solution addressing the limitations of existing methods, this
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIFS.2026.3694664 paper proposes a robust network malicious traffic detection
 1556-6021 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4986 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

framework named Argus. Argus focuses on three challenges: through automated classification, drift detection and iden-
(1) How to achieve accurate classification of known i.i.d. tification, and model adaptation. To our knowledge, this is
traffic while simultaneously detecting drifting traffic? (2) How the first comprehensive, automated and adaptive detection
to automatically identify the characteristics of drifting traffic framework designed to handle malicious network traffic
without human intervention? (3) How to maintain optimal with concept drift.
performance while continually adapting to drifting traffic, • We design ACLearner to generate compact represenenabling further enhancement over time? tations for different types of traffic, along with a
 For the first challenge, we design a novel module named fine-grained method to detect drift and classify non-
ACLearner based on contrastive learning and autoencoders drifting traffic. We implement an automated mechanism
to generate compact representations for each type of traffic. based on clustering characteristics to identify drifting
ACLearner is trained separately on both statistical features traffic types. To maintain optimal performance, we also
and behavioral features, and they are integrated in a bagging introduce a distance-constrained update strategy for the
manner to cover a wider range of categories, helping prevent proposed model.
single points of failure and improving the generalization • We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the
capability. Additionally, we introduce a novel fine-grained effectiveness of Argus, and results show that Argus outmeasurement method to detect traffic drift and classify non- performs other methods across different scenarios and
drifting traffic. It evaluates the reconstruction loss distribution maintains stable performance even under extreme drift
of the nearest class in the latent feature space, enabling it conditions. The functionality of each component of Argus
to more precisely handle the distributional differences among has also been thoroughly validated.
various traffic categories, thereby improving the discriminative
ability of the detection method. II. P RELIMINARY
 To address the second challenge, for traffic identified as A. System Model and Scope
drift, we design an automated drift identification strategy based
on clustering distribution differences, eliminating the need for To ensure comprehensive monitoring coverage, the proposed
human intervention. This strategy detects malicious traffic by framework is deployed at the mirroring port of the network’s
analyzing its clustering characteristics in both the feature and core switch. This strategic placement provides visibility into
physical spaces. Our analysis shows that, due to the certainty both North-South traffic (external ingress/egress) and Eastof its attack purpose and target, malicious traffic typically West traffic (internal communications), thereby effectively
exhibits stronger clustering while normal traffic tends to be facilitating the detection of both external intrusions and intermore dispersed. nal threats. Our detection scope focuses on network attacks
 Regarding the third challenge, we introduce an adaptation that manifest discernible patterns within traffic flows, includmethod that can use non-drifting or drifting traffic to update ing but not limited to botnet attacks, DoS attacks and web
Argus as needed. To prevent significant degradation in the attacks. Regarding data availability, we assume access to a
detection performance on old data during model updates, we labeled dataset containing both normal and malicious traffic
design a distance-constrained update method that imposes for the initial offline training phase. However, during the
restrictions on changes in the feature space throughout the online deployment phase, the system must process continuous
update process. This ensures that the model or detection streams of unlabeled traffic and adapt itself to concept drift
criteria do not undergo abrupt changes while aligning the without requiring real-time ground-truth labels from human
update process with the architecture of Argus. analysts.
 We implement Argus and conduct thorough experiments to
assess its effectiveness in handling various types and degrees B. Threat Model
of drifting traffic. The experimental results demonstrate that We consider an open-world scenario where an active exter-
Argus outperforms other methods across different scenarios, nal adversary operates under a black-box assumption, aiming
with an average F1 exceeding 95%, and maintains stable per- to evade detection without knowledge of the model’s paramformance under varying degrees of drift. Even under extreme eters or training data. In this setting, concept drift is driven
drift conditions, its F1 score remains at 88.22%, significantly by two forces: benign environmental evolution and malicious
surpassing other methods, which generally experience a drop adversarial dynamics. For normal traffic, drift stems from natuin F1 by more than 40%. Additionally, we validate the effec- ral shifts in the network environment such as evolving business
tiveness of individual components of Argus through ablation demands, infrastructure changes, or shifting user behaviors.
studies. For instance, the drift identification module accurately For malicious traffic, adversaries induce drift through either
classifies drifting traffic as malicious or normal without human attack evolution, which involves upgrading tools and modiintervention, consistently achieving an accuracy of over 97% fying signatures to evade static rules, or novel attacks, where
and greatly outperforming versions without this component. 0-day vulnerabilities or new methods generate patterns unseen
 In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: during training.
 • We propose Argus,1 a novel framework that robustly Argus is most effective against coordinated attacks with
 detects malicious network traffic in complex environments discernible concentrations, such as high-volume similar traffic or tight physical connectivity. However, highly dispersed
 1 https://github.com/Argusaaa/Argus activities, including low-frequency scans or distributed attacks
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4987

 Fig. 1. Workflow of argus.

on unrelated hosts, remain challenging to detect because they III. D ESIGN OF A RGUS
mimic the natural sparsity of benign users and represent the
 A. Workflow of Argus
inherent boundary of our distribution-based approach.
 Argus is a comprehensive robust malicious network traffic detection framework that can effectively handle dynamic
C. Problem Definition traffic. It consists of five key components, including traf-
 Let X be the feature space and Y be the label space. fic extraction module (I, Sec III-B), model training module
A network malicious traffic detection model aims to learn (II, Sec III-C), classification and drift detection module
a joint probability distribution P(x, y) = P(x)P(y|x) from a (III, Sec III-D), drift identification module (IV, Sec III-E) and
labeled training set, where x ∈ X represents a traffic sample model adaptation module (V, Sec III-F). Figure 1 illustrates
and y ∈ Y denotes its label. In a static environment, the an overview of Argus.
model can accurately classify data based on this learned During training, statistical features and behavioral features
distribution. However, in real-world dynamic networks, the of traffic are first extracted by I, and II uses these features
traffic distribution is time-variant. Concept drift occurs when to train two separate ACLearners, both based on contrastive
the joint distribution at time t differs from that during training, learning and autoencoders. During inference, traffic is also first
i.e., Pt (x, y) , Ptrain (x, y). This deviation manifests in two processed by I, followed by the extraction of latent features
primary forms: deviations in the marginal probability distri- and reconstruction loss using the ACLearners trained by II. III
bution of input features, denoted as P(x) drift, which typically then determines whether the traffic exhibits drift and classifies
corresponds to the evolution of normal user behaviors; and its category by comparing it with the criteria. The detection
deviations in the conditional probability distribution or the criteria in III are based on the models trained in II and the
expansion of the label space Y, denoted as P(y|x) drift, which data used during training. For non-drifting traffic, III directly
involves changes such as the emergence of new attack classes. outputs its category. For drifting traffic, IV is responsible for
Such drifts often lead to model biases, resulting in increased determining whether they are malicious according to cluster
false positives or false negatives. characteristics. To maintain stable model performance, V can
 Our objective is to develop an efficient, robust, and fully use both drifting traffic from IV and non-drifting traffic from
automated detection system, Argus, capable of maintaining III for updates.
superior performance under these drift conditions. Specifically,
Argus is designed to achieve three core objectives: (1) to
identify normal traffic and known malicious traffic that aligns B. Traffic Feature Extraction
with the learned distribution P(x, y) with high accuracy; (2) to Network traffic can be categorized into data transfer traffic
promptly detect samples that deviate from P(x) or P(y|x) and and management and control traffic. The former typically has
automatically categorize this drifting traffic as either benign or a longer duration, larger data volume, and a greater number
malicious without the human intervention; (3) to be adaptive, of packets, while the latter is characterized by a shorter
capable of updating its learned probability distribution to duration and fewer packets. Given the diversity of network
accommodate dynamic changes. traffic mentioned earlier, we extract both statistical features
4988 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

and behavioral features of network traffic to better characterize samples of different classes. z+ represents the latent features of
their attributes. samples belonging to the same class as z, and z− represents the
 We use the session as the processing unit, where a session is latent features of samples from different classes. The margin
defined by packets sharing the same 5-tuple (Src IP, Dst IP, Src m is used to ensure that if the distance between samples from
Port, Dst Port, and Protocol). To ensure feature completeness, different classes exceeds m, it does not further influence the
a session is passed to Argus for feature extraction only after training process.
its transmission is fully completed. The statistical features
we extract from sessions include packet statistics such as Lc = fd (z, z+ −
 i ) + max(m − fd (z, zi ), 0) (2)
average packet length and average packet size in bytes, time- The overall loss L is obtained by the weighted sum of
related features like the average time interval between packets, reconstruction loss and contrastive loss, and λr and λc are
and flag-related features such as the number of packets with hyperparameters controlling the weights.
the URG flag. For behavioral features, we extract the packet
length sequence L p = {l1 , . . . , lNs } and direction sequence L = λr Lr + λc Lc (3)
D p = {d1 , . . . , dNs } from the session. li ∈ N and di ∈ {1, −1} are
 For statistical features and behavioral features, we use
the length and direction of ith packet, and N s is the number
 them to train two separate ACLearners (SACLearner and
of packets. Additionally, to mitigate the impact of positive
 EACLearner), and then integrate them during decision-making
and negative signs in the direction sequence on subsequent
 using a bagging approach. This strategy enables each type of
model training, we encode them as a one-hot matrix with
 feature to concentrate on its specific task, mitigates the impact
two rows and N s columns, placing the packet length values of
 of sample distribution bias on feature weights, enhances the
the forward and reverse data flows in separate rows. Ideally,
 model’s robustness, and reduces the risk of single-point faila session should encompass sufficient packets to capture the
 ures. For the SACLearner, which handles statistical features,
underlying interaction logic, thereby providing a representative
 its autoencoder is composed of several fully connected layers.
and stable basis for feature characterization.
 For the EACLearner, which processes behavioral features, the
 For a session, the extracted feature representation is denoted
 autoencoder is based on Transformer architecture [23]. The use
as x = {x s , xe }, where x s represents statistical features and xe
 of the attention mechanism enables it to effectively capture the
represents behavioral features. Statistical features effectively
 temporal characteristics of the sessions.
analyze the overall trends and patterns of the traffic, while
 2) Traffic Pre-Cluster: Training ACLearner requires class
behavioral features are stronger in modeling fine-grained traffic
 labels, but using existing labels directly poses several issues.
patterns. The combination of both provides a more compre-
 Firstly, fine-grained labels are often missing, and using broad
hensive perspective for network traffic analysis.
 labels such as “normal” or “malicious” can be too coarse.
 Within each class, there are many more specific subcate-
C. Model Training gories with inherent differences, and grouping samples with
 For the purpose of accurately detecting whether the traffic significant differences into the same category may negatively
is drifting and classifying non-drifting traffic, we combine affect model convergence. In addition, fine-grained labels may
autoencoders with contrastive learning. Autoencoders excel in not always be accurate, as determining these labels heavily
unsupervised feature learning by capturing the main structure depends on expert knowledge and establishing a unified clasand features of the data through learned compressed repre- sification standard and granularity is challenging. Therefore,
sentations. Contrastive learning, on the other hand, enhances we first pre-cluster normal and malicious traffic separately to
the model’s ability to learn more discriminative features by obtain fine-grained labels for training the ACLearners.
maximizing the similarity between samples of the same class To ensure that ACLearner exhibits generalizability and to
and minimizing the similarity between samples of different mitigate the impact of clustering randomness on performance,
classes [22]. We leverage both the reconstruction capability of we employ more coarse-grained features compared to statistiautoencoders and the distance metrics derived from contrastive cal and behavioral features. Specifically, we divide the packet
learning to achieve these goals. length range into 10 buckets and count the number of packets
 1) ACLearner: ACLearner consists of the autoencoder part within each length range in a session to form a feature vector.
and the contrastive learning part. Session features x are first The K-means algorithm is then used to cluster normal and
processed through the encoder to obtain the latent features malicious traffic into k distinct clusters, respectively. If the
z, which are then passed through the decoder to produce the number of samples in a cluster is less than φcdr times the
reconstructed session features x̂. We compute the Euclidean average cluster size, this cluster of samples is discarded. φcdr
distance between x and x̂ as the reconstruction loss Lr , and fd is a threshold coefficient.
denotes Euclidean distance.
 D. Classification and Drift Detection
 Lr = fd (x, x̂) (1)
 After completing model training, we employ the trained
 To enhance the distinctiveness and representativeness of the model in conjunction with inter-sample distances and reconfeatures, we use the latent features z to calculate the contrastive struction loss to determine whether traffic drift has occurred
loss Lc . The goal is to minimize the distance between samples and to classify samples that have not experienced drift into
of the same class while maximizing the distance between their respective categories.
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4989

 1) Criteria Establishment: We first establish detection criteria by considering both the distance relationships between
samples and the distribution of reconstruction losses to ensure
a stable performance. We establish customized criteria for
each class rather than using a common baseline derived from
all training data, due to the varying distribution and sample
 Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of drifting traffic distribution in physical and
sizes across different classes. Specifically, we first calculate the feature spaces. (red: malicious, others: normal).
latent features z, including z s for statistical features and ze for
behavioral features, along with reconstruction losses Lr,s and
Lr,e for each sample in the training set. Then, for each class,
 E. Drift Identification
we calculate the mean of reconstruction losses µLr,s and µLr,e
alongside their variances σLr,s and σLr,e . The class centroids For drifting traffic, we aim to leverage their clustering
c s and ce are computed by averaging the latent features of all characteristics to automatically determine whether it is malisamples in each class. cious, thereby eliminating the reliance on human intervention
 2) Classification and Detection: For a given sample under throughout the process. This process can be triggered by either
evaluation, the model first derives intermediate results using a specific running time or the volume of samples processed and
statistical and behavioral features separately and then com- accumulated. In previous work [19], this step has invariably
bines these results to produce a final result. Taking the required human involvement.
statistical feature x s as an example, the intermediate result Our key observation is that for traffic identified as drift,
is derived through a two-step process. We first compute its malicious traffic tends to exhibit concentrated characteristics in
corresponding latent feature z s and calculate the distances to both feature space and physical space, whereas benign traffic
each class centroid to identify the nearest class k s . In the is more dispersed, as illustrated schematically in Figure 2.
second step, we calculate the reconstruction loss Lr,s and Drifting malicious traffic is primarily generated by network
determine if z s is a drift relative to the nearest class. If Lr,s attacks. To achieve a successful attack, they often need to make
satisfies µLr,s
 k s − nσ σ k s < Lr,s < µ k s + nσ σ k s , then with respect
 Lr,s Lr,s Lr,s multiple attempts, such as scanning ports, resulting in similar
to the statistical features, the sample is not a drift and belongs traffic patterns. They are close to each other in feature space
to class k s . Typically, nσ is set to 3. µLr,s k s and σ k s represent
 Lr,s (red dots in Figure 2), forming relatively compact clusters.
the mean and variance of the reconstruction loss for samples Additionally, to minimize the likelihood of being detected,
belonging to class k s . Similarly, we employ this approach to attackers typically target only a few devices, leading to a condetect drift and the class ke for behavioral features. If both centrated pattern in physical space (red edges), where frequent
statistical and behavioral indicators show no drift and k s = ke , and similar interactions occur between a limited set of IP
the sample remains in the class k s (ke ) without drift. Otherwise, addresses. In contrast, in a well-functioning network, drifting
drift is considered to have occurred. benign traffic usually arises from new behaviors triggered by
 Compared to directly assessing drift based on distance or changes in business processes or from the introduction of
overall reconstruction loss distribution, using the reconstruc- new users and devices. Since normal users’ operations and
tion loss distribution of the nearest class provides a more behaviors are generally heterogeneous, this leads to dispersed
accurate reflection of whether the sample truly belongs to patterns in feature space (green and orange dots). Admittedly,
that class. Distance metrics primarily focus on the similarity some drifting traffic generated by normal users may be concenbetween sample features and class centroids but may not trated in feature space (blue dots). However, the participants
fully capture sample anomalies, and distance calculations can are distinct and dispersed, resulting in a sparse distribution in
be influenced by sample distribution, distance scale, and the physical space (blue edges).
complexity of the feature space. In contrast, reconstruction Based on these observations, we first cluster the features of
loss directly measures the degree of matching between the the drifting traffic to group together traffic that is similar in
sample and the well-trained reconstruction model. The overall the feature space. The feature used here is a concatenation
reconstruction loss distribution may be affected by the mixed of latent statistical features z s and behavioral features ze .
influence of samples from different classes, potentially leading We employ DBSCAN for this task as it avoids the need to
to misjudgment. Our approach can more accurately reflect predetermine the number of clusters and effectively captures
whether the sample conforms to the characteristics of the high-density patterns. After clustering, for traffic labeled as
class, improve detection sensitivity by capturing specific class noise, we consider it to be benign since it is sparse in the
patterns, and effectively mitigate interference from sample feature space.
anomalies or differences between classes. For other clusters, we evaluate their sparsity in the physical
 Furthermore, since different features may exhibit varying space by constructing a host interaction graph for each cluster.
sensitivities to different types of traffic, combining the judg- This interaction graph is a multigraph where IP addresses
ments from both feature types using a bagging approach allows are the nodes, and the interactions between IP pairs are the
us to better accommodate diverse feature information. By edges. We then calculate the number of vertices nv , the number
cross-validating the results from both feature dimensions, we of edges ne , and the number of connected components nc
can effectively enhance the robustness of the detection system in the graph. If the ratio of ne to nv exceeds a predefined
and mitigate the impact of failures from any single dimension. threshold θev , or the ratio of ne to nc exceeds θec , the traffic
4990 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

within that cluster is deemed malicious. By combining these including c s , ce , as well as the corresponding µLr,s , σLr,s , µLr,e ,
two conditions, Argus can detect malicious behavior with and σLr,e for each class.
highly frequent connections between nodes. For instance, in 2) Update With Drifting Data: Updating with drifting data
DDoS attacks or scanning attacks, the attacker attempts high- can expand the model’s coverage of traffic categories, broadfrequency connections to many targets within a short period, ening the applicability of the detection method.
whereas normal network communication does not exhibit such When updating the model using drifting data Xdr , it is also
frequent and similar connections within such a brief timeframe necessary to include old data. We randomly select nodr old
[24], [25]. Moreover, Argus can detect malicious behavior samples to form Xo , and then combine it with Xdr to create a
that forms one or more tightly connected subgroups, which new dataset Xdr 0
 for model updating. The value of nodr is αdr
is typical in lateral movement attacks, where attackers use times the number of samples in Xdr . Note that the classes of
compromised hosts to move laterally to other hosts, or in samples in Xo do not overlap with those in Xdr . During the
botnet activity, where such distributions are observed [26]. If drift identification process (Sec III-E), each cluster obtained
the ratio of ne to nv is less than θev and the ratio of ne to nc by DBSCAN is treated as an independent class. However, the
is less than θec , the traffic in that cluster is considered to be number of clusters is often large, and each cluster contains a
normal. relatively small number of samples, leading to issues of data
 imbalance and insufficient sample representativeness, which
 are detrimental to model updating. To address this issue, we
F. Model Adaptation performed a merging operation on these clusters, repeatedly
 To maintain model effectiveness in dynamic environments, merging the two clusters with the closest centroids until only
we design independent update strategies for drifting and ncl clusters remained.
non-drifting data, tailored to their distinct characteristics. The loss function during the update process, Ludr , similarly
Depending on specific needs, the model can be updated using consists of the reconstruction loss Lr , the contrastive loss
either or both data types. These updates are triggered after one Lc , and the change loss Lchd , and λr,udr , λc,udr , λchd are
or multiple identification cycles. corresponding weights. However, Lr and Lc are computed
 0
 1) Update With Non-Drifting Data: Updating with non- using all of the data Xdr , whereas Lchd is calculated only from
drifting data can increase the diversity of known categories, the data in Xo , as the drifting data does not conform to the
thereby enhancing the model’s robustness to subtle changes. distribution of the old model.
 Since updating the model not only requires adjusting Additionally, Lchd measures the change in distance between
model parameters but also involves updating cluster centroids, the latent features of samples in the updated model and the
distance distributions, and reconstruction loss distributions, old cluster centroids c of their classes, instead of directly
we adopt a data replay-based update strategy to prevent measuring latent feature changes. This is a more flexible concatastrophic forgetting of previously learned knowledge. straint, which is crucial when updating with drifting data, as
Specifically, we randomly select nond samples from the old the process involves the introduction of new classes. Adequate
training data and mix them with the non-drifting update data space must be reserved in the feature space to effectively
Xnd to form a new dataset Xnd 0
 for model updating. nond is αnd distinguish and represent new classes.
times the number of samples of Xnd , and the value of αnd is
 Ludr = λr,udr Lr + λc,udr Lc + λchd Lchd (6)
usually less than 1. X
 The overall loss Lund during the update process is the Lchd = | fd (z, c) − fd (z0 , c)| (7)
weighted sum of the reconstruction loss Lr , the contrastive z∈Xo
loss Lc , and the change loss Lchn , where λr,und , λc,und , and λchn The updates are performed separately on SACLearner and
are their respective weights. The calculations for Lr and Lc EACLearner similarly. The method for updating the detection
are the same as those described in Section III-C. The change criteria is the same as when updating with non-drifting data.
loss Lchn constrains the change in latent features, with z and z0
denoting the latent features produced by the old model and the
 IV. E VALUATION
updated model, and is calculated using the Euclidean distance.
By minimizing Lchn , we ensure a smoother update process, A. Experimental Setup
which prevents excessive changes due to overfitting the new 1) Datasets: Argus aims to accurately classify known trafdata, thereby enhancing the model’s robustness, maintaining fic, detect and identify drifting traffic, and adaptively update
cluster structure stability, and preserving the consistency of in environments with evolving traffic patterns. To evaluate the
classification and drift detection criteria. performance of our method, we reorganize both publicly available datasets (CICIDS2018 [27], CICIDS2017 [28], MCFP
 Lund = λr,und Lr + λc,und Lc + λchn Lchn (4) [29] and ISCX-NonVPN [30]) and our own collected dataset
 X
 Lchn = fd (z, z0 ) (5) (NormTI) to create two datasets: CICIDD and MalReal. Each
 dataset is divided into multiple subsets for experiments to
 Similar to the initial training process, the statistical features assess how Argus performs in the presence of varying degrees
and behavioral features are independently used to update the and types of drifts.
SACLearner and EACLearner, respectively. Subsequently, we This reorganization establishes a controlled evaluation
update the detection criteria based on the updated models, framework, where the comparative performance across subsets
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4991

serves as a reliable proxy for quantifying drift detection • M-D1 contains malicious traffic generated by botware
efficacy. Specifically, we construct these subsets to span (Trickbot, Emotet) and ransomware (Dridex).
a spectrum of drift scenarios: from stable baselines with • M-D2 extends the M-D1 baseline by incorporating traffic
unavoidable minor fluctuations to extreme drifts triggered by generated by an additional botware variant (Zeus). This
novel attacks or environmental changes. By analyzing the represents a drift scenario driven by new malware variperformance variance across these controlled scenarios, we ants. It is important to note that even within the same
can rigorously evaluate the sensitivity and robustness of drift malware category, variations in tool versions, execution
detection modules. procedures, or targets lead to distinct traffic patterns,
 A detailed description of the subsets and their corresponding contributing to the overall drift.
drift characteristics is provided below. • M-D3 represents a high-drift scenario that builds upon
 CICIDD. This dataset contains common network intrusion M-D2. In addition to the existing traffic, it introduces
traffic, derived from the publicly available CICIDS2018 and new malware categories and variants, including miner
CICIDS2017 datasets. We reorganize this data into three (MinerTrojan), Spyware (Trickster, CCleaner), and dissubsets (C-D1, C-D2, C-D3). The normal traffic in each subset tinct Ransomware strains (WannaCry).
is sourced from CICIDS2018 and partitioned by date, thereby • The malicious traffic in M-D4 is consistent with that in
incorporating natural drift resulting from temporal shifts. The M-D2 and is primarily used to test the drift in normal
malicious traffic in C-D1 and C-D2 is sourced from the traffic.
CICIDS2018 dataset. To facilitate rigorous evaluation, each subset within the
 CICIDD and MalReal datasets is pre-partitioned into training
 • C-D1 includes the following types of malicious traffic: and testing sets. Model training and adaptive updates are
 Bot, DDoS LOIC HTTP, DoS GoldenEye, DoS slowhttp, strictly confined to the training sets, whereas all performance
 and FTP Bruteforce. evaluations are conducted exclusively on the testing sets. In
 • C-D2 includes a broader range of attacks compared to our experimental setup, the training sets of C-D1 and M-D1
 C-D1. It features variants of known attacks (DoS Hulk and serve as the baselines for initial model training.
 SSH Bruteforce) implemented with different techniques, Accordingly, Table I summarizes the drift sources and drift
 as well as new attack categories (XSS Bruteforce, Web levels of normal and malicious traffic in the remaining subsets
 Bruteforce, and SQL Injection) that are entirely different relative to these two baselines. A higher drift level indicates
 from C-D1, thereby introducing a distinct degree of drift. a greater deviation from the baseline distribution, implying a
 • C-D3 comprises malicious traffic from the CICIDS2017 higher difficulty for the detection model.
 dataset. While it covers the same attack categories as 2) Metric: We use accuracy (Acc), recall (Rec), precision
 the baseline (e.g., Botnet, DoS, and Web attacks), the (Pre), and F1-score (F1) as evaluation metrics to assess
 underlying traffic patterns exhibit significant deviation whether malicious traffic is accurately detected. Moreover, the
 due to the temporal gap and distinct network environ- drift ratio (DR) and the non-drift ratio (NDR) are employed to
 ments. This simulates a realistic scenario of long-term assess the percentage of samples identified as drift or non-drift
 pattern evolution, representing a more significant degree relative to the total number of samples.2
 of drift compared to short-term variations. 3) Parameter Setting: For the CICIDD dataset, model
 MalReal. This dataset primarily includes traffic generated training uses k = 3, φcdr = 0.05, and m = 10. Loss
 by malware, consisting of data from the publicly available weights λc and λr are 10 and 0.01. Drift detection is set at
 MCFP and ISCX-NonVPN datasets, as well as the self- nσ = 3. Drift identification utilizes DBSCAN (E ps = 2.0,
 collected NormTI dataset. We reorganize this data into MinPts = 10) with thresholds θec = 5 and θev = 10. Adaptation
 four subsets (M-D1, M-D2, M-D3, M-D4). parameters αnd and αdr are 0.1. Update weights for contrastive,
 • The normal traffic in M-D1, M-D2, and M-D3 comes reconstruction, and constraint losses are 1, 0.5, and 0.001,
 from the NormTI dataset. It includes normal user traffic respectively. For the MalReal dataset, training parameters are
 captured over a period of three months in 2024 from k = 5, φcdr = 0.05, m = 10, with λc = 1 and λr = 0.01. Drift
 a subnet within a research institution, involving nearly detection uses nσ = 3. Identification employs E ps = 1.0,
 1,000 devices. Similar to CICIDD, this traffic is parti- MinPts = 10, θec = 5, and θev = 10. Adaptation uses
 tioned chronologically, thereby introducing natural drift αnd = αdr = 0.1. Update process weights match those of
 resulting from temporal shifts. CICIDD (1, 0.5, and 0.001). Detailed sensitivity analyses for
 • The normal traffic in M-D4 comes from the ISCX- these parameters are provided in Section IV-F.
 NonVPN dataset, which includes network traffic gener- 4) Baseline: We consider three categories of baseline methated by real-world activities such as chat, file transfer, and ods, including those aimed at improving detection accuracy
 video streaming. This traffic differs significantly from the for standard network malicious traffic (the supervised method
 normal traffic in M-D1 in terms of network environment FS-Net [4] and the semi-supervised method CPS-Guard [31]),
 and user behavior patterns, representing severe drift in those robust methods focused on enhancing generalization
 normal traffic.
 2 Due to the inconsistency in label granularity and the fact that differing
 The malicious traffic in this dataset comes from the
 labels do not necessarily indicate drift, especially for normal samples, we do
 publicly available MCFP dataset, which includes traffic not use metrics such as recall and precision specifically for detecting drift, as
 generated by various malware executions. Specifically: is common in other drift detection studies.
4992 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE I
 D RIFT S OURCES AND D RIFT L EVELS OF DATASETS R ELATIVE TO C-D1 AND M-D1

 TABLE II TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF A RGUS AND BASELINES P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF A RGUS AND BASELINES
 ON THE CICIDD DATASET (%) ON THE M AL R EAL DATASET (%)

in the presence of varying traffic (ACID [11]), and methods
capable of detecting concept drift (CADE [16] and AOC-IDS
[32], with AOC-IDS supporting adaptive updates).

B. Detection Performance
 fluctuations of only 9.24% across the CICIDD subsets and
 1) Comparison With Baselines: Tables II and Table III
 4.67% across the MalReal subsets.
present the performance of Argus and other methods3 across
 Supervised network malicious traffic detection methods
various subsets of the CICIDD and MalReal datasets. These
 (such as FS-Net and ACID) perform well when the training
results are obtained by training on the C-D1 and M-D1
 traffic and testing traffic follow the same distribution. However,
training sets and testing on the corresponding test sets of each
 their performance may degrade significantly in the presence of
subset. It can be observed that our method, Argus, outperforms
 drift. For example, FS-Net achieves an F1 score of 97.43% on
the other methods, with F1 scores consistently above 93%
 C-D1, but only 31.55% on C-D3, indicating its inability to
across all subsets of MalReal. Moreover, Argus demonstrates
 handle drift. Although ACID attempts to enhance robustness
significantly more stable performance under varying degrees
 by extending features and improving the method, its effectiveand types of drift compared to the baselines, with F1 score
 ness is limited, only being suitable for slight drifts and unable
 3 Since CADE is primarily a drift detector, its output was post-processed for
 to handle new types of traffic. For instance, its F1 score drops
the malicious traffic detection performance evaluation: non-drifting samples by 25.52% on M-D3 with more significant drifts.
were classified as the category of their nearest cluster, while drifting samples CPS-Guard performs poorly on MalReal, particularly with a
were labeled according to the dataset organization rules (normal traffic for M- low recall. CPS-Guard’s initial training is conducted solely on
D4, and malicious traffic for all other datasets). All other methods, including
Argus, are evaluated directly using their primary malicious traffic detection normal traffic, and it adaptively determines decision thresholds
output. based on the distribution of test data. This method performs
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4993

 TABLE IV
 D ETAILED P ERFORMANCE OF A RGUS AND CADE ON THE CICIDD DATASET AND THE M AL R EAL DATASET (%)

well when the difference between attack traffic and normal
traffic is significant, as evidenced by its F1 score of 75.07%
on C-D3, second only to Argus. However, its performance
deteriorates when normal and malicious traffic are similar, as
seen in its poor performance on M-D1, where other supervised
methods can learn the differences from labeled data.
 AOC-IDS uses Gaussian distributions to model each class
in the training data, classifying and detecting anomalies in the
test data. It faces similar challenges, struggling to handle drift
in normal traffic, with an F1 score of only 46.94% on M-D4.
 Fig. 3. Ratio of non-drifting and drifting samples for each category.
 CADE’s overall performance on CICIDD is lower than
on MalReal, with generally lower precision on the CICIDD
datasets, suggesting a higher rate of misclassification of normal accuracy and F1 score for malicious traffic detection on data
traffic. One possible reason is that all normal traffic is treated identified as drift and non-drift.
as a single class, failing to effectively model intra-class varia- Argus is capable of appropriately identifying drift in both
tion. Besides, the issue of data imbalance significantly impacts normal and malicious traffic, and this is evidenced by the
the contrastive learning method used by CADE. Another factor consistency between the drift ratios across different subsets
is our post-processing strategy for drifting samples. As CADE identified by Argus (Table IV) and the drift levels established
lacks an automated mechanism to determine the category of during subset partitioning (Table I). For instance, in the
drift, uniformly labeling these samples as normal or malicious CICIDD dataset, the drift level of malicious traffic increases
based on dataset organization introduces an increased risk of from C-D1 to C-D3, and Argus’s drift ratio for malicious
false positives. This also highlights the necessity of automated traffic in these subsets rises from 2.67% to 94.67%.
drift identification, as detection is the ultimate goal, not just Furthermore, Figure 3 visually presents the ratios of nondrift observation. Detailed results regarding CADE’s drift drifting and drifting samples identified by Argus for various
detection and non-drifting sample classification will be further categories, illustrating the module’s effectiveness in distinanalyzed in Section IV-B.2. guishing between different types and degrees of concept drift.
 Although AOC-IDS, CADE, and our Argus are all based In C-D2, known categories like DDoS and Botnet remain
on contrastive learning and autoencoder architectures, Argus stable, with a non-drifting proportion greater than 98%, while
demonstrates better performance than the others. This is newly introduced categories such as WebBruteforce and DoS
attributed to our integration of statistical and behavioral fea- Hulk are largely marked as drifting. Correspondingly, in
tures, the design of AClearner, and the collaboration across M-D3, Argus differentiates known malware (Botware) from
multiple stages, all contributing to the overall enhancement of high-drift new variants (e.g., Spyware with 51.6% drifting),
performance. validating its detection of novel variants. Furthermore, Argus
 2) Detailed Performance for Non-Drifting and Drifting is sensitive to temporal and environmental drift. The C-D3
Traffic: The outstanding performance of Argus is attributed to subset shows high drift in known Botnet traffic, with 98% of
the combined contributions of its traffic classification and drift samples identified as drift. Similarly, when Argus evaluates
identification components. Table IV provides a detailed com- M-D4, all normal traffic categories are detected to exhibit
parison of the performances of Argus and CADE,4 including significant drift, exceeding 50% in every case, with FTP traffic
drift ratios (DR) of different splits of datasets (entire testing showing the highest detected drift ratio at 84%, underscoring
set, only normal traffic or only malicious traffic) as well as the the severity of benign environmental change.
 Argus also demonstrates satisfactory performance in detect-
 4 CADE does not determine the category of samples identified as drift, so
 ing malicious traffic within both drifting and non-drifting
we only compare the performance on non-drifting samples. AOC-IDS does
not provide explicit results on whether a sample is a drift sample, so we do traffic. For non-drifting traffic, Argus classifies the traffic based
not include comparisons with it in this section. on the class closest to the cluster center in the latent feature
4994 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 Fig. 5. Comparison of F1 for argus and AOC-IDS on the malreal dataset
Fig. 4. Distribution of drifting traffic clustered in feature space within physical before and after adaptations. (T: train, U: update).
space (left identified as malicious by argus, right as normal).

space. Across these datasets, Argus achieves a detection accuracy of over 97% for non-drifting traffic, outperforming that of
CADE. In most cases, non-drifting traffic accounts for a large
proportion of the total traffic, so the detection performance
on non-drifting traffic is critical. For drifting traffic, Argus
leverages its clustering features in both the feature space and
physical space to determine whether the traffic is malicious.
In almost all cases, Argus achieves an F1 score of over 85% Fig. 6. Impact of model adaptation on drift ratio and F1 for argus on the
for classifying drifting traffic, enhancing Argus’s applicability. CICIDD dataset.
Moreover, this process is labor-free, boosting its efficiency.
 In comparison, CADE’s performance is not as favorable.
For example, in C-D3, the subset with the highest degree M-D2, Argus also shows improved performance on M-D1
of drift in CICIDD, CADE incorrectly concludes that no and M-D3. This may be because the update process using
drift exists within the malicious traffic. Furthermore, it fails non-drifting data increases data diversity, thereby enhancing
to accurately detect these “non-drifting” malicious traffic, as its generalization capability. In contrast, after updating with
reflected by its low F1 score of just 0.33% for non-drifting M-D2, the performance of AOC-IDS on the M-D2 testing set
traffic. declines to 88.87%, which is lower than its initial performance
 Figure 4 shows the distribution of two groups of traffic clus- when trained on M-D1. Its performance on M-D1 and M-D3
tered in feature space within physical space, further validating also decreases by at least 5.9% and 13.15%, respectively. This
the effectiveness of the drift identification module of Argus. is primarily due to AOC-IDS’s reliance on the distribution
Malicious traffic come from a Botnet attack, and they cluster of latent features during detection, coupled with the lack of
in both feature and physical spaces due to targeted attacks. effective constraints during the update process. When updated
Normal traffic, though clustered in feature space, is dispersed with drifting data, AOC-IDS struggles to balance new and
in physical space, likely due to network environment changes. old knowledge, resulting in considerable deviation from the
 original model.
 Figure 6 provides a detailed analysis of the joint trend
C. Adaptation Performance of drift ratio and performance (overall F1 and recall for
 The ultimate goal of addressing concept drift is to prevent both normal and attack traffic) for Argus on the CICIDD
model performance degradation, thereby ensuring the model’s dataset before (T@C-D1) and after updates (U@C-D2 and
effectiveness and accuracy in ever-changing environments. We U@C-D3). It can be seen that after updating with the
utilize the C-D2, C-D3, M-D2, and M-D4 datasets to update C-D2 or C-D3 datasets, the corresponding attack drift ratio
the models initially trained on the C-D1 and M-D1 datasets, decreases while the F1 increases. Notably, the recall for attack
intending to validate the effectiveness of the model update traffic exhibits a substantial improvement, demonstrating that
module in Argus. Note that the updates are executed using the the update mechanism in Argus effectively enhances the
training subsets corresponding to each respective dataset, with model’s adaptability to new classes and enables it to recognize
performance validated on the corresponding test sets, ensuring emerging categories. Furthermore, after updating with C-D2
no overlap between training and test data. Both non-drifting or C-D3, the performance on C-D1 does not experience any
and drifting data updates are performed. significant degradation. The recall for normal traffic on C-D1
 Figure 5 compares the F1 of Argus and AOC-IDS across even shows an improvement after the C-D2 update. In addition,
different MalReal sub-datasets, both before and after the an interesting phenomenon is observed: after updating with
updates. It can be observed that after updating with M-D2 C-D2, the drift ratio for C-D3 also decreases significantly.
and M-D4, Argus’s performance on M-D1 remains stable, and This may be attributed to that the new attack traffic categories
its performance on M-D2 and M-D4 improves. This indicates introduced in C-D2 overlap with those in C-D3. Although they
that Argus possesses the capability to continue learning and originate from different datasets, C-D2 effectively carves out a
adapting to new knowledge without forgetting previously new space in the feature space for attack traffic, which could
acquired knowledge, effectively addressing the challenges cover some of the traffic in C-D3, thereby positively impacting
posed by concept drift. Furthermore, after updating with the detection of malicious traffic in C-D3.
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4995

 TABLE V labels indicating whether the traffic is normal or malicious.
 RUNTIME AND M EMORY OVERHEAD OF A RGUS (30,000 S ESSIONS ) However, considering the impact of intra-class sample variability, Argus incorporates a pre-clustering mechanism to generate
 fine-grained labels. We apply pre-clustering to both normal and
 malicious traffic. To validate the necessity and effectiveness
 of pre-clustering, we conduct experiments where we do not
 cluster the normal traffic (w/o NPC), treating all normal traffic
 as a single class, and where we do not cluster the malicious
 traffic (w/o MPC), using the fine-grained labels available in the
 dataset for malicious traffic. The experimental results suggest
D. Efficiency and Overhead Analysis
 that pre-clustering normal traffic may improve performance,
 To verify the practical feasibility of Argus, we evaluate particularly on the CICIDD dataset, where the F1 increases by
the processing latency and memory consumption across all up to 14.42%. The consistency of intra-class samples is crucial
stages. Table V presents the quantitative results for processing for the model to accurately capture the characteristics of each
30,000 sessions. These sessions were randomly sampled from class, and Argus’s pre-clustering effectively enhances class
the datasets to reflect real-world traffic distribution, with an cohesion, thereby positively influencing training. Moreover,
average duration of 33s, 244 packets, and 120,955 bytes per compared to using the true fine-grained labels for malicious
session. The results indicate that the Classification and Drift traffic, Argus exhibits only a maximum decrease of 1.91% in
Detection module, which handle real-time traffic, operate at F1, demonstrating that our pre-clustering method is effective
high speeds to meet the requirements of high-speed network and achieves performance close to that of training with true
environments. Other steps are executed asynchronously or labels. Pre-clustering enhances Argus’s generalizability, paroffline, ensuring they do not block the primary detection path. ticularly when fine-grained labels are lacking or inconsistent.
 Regarding memory usage, the overhead is primarily con- 3) Ablation on Classification and Drift Detection: Argus
centrated in the initial feature extraction stage where raw identifies drifting traffic by evaluating whether the reconstruc-
PCAP files are processed. Once in the subsequent stages, tion loss of the traffic aligns with the reconstruction loss of
the system operates only on extracted features or low- its nearest class. We compare this approach with a distancedimensional latent representations, which significantly reduces based method (w/ Dist), which assesses whether the distance
the memory usage. Furthermore, the additional memory cost between a sample and its nearest class centroid matches
during model updates stems only storing a small fraction of the distribution of distances within that class. It performs
historical features. Since the replay ratio is kept low, this well on C-D1, achieving an F1 score 1.03% higher than
overhead remains minimal, ensuring the system’s robustness Argus. However, on C-D2 and C-D3, its F1 scores are more
in resource-constrained environments. than 10% lower than Argus. The stability of using distance
 directly to detect drift is relatively poor, as its performance is
E. Ablation Study significantly influenced by the intra-class sample distribution
 To validate the contributions of each component within and the model’s fit, particularly for classes not encountered
Argus, we conduct comprehensive ablation experiments on during training. We also compare Argus with a method based
two datasets. In these experiments, we either remove or replace on overall reconstruction loss (w/ AllRecon), which checks if
various components within each stage of Argus to assess their the traffic’s reconstruction loss aligns with the distribution of
impact. Table VI presents the results of these ablation studies. overall reconstruction losses. Using overall reconstruction loss
 1) Ablation on Traffic Feature Extraction: During the fea- leads to a performance drop across all datasets, as it overlooks
ture extraction phase, Argus extracts statistical features and the differences between classes, and the overall reconstruction
behavioral features from the traffic data to train SACLearner loss distribution can be skewed by specific class distributions.
and EACLearner separately. The final decision-making pro- Argus, by combining reconstruction loss with class specificity,
cess involves the joint contribution of these two models. We better balances the influence of different features, resulting in
evaluate the performance of using only SACLearner (w/ SAC) superior performance in detecting drifting traffic.
and only EACLearner (w/ EAC) here to further analyze the 4) Ablation on Drift Identification: Argus considers traffic
impact of each feature. The experimental results show that that exhibits clustering in both feature space and physical
Argus achieves more stable and superior performance by space within drifting samples as malicious. In the ablation
combining both types of features, which not only expands experiments, we compare two simplified methods: one that
the coverage of traffic types but also reduces the risk of disregards the clustering characteristics in both feature and
single points of failure. Conversely, utilizing only a single physical spaces, and classifies all drifting traffic as malicious
feature leads to relatively unstable performance, occasionally (w/o FPS), based on the assumption that normal traffic in a
leading to significant declines. For example, on C-D2, using well-functioning network typically does not exhibit drift [33];
only behavioral features (w/ EAC) yields an F1 of 77.94%, and another that ignores clustering in physical space (w/o PS),
representing an approximately 20% drop compared to C-D1. treating the noise identified by DBSCAN as normal traffic
 2) Ablation on Model Training: In real-world scenarios, and the remaining clustered traffic as malicious, based on
precise fine-grained labels are often unavailable, especially for that drifting malicious traffic tends to be more concentrated
normal traffic. Therefore, during training, we use only coarse in feature space compared to normal traffic, as discussed
4996 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION S TUDY OF K EY C OMPONENTS IN A RGUS ON THE CICIDD AND M AL R EAL DATASETS (%)

in Section III-E. Table VI compares their performance with to avoid interference from parameter settings during the
Argus (Argus-D) in identifying the categories of traffic already drift identification process. Experiments are conducted on the
determined to be drifting. The combination of both dimensions M-D2 and M-D4 datasets, which include drifting malicious
is crucial for enhancing overall performance, especially in the traffic and drifting normal traffic, respectively.
MalReal dataset. In the CICIDD dataset, the approach that In the pre-clustering process, as shown in Figure 7a, model
considers only feature space (w/o PS) performs slightly worse performance is optimal when the value of k is moderate (i.e.,
than classifying all drifting traffic as malicious (w/o FPS). k = 5). Smaller values of k do not provide sufficient intra-class
However, this does not imply that clustering in feature space is specificity, while larger values of k tend to partition similar
an ineffective characteristic. On the contrary, Argus achieves samples into separate clusters. Regarding φcdr , Figure 7b
improved performance by first identifying clustering in feature shows that when φcdr = 0.01, ND-Acc for M-D4 normal
space and then analyzing it in physical space, effectively traffic is relatively poor, as this setting retains some lowcombining these two dimensions. sample categories, which, as independent classes for training,
 5) Ablation on Model Adaptation: In Argus, we adopt are insufficient and prone to misclassification.
an updating approach with constrain to prevent significant In ACLearner, the margin m represents the minimum
changes in the model and clusters during the update process, required distance between samples of different classes, and
which could negatively impact performance. We update the the analysis results are shown in Figure 7c. When m is
models initially trained on C-D1 and M-D1 using C-D3 small, the model’s ability to differentiate between samples of
and M-D4, respectively, and compare the performance of different classes decreases, as evidenced by a significant drop
Argus’s default constrained update method (Argus-U) with in accuracy for normal traffic in M-D4. Additionally, a smaller
the unconstrained method (w/o Cons). Except for the C-D1 m reduces the inter-class distance, which also shortens the
dataset, the constrained approach consistently outperforms the distance among samples within the same class, making the
unconstrained one, highlighting the importance of incorporat- model more likely to classify unknown samples as drifting.
ing constraints during updates. Conversely, a larger margin led the model to classify more
 samples similar to the training distribution as non-drift samples; for example, in M-D2, the proportion of non-drift normal
F. Parameters Analysis traffic samples increases with larger margins.
 We further study the impact of different parameter values on Besides, as shown in Figure 7d, the weights of reconstructhe performance of Argus. Below, we analyze the parameters tion loss and contrastive loss generally had little effect on
involved in each module separately. model performance. However, when the weight of reconstruc-
 1) Parameters Analysis on Model Training: In the model tion loss is too high, it significantly impacts performance.
training phase, we investigate the effects of the pre-clustering Given that reconstruction loss has an inherently large value,
cluster number k, the proportion of discarded class samples assigning it a higher weight diminishes the effect of contrastive
φcdr , and the margin m in ACLearner, along with the weights learning, resulting in poor separation of samples from different
of contrastive loss and reconstruction loss, λc and λr , on classes in feature space.
Argus’ performance. We focus on analyzing non-drift ratio 2) Parameters Analysis on Drift Detection and Classifi-
(NDR) and the accuracy in classifying these non-drifting cation: The drift detection phase determines whether the
traffic (ND-Acc), rather than evaluating overall performance, reconstruction loss of a new sample’s statistical and behavioral
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4997

 Fig. 7. Parameters analysis of model training and model adaptation modules.

 necessitates a trade-off in parameter selection based on specific
 requirements in practical applications to balance detection
 accuracy and the risk of missed detections.
 4) Parameters Analysis on Model Adaptation: We use
 C-D2 to update the model initially trained with C-D1 to
 study the impact of parameters during the adaptation process.
 Figure 7f illustrates the variations in non-drift ratio and
 ND-Acc across the C-D1 and C-D2 datasets. As shown,
 Fig. 8. Parameters analysis of drift identification module. updating with C-D2 effectively increases the non-drift ratio
 of the relevant test data, enhancing adaptability to new types
 of data. Moreover, when the values of αnd and αdr exceed 0.1,
features falls within the nσ range of the training data. Figure 7e the non-drift ratio and ND-Acc on the C-D1 dataset remain
illustrates NDR and ND-Acc on M-D2 and M-D4. It is almost unchanged from their pre-update levels, indicating that
observed that as the value of nσ increases, the criteria for a small amount of old data included in the update process can
identifying non-drifting data become more relaxed, leading to effectively prevent forgetting of previously acquired knowlan increase in NDR and a slight decrease in ND-Acc. By edge. Figure 7g shows the impact of the reconstruction loss
leveraging contrastive learning within the ACLearner training weights and the constraint term weights on performance during
phase, we achieve compact class representations, which allows the update process, with the contrastive loss weight fixed at 1.
the nσ -based threshold to accurately identify drifting samples It is evident that Argus’s update process is robust to weight
through their reconstruction loss. configuration.
 There is an inherent trade-off between the drift detection rate
and non-drift classification accuracy, and the results indicate
that the overall impact remains marginal. Furthermore, the V. D ISCUSSION
subsequent drift identification module automatically analyzes
 A. Scalability
samples flagged as drifting, thereby mitigating the manual
burden typically associated with tuning this trade-off. Argus exhibits excellent scalability due to its modular
 3) Parameters Analysis on Drift Identification: In the drift design and low-coupling architecture, allowing for indepenidentification phase, the key parameters include the two dent ACLearner models trained on network traffic features
DBSCAN parameters (Eps and MinPts) and two thresholds, and integrated via bagging for decision-making. Additional
θec and θev , used to determine whether a cluster should be features, such as raw payload-based ones, can be easily added
classified as malicious. Due to the interdependence among with dedicated encoders and decoders. This flexible design
these parameters, we present the precision (D-Pre) and recall supports the rapid integration of new features, enhancing
(D-Rec) performance for drifting traffic of Argus under various adaptability. Argus can also address concept drift in tasks like
parameter combinations on M-D2 and M-D4 in Figure 8. We traffic classification and malware detection by adjusting the
can observe that as Eps increases, D-Rec improves due to features used.
larger clusters incorporating more data points. Conversely, as Currently, Argus primarily considers the concentration in
MinPts increases, D-Rec declines, as higher MinPts values feature space and physical space when determining whether
result in more data points being classified as noise, reducing drifting traffic is malicious. However, temporal aggregation
the number of positively identified samples. Increasing the may also provide important insights. Normal traffic typically
thresholds θec and θev also leads to a slight decrease in exhibits uniform or widespread distribution over time, whereas
recall. D-Pre and D-Rec exhibit a negative correlation, which malicious traffic is often concentrated or sporadic. We plan to
4998 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

continue exploring this direction in future research to further distributed botnets, their traffic patterns may lack the density
enhance Argus’s detection capabilities. required for strong clustering in feature space. We acknowledge that Argus faces inherent limitations in detecting such
B. Adversarial Robustness stealthy drifts because the framework is optimized for attacks
 Argus demonstrates a high level of robustness when dealing with discernible concentrations in both feature and physical
with attackers who attempt to mimic normal behavior to evade spaces. However, the detection sensitivity can be adaptively
detection. By incorporating both statistical and behavioral tuned by relaxing the compactness criteria in the feature space,
features in its decision-making process, Argus increases the thereby allowing more suspicious samples to be evaluated by
difficulty for attackers to satisfy the normal distributions of the host interaction graph in the physical space. Coordination
both feature types simultaneously. Additionally, Argus miti- in physical space, such as specific host-to-host interaction
gates the impact of anomalous data on the training process by logic, is significantly more difficult for attackers to disguise
comparing the reconstruction loss of the test sample with that than individual flow features.
of its nearest neighbors, further enhancing the robustness of Conversely, bursty and highly similar legitimate behaviors
detection. could theoretically be flagged as malicious drift. However, the
 The issue of poisoning attacks indeed poses certain risks, probability is low as a false positive requires three simulespecially when data detected by Argus is used to update taneous conditions: the traffic must be previously unseen,
the model. However, Argus separates the updates for drifting triggering a drift judgment; highly compact in the feature
and non-drifting samples, allowing users to update the model space, overcoming natural user heterogeneity; and tightly
with only drifting malicious samples based on their needs. associated in the physical space via correlated business logic.
Due to constraints on feature changes during the update Such alignment in legitimate traffic is rare. Furthermore, even
process, the impact on existing classes is mitigated to a certain in this rare cases, the risk is practically mitigated without comextent. Additionally, Argus internally annotates drift traffic promising automation. These normal behaviors are typically
for updates rather than relying on externally labeled datasets. event-driven, allowing relevant host or event information to
This approach makes it difficult for attackers to execute data be manually pre-registered into a allowlist filter. This approach
poisoning attacks on the update data by generating spoofed mitigates risk without compromising automation or requiring
traffic within the target network, as such traffic would appear manual intervention for every drift sample.
legitimate while actually being malicious.
 E. Long-Term Adaptivity
C. Interpretability In real-world scenarios, models require multiple continuous
 Although Argus does not currently offer a dedicated inter- updates to maintain performance. Argus addresses evolving
pretability module, it is not a completely black-box model. attack types through a cluster merging mechanism. When the
By saving and analyzing intermediate results, users can drift identification module recognizes new attack clusters, they
still extract interpretability information and understand the are merged during updates to prevent over-dispersion, thereby
decision-making process of the model. First, when determin- avoiding decreased training efficiency and data sparsity.
ing traffic categories and whether drift has occurred, Argus To enhance long-term usability, we envision a multi-tiered
provides information on the distance between the target traffic adaptation strategy. This includes a short-term track for rapid
and existing categories, as well as whether the reconstruc- response to new attacks and a long-term track for large-scale
tion loss aligns with the nearest class distribution. Besides, merging once sufficient samples accumulate. Future research
Argus separates the analysis results based on statistical and will focus on integrating new samples with existing model
behavioral features. With this information, users can clearly knowledge to achieve seamless class merging. Furthermore,
understand why traffic is classified into a particular category we plan to explore time-decay strategies to de-emphasize
and identify which features played a key role in the decision- outdated data and data selection mechanisms to ensure that
making process. Second, when assessing whether drifting only high-quality, representative samples guide the model’s
traffic is malicious, Argus clusters these traffic samples in the generalization.
feature space and then analyzes the characteristics of these Furthermore, to ensure update quality and efficiency, we
clusters in physical space. This method offers a more macro- plan to explore applying a time-decay strategy to historilevel analytical perspective, allowing researchers to analyze cal samples, which gradually reduces the weight of older
traffic as clusters, thus gaining a better understanding of the data to prevent negative impacts on the model. Additionally,
overall characteristics of malicious behavior. introducing a data selection mechanism during the update
 process to choose representative, high-quality data minimizes
D. Extreme Scenario Analysis the negative effects of low-quality input and ensures better
 generalization capabilities.
 While Argus aims for automated drift identification, its
performance is subject to theoretical constraints in two extreme
 VI. R ELATED W ORK
scenarios: highly evasive attacks and centralized legitimate
behaviors. A. Malicious Network Traffic Detection
 For extremely stealthy attacks designed to evade detection, Effective feature extraction is crucial for detecting malisuch as low-rate scans, slow lateral movement, or highly cious network traffic. Most existing methods operate at the
HAN et al.: ROBUST MALICIOUS NETWORK TRAFFIC DETECTION FRAMEWORK 4999

flow level, deriving representations from packet characteristic weights based on importance in real time [18], [52]. Ensemble
sequences [4], [34], [35], [36] or raw traffic payloads [5], learning frameworks are widely used [53]. These methods
[37]. These methods typically extract statistical [38], [39], adapt to new data by dynamically adjusting the weights of base
frequency domain [13] and distributional features [40] to classifiers or introducing new ones. To reduce the reliance on
serve as inputs for machine learning or deep learning mod- extensive labeled data during model updates, active learning
els. To further enhance detection performance, researchers frameworks are often used [21], [54]. These methods select
have also incorporated traffic interaction characteristics, fully the most important samples for manual labeling, allowing the
leveraging the communicative relationships between flows model to adapt quickly with minimal cost.
[12], [22], [41]. Beyond precision, some research focuses Besides, some methods can provide explanations for drift
on robustness. Consequently, robust representations, such as [16], [19], [55], such as pointing out which features have
frequency domain [2] and cluster-based features [11], have changed, but there is still a lack of automated techniques
been engineered to maintain discriminative power, ensuring to determine the nature of the drift. Consequently, human
that malicious traffic remains distinguishable from benign intervention is often still required to identify the specific type
traffic even when undergoing adversarial perturbations. and cause of the drift.
 Based on these features, supervised learning is the most
common approach, directly classifying extracted features to VII. C ONCLUSION
identify threats. Innovations such as automated machine learn- We proposed Argus, a novel framework for malicious
ing have also been employed to optimize model selection and traffic detection in dynamic environments. By integrating
hyperparameter tuning automatically [42]. To make the models contrastive learning, automated drift identification, and a
more efficient to deploy, some approaches use programmable distance-constrained adaptive mechanism, Argus achieves
switches to calculate flow features at line speed for dynamic high-performance detection and continuous adaptation. Experanalysis [43]. There are also semi-supervised methods [31], imental results show that Argus outperforms existing methods,
[44], which typically use only a small amount of labeled maintaining an average F1 above 95% even under extreme
data, leveraging the distributional characteristics of unlabeled concept drift. These results confirm Argus as an effective,
data to assist in classification. Furthermore, given the high stable, and automated solution for evolving network threats.
variability of malicious traffic and the relative ease of acquiring
benign traffic labels, unsupervised methods are also widely R EFERENCES
used. These methods detect malicious traffic by establishing [1] K. Shaukat, S. Luo, V. Varadharajan, I. A. Hameed, and M. Xu, “A
a baseline for normal traffic and identifying anomalous traffic survey on machine learning techniques for cyber security in the last
[6], or by detecting traffic that deviates from the majority of decade,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 222310–222354, 2020.
 [2] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
the data [45], [46]. detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446, doi: 10.1145/
B. Concept Drift in Security Application 3460120.3484585.
 [3] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,”
 Concept drift is a prevalent challenge in security appli- in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988.
cations like intrusion detection and malware detection. [4] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
Fundamentally, it refers to the phenomenon that the statistical Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
patterns of data change, consequently degrading the perfor- [5] X. Han, S. Cui, S. Liu, C. Zhang, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “Network intrusion
mance of detection models. To address this challenge, existing detection based on n-gram frequency and time-aware transformer,”
 Comput. Secur., vol. 128, May 2023, Art. no. 103171.
research mainly focuses on two dimensions: drift detection and [6] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
drift adaptation. ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018,
 Some drift detection methods detect drift by continuously arXiv:1802.09089.
 [7] M. Jiang, P. Cui, A. Beutel, C. Faloutsos, and S. Yang, “Catching
monitoring fluctuations in the model’s prediction error rates synchronized behaviors in large networks: A graph mining approach,”
or variations in predictive probability distributions [47], [48]. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery Data, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1–27, Jul. 2016.
Other methods evaluate the distance [16] or statistical dif- [8] Y. Guo, “A review of machine learning-based zero-day attack detection: Challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 198,
ferences [19], [32] between current samples and historical pp. 175–185, Jan. 2023.
data. This distribution-based approach is suitable for real- [9] S. T. K. Jan et al., “Throwing darts in the dark? Detecting bots with
world network environments where real-time labels are often limited data using neural data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Privacy (SP), May 2020, pp. 1190–1206.
missing. Additionally, some studies utilize uncertainty estima- [10] F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, R. Jordaney, J. Kinder, and L. Cavallaro,
tion in deep learning models to identify potential drifts [17], “TESSERACT: Eliminating experimental bias in malware classification
[49], [50]. There are also unsupervised approaches that detect across space and time,” in Proc. 28th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2019,
 pp. 729–746.
normal drift without requiring manually labeled data [19]. [11] A. F. Diallo and P. Patras, “Adaptive clustering-based malicious traffic
 To mitigate model degradation caused by drift, existing classification at the network edge,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
techniques use various strategies to update and adapt the Comput. Commun., May 2021, pp. 1–10.
 [12] L. Gao, C. Fu, X. Deng, K. Xu, and Q. Li, “Wedjat: Detecting
model. The most straightforward approach involves period- sophisticated evasion attacks via real-time causal analysis,” in Proc.
ically finetuning [51] or retraining the model with newly 31st ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining V.1, Jul. 2025,
acquired data to update the detection criteria [19], [32]. To pp. 342–353.
 [13] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
address dynamic shifts in the feature space, some researchers robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
have proposed adding features dynamically or adjusting their no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1109/TNET.2022.3195871.
5000 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 21, 2026

[14] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [36] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Detecting tunneled flooding traffic
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers via deep semantic analysis of packet length patterns,” in Proc. ACM
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Dec. 2024, pp. 3659–3673.
 pp. 633–642, doi: 10.1145/3485447.3512217. [37] H. Zhang et al., “TFE-GNN: A temporal fusion encoder using graph
[15] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, neural networks for fine-grained encrypted traffic classification,” in
 “MT-FlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 2066–2075, doi: 10.1145/
 traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. 3543507.3583227.
 Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2022, pp. 2576–2584, doi: 10.1145/ [38] J. Gu and S. Lu, “An effective intrusion detection approach using SVM
 3534678.3539314. with naı̈ve Bayes feature embedding,” Comput. & Secur., vol. 103, Apr.
[16] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples 2021, Art. no. 102158.
 for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX [39] K. Lin, X. Xu, and F. Xiao, “MFFusion: A multi-level features fusion
 Secur.), 2021, pp. 2327–2344. model for malicious traffic detection based on deep learning,” Comput.
[17] R. Jordaney et al., “Transcend: Detecting concept drift in malware Netw., vol. 202, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 108658.
 classification models,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX [40] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. V. Ramos,
 Secur.), 2017, pp. 625–642. and A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for
[18] X. Wang, “ENIDrift: A fast and adaptive ensemble system for network ML-based network security applications,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst.
 intrusion detection under real-world drift,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18.
 Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 785–798. [41] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
[19] D. Han et al., “Anomaly detection in the open world: Normality shift encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 detection, explanation, and adaptation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Mar. 2024, doi: 10.1109/TNET.2024.3370851.
 Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. [42] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions
[20] B. A. Alahmadi, L. Axon, and I. Martinovic, “99% false positives: A in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 qualitative study of SOC analysts’ perspectives on security alarms,” Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
 in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), Aug. 2022, [43] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
 pp. 2783–2800. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/ intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
 usenixsecurity22/presentation/alahmadi 2023, pp. 6203–6220.
[21] F. Camarda, A. De Paola, S. Drago, P. Ferraro, and G. L. Re, “Managing [44] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
 concept drift in online intrusion detection systems with active learning,” on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 in Proc. CEUR Workshop, vol. 3962, 2025, Art. no. 42. 2020, pp. 1–18.
[22] C. Fu, Q. Li, E. Bertino, and K. Xu, “Training with only 1.0% [45] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
 samples: Malicious traffic detection via cross-modality feature fusion,” detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web
 in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2025, Conf., May 2024, pp. 1680–1689, doi: 10.1145/3589334.3645479.
 pp. 3930–3944. [46] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
[23] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
[24] A. Mustapha et al., “Detecting DDoS attacks using adversarial neural [47] M. Amin, F. Al-Obeidat, A. Tubaishat, B. Shah, S. Anwar, and T. A. Tannetwork,” Comput. Secur., vol. 127, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 103117. veer, “Cyber security and beyond: Detecting malware and concept drift
[25] M. H. Bhuyan, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. Kalita, “Surveying port in AI-based sensor data streams using statistical techniques,” Comput.
 scans and their detection methodologies,” Comput. J., vol. 54, no. 10, Electr. Eng., vol. 108, May 2023, Art. no. 108702.
 pp. 1565–1581, Oct. 2011. [48] S. Cai, H. Tang, J. Chen, Y. Hu, and W. Guo, “CDDA-MD: An efficient
[26] B. Stone-Gross et al., “Your botnet is my botnet: Analysis of a botnet malicious traffic detection method based on concept drift detection and
 takeover,” in Proc. 16th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. adaptation technique,” Comput. Secur., vol. 148, Jan. 2025, Art. no.
 2009, pp. 635–647. 104121.
[27] Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. (2018).Intrusion Detection Evalu- [49] G. Andresini, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, C. Loglisci, A. Appice, and
 ation Dataset (CIC-IDS2018). [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/ L. Cavallaro, “INSOMNIA: Towards concept-drift robustness in network
 cic/datasets/ids-2018.html intrusion detection,” in Proc. 14th ACM Workshop Artif. Intell. Secur.,
[28] (2017). Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset (CIC-IDS2017). Nov. 2021, pp. 111–122, doi: 10.1145/3474369.3486864.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html [50] F. Barbero, F. Pendlebury, F. Pierazzi, and L. Cavallaro, “Transcending
[29] Stratosphere Laboratory.(2014). Malware Capture Facility Project transcend: Revisiting malware classification in the presence of concept
 (MCFP) Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://mcfp.weebly.com/mcfp- drift,” 2020, arXiv:2010.03856.
 dataset.html [51] S. Yang, X. Zheng, J. Li, J. Xu, X. Wang, and E. C. H. Ngai,
[30] Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. (2016).VPN Non-VPN Traffic “ReCDA: Concept drift adaptation with representation enhancement for
 Dataset. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/vpn.html network intrusion detection,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
[31] M. Catillo, A. Pecchia, and U. Villano, “CPS-GUARD: Intrusion detec- Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2024, pp. 3818–3828.
 tion for cyber-physical systems and IoT devices using outlier-aware deep [52] M. A. Shyaa, N. F. Ibrahim, Z. Zainol, R. Abdullah, M. Anbar, and
 autoencoders,” Comput. Secur., vol. 129, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 103210. L. Alzubaidi, “Evolving cybersecurity frontiers: A comprehensive survey
[32] X. Zhang et al., “AOC-IDS: Autonomous online framework with con- on concept drift and feature dynamics aware machine and deep learning
 trastive learning for intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf. in intrusion detection systems,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 137, Nov.
 Comput. Commun., May 2024, pp. 581–590. 2024, Art. no. 109143.
[33] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: [53] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer-
 Robust malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
 confidence mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
 pp. 6871–6885, 2024. [54] X. Zhang et al., “Continual learning with strategic selection and forget-
[34] X. Hu, W. Gao, G. Cheng, R. Li, Y. Zhou, and H. Wu, “Toward early ting for network intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM Conf.
 and accurate network intrusion detection using graph embedding,” IEEE Comput. Commun., May 2025, pp. 1–10.
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 5817–5831, 2023. [55] Y. He, J. Lei, Z. Qin, K. Ren, and C. Chen, “Combating concept
[35] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework drift with explanatory detection and adaptation for Android malware
 for traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX classification,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
 Secur.), 2023, pp. 589–606. 2025, pp. 978–992.