IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 3753

 SAGA: Synthetic Audit Log Generation for
 APT Campaigns
 Yi-Ting Huang , Ying-Ren Guo , Yu-Sheng Yang, Guo-Wei Wong , Yu-Zih Jheng, Yeali S. Sun ,
 Jessemyn Modini, Timothy Lynar , and Meng Chang Chen

 Abstract—With the increasing sophistication of Advanced Per- malware analysis [1], [2], effective detection and mitigation of
sistent Threats (APTs), the demand for effective detection and mit- APT attacks remains a critical priority. A key obstacle in APT
igation strategies and methods has escalated. Program execution threat studies is the lack of a widely recognized benchmark
leaves traces in the system audit log, which can be analyzed to
detect malicious activities. However, collecting and analyzing large dataset [3], which is essential to develop AI/ML-based solutions
volumes of audit logs over extended periods is challenging, further and objectively evaluate methods. This challenge motivates the
compounded by insufficient labeling that hinders their usability. study of synthetic audit log generation in this work.
Addressing these challenges, this paper introduces SAGA (Syn- System audit logs, which record traces of program execution,
thetic Audit log Generation for APT campaigns), a novel approach play a crucial role in log analysis for threat detection. For
for generating find-grained labeled synthetic audit logs that mimic
real-world system logs while embedding stealthy APT attacks. example, MITRE ATT&CK Evaluations [4] provide emulation
SAGA generates configurable audit logs for arbitrary duration, plans that allow cybersecurity providers to assess their product’s
blending benign logs from normal operations with malicious logs ability to detect simulated cyber attacks through system logs.
based on the definitions the MITRE ATT&CK framework. Ma- With the advancement of data-driven artificial intelligence methlicious audit logs follow an APT lifecycle, incorporating various ods, it has become increasingly effective in addressing certain
attack techniques at each stage. These synthetic logs can serve
as benchmark datasets for training machine learning models and cyber threats, such as attack analysis [5], [6], [7], which offer
assessing diverse APT detection methods. To demonstrate the use- the potential for timely Technique detection. These approaches
fulness of synthetic audit logs, we ran established baselines of typically rely on high-quality labeled audit logs for model trainevent-based technique hunting and APT campaign detection using ing. In addition, it allows for the enhancement and comparison
various synthetic audit logs. In addition, we show that a deep of various methods.
learning model trained on synthetic audit logs can detect previously
unseen techniques within audit logs. However, labeling large volumes of audit logs over long
 periods poses challenges, especially when APT attacks lack
 Index Terms—Technique hunting, APT campaign, provenance- obvious indicators. Researchers often rely on publicly available
based detection, synthetic audit log, deep learning.
 datasets such as the DARPA Transparent Computing Engage-
 I. INTRODUCTION ment [8], Operationally Transparent Cyber (OpTC) [9], and
 LANL’s dataset [10], as well as smaller datasets that are rarely
 HE emergence of Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs),
T such as Fancy Bear (APT28) and Lazarus Group Elfin
(APT33), poses significant challenges to the cybersecurity comshared due to privacy and proprietary concerns. Moreover, some
 datasets provide fine-grained labels on malicious entities [5] or
 processes [11], while others [8], [9] only report attack scenarios
munity. APT campaigns, typically orchestrated by advanced
 over time intervals, without linking them to specific system
threat actors with economic or political motives,involve multiple
 events. This shortage of labeled logs limits a deeper understages, including gaining initial access to a victim environment,
 standing of attack behaviors and restricts the development of
remaining undetected for extended periods, exfiltrating sensitive
 AI/ML-based cybersecurity defense studies [12], [13].
data, and compromising system integrity. Despite progress in
 The absence of such audit logs motivates the development
 Received 20 November 2024; revised 30 October 2025; accepted 28 Novem- of methods for generating configurable synthetic audit logs that
ber 2025. Date of publication 5 December 2025; date of current version 12 fulfill the following key requirements.
March 2026. This work was supported in part by CITI, Academia Sinica and in r Realism: Synthetic audit log should closely resemble the
part by MOST under Grant NSTC 114-2221-E-011-080-MY3, Grant 114-2634-
F-001-001-MBK, and Grant 114-2221-E-001-018. (Corresponding author: real audit logs.
Yi-Ting Huang.) r Scenario coverage: They should represent a broad spec-
 Yi-Ting Huang is with the National Taiwan University of Technology and
Science, Taipei 106, Taiwan (e-mail: ythuang@mail.ntust.edu.tw). trum of APT campaigns, including recent and emerging
 Ying-Ren Guo and Meng Chang Chen are with Academia Sinica, Taipei City threats.
115201, Taiwan (e-mail: mcc@iis.sinica.edu.tw). r Detailed labeling: Logs should include fine-grained la-
 Yu-Sheng Yang, Guo-Wei Wong, Yu-Zih Jheng, and Yeali S. Sun are with
National Taiwan University, Taipei City 106319, Taiwan. bels such as specific Techniques or equivalents mapped
 Jessemyn Modini and Timothy Lynar are with the University of New South to events in the audit log.
Wales, Kensington 2052, Australia. r Higher-Level representation: Along with raw events, they
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3640696, provided by the authors. should offer higher-level abstractions, facilitating easier
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3640696 understanding, examination, and communication.

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
3754 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 r Flexibility: The framework should be able to generate logs
 of any duration and include any number of APT campaigns.
 r Diversity: The framework should be able to generate previously unseen logs, which would benefit model training
 and examination.
 This study introduces SAGA (Synthetic Audit Log Generation for APT Campaigns), a framework for generating configurable synthetic audit logs. SAGA is aligned with the MITRE
ATT&CK framework and terminologies, chosen for its openness, comprehensiveness, and availability. The generated synthetic audit log contains both benign and malicious (APT cam- Fig. 1. Example of audit log events captured by Procmon.
paigns) audit logs, with benign logs representing normal system
and user operations and malicious logs constructed from predefined Technique templates. Each APT campaign in the logs,
 WinRAR process creates a file named IOC_09_11.rar. System
comprising stages/tactics with corresponding techniques, which
 events, along with their subjects and objects, include attributes
are reflected in the audit logs.
 such as meta-information, properties, and other details provided
 The specific tasks of this study include:
 r Obtaining attack scenarios: Use a red team emulator to by the system, which can further describe the event and context.
 These details will be discussed in the subsequent section. System
 collect and label logs with technique identifiers based on
 audit logs can be obtained using built-in kernel event logging
 the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
 r Designing the SAGA framework: Develop the SAGA mechanisms such as Windows Event Tracing (ETW) and Linux
 Audit, or through additional tools like Procmon, Sysmon, and
 framework and workflow to address the aforementioned
 CamFlow.
 challenges.
 r Synthesizing configurable audit logs: Create synthetic au- In this study, we use Procmon as the primary logging tool.
 Procmon, short for Process Monitor is a Windows utility that
 dit logs that combine APT attack scenarios and benign
 monitors and records real-time system activities, including probehaviors, resembling real data logs.
 r Verifying SAGA usefulness: Run existing systems using cess actions, file system activities, registry changes, and more.
 Fig. 1 provides an example of the captured system events.
 the SAGA synthetic audit log as input to demonstrate its
 The first row records the event <firefox.exe, QueryOpen, ...
 effectiveness. Furthermore, show that models trained on
 \IOC_09_11.rar>, along with attributes such as timestamp, PID,
 the synthetic audit log can successfully identify previously
 and object value, which indicate a query for the existence of
 unseen malicious behaviors in new datasets.
 the RAR file. The audit log is proved useful for analyzing
 To demonstrate the usefulness of synthetic audit logs, we
 malicious attempts and APT attacks, offering insights into their
tested established baselines and the existing methods across
 characteristics.
various applications, including APT intrusion detection, technique hunting, and APT campaign detection. The objective of
this empirical study is to demonstrate that SAGA synthetic audit B. APT Attack Lifecycle
logs can be used effectively and meaningfully in cybersecurity- Frameworks such as Lockheed Martin’s cyber kill chain [14],
related audit log applications. The focus is not on comparing MITRE ATT&CK framework [15], and Mandiant adversary
the performance or goodness of these methods, as they target lifecycle [16] define the lifecycle of cyber attacks, helping
different objectives and operate in distinct contexts, making defenders understand the collective operations and intention of
direct comparison uninformative. APT attacks. This study uses the Mandiant adversary lifecycle,
 depicted in Fig. 2a , as a reference for the APT attack lifecycle,
 II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION although other frameworks can be equally applicable. Each
 stage/tactic encompasses associated Techniques, and each Tech-
 In this section, we introduce the audit log and its related issues
 nique may have several implementations/abilities. In addition,
using a running example of an APT campaign.
 this lifecycle framework helps to generate and analyze synthetic
 audit logs. Note that in this paper, we consider Technique and
A. System Audit Log Sub-Technique equally and use the term Technique to represent
 System audit logs are records of system events such as file both.
access, process creation and termination, and network access. A typical APT attack consists of multiple stages, including
Each system event depicts the interaction between two system initial compromise, establishing foothold, internal reconnaisentities, typically represented as <subject, operation, object>, sance, escalating privileges, moving laterally, maintaining preswhere the subject refers to a process entity or a program, and ence, and ultimately complete mission. Note that the stages of
the object represents a system entity such as a process, file, internal reconnaissance, escalating privileges, moving laterally,
registry, or network socket. The operation signifies the action and maintaining presence may occur multiple times, and not all
performed by the subject on the object. For example, the event four stages are necessary in every instance. Fig. 2 a shows the
<WinRAR.exe, CreateFile, IOC_09_11.rar> indicates that the lifecycle stages corresponding to the APT28 campaign.
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3755

Fig. 2.  a Mandiant attack lifecycle [16] of APT28.  b The APT28 attack provenance graph, derived from [17], presents five malicious events labeled with six
techniques, which are mapped to the corresponding stages of the attack lifecycle. In each zoomed-in box, the dotted boundary color corresponds to its specific
stage in the attack lifecycle. Rectangular nodes represent files, diamond-shaped nodes represent sockets, oval nodes denote processes, and the edges illustrate the
causal relationships between the entities. The red arrow edges indicate the sequence of malicious events.

 The attack proceeds by establishing a reverse shell between
 the attacker and the victim, designated as T1071 Application
 Layer Protocol of the Establish Foothold stage, marked as (3)
 in the figure. Next, it steals information such as local state
 files, corresponding to T1082 System Information Discovery and
 T1005 Data from Local System, marked as (4) and (5) of the
 Internal Reconnaissance stage. Finally, the stolen information
 is uploaded to a web servicewebhook.site, designated as T1567
Fig. 3. SAGA workflow.
 Exfiltration Over Web Service of the Complete Mission stage,
 shown as (6) in Fig. 2 b .

C. Running Example III. SAGA GENERATIVE MODEL
 We refer to APT28 threat intelligence reports [17] to construct The SAGA generative model involves collecting audit logs
the attack scenario illustrated in Fig. 2, which serves as the run- from a red-team emulator to create a repository of attack pattern
ning example in this work. Fig. 2 a outlines its attack lifecycle, templates with fine-grained labels. These templates are then
while Fig. 2 b shows the corresponding APT audit log. In the used, following lifecycle selection instructions, to generate syninitial stages of the attack, phishing emails containing malicious thetic audit logs that embed APT campaigns. Fig. 3 provides an
attachments are sent to the victim to download the attachment overview and the workflow of SAGA, which will be discussed
IOC_09_11.rar. This activity is designated as the Technique in detail in the following subsections. To mitigate the risk of
T1566.001 Spearphishing Attachment, as (1) in Fig. 2 b , of the detection models overfitting on artificial patterns, SAGA introattack lifecycle stage Initial Compromise. This malicious attach- duces variability in both attack implementation in Section III-A
ment exploits a vulnerability in WinRAR versions below 6.23 (as and artifact representation in Section III-C3. In Section III-A,
mentioned in CVE-2023-38831). When the victim clicks on the SAGA collects attack pattern from a red-team emulation plat-
IOC_09_11.rar file, it triggers subsequent malicious activities form that supports multiple abilities per Technique, enabling the
designated as T1204.002 User Execution: Malicious File of the generation of diverse execution paths and behavioral variants.
attack lifecycle Establish Foothold, as (2) in Fig. 2 b . In Section III-C3, SAGA incorporates entity-level variability
3756 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

by replacing generalized entities with hyponyms derived from
real-world malware samples and synthetic variants. This combination of implementation diversity and entity-level variation
helps generate a wide range of realistic log instances.

A. Attack Pattern Collection and Labeling
 The first task of SAGA is to collect labeled audit logs,
as depicted in Fig. 3. The Red Team Platform, such as
CALDERA [18], [19] and Atomic Red Team [20], simulates
real-world adversaries in a controlled environment. In this study, Fig. 4. Attack pattern template model.
we use CALDERA to emulate real-world attacks by adversaries.
Our choice is based on its open source nature and alignment with
the MITRE ATT&CK framework. To deploy CALDERA, we
configure a master server and set up Remote Access Tool (RAT)
clients on a compromised host. An ability of CALDERA refers
to a specific implementation of an ATT&CK Technique, representing a discrete adversarial behavior. After acquiring audit
logs from a red team emulator and process monitor, the next step
is to extract the relevant attack patterns and assign appropriate
Technique labels. CALDERA-generated reports provide details
for each executed attack, including process IDs, commands used,
and associated technique IDs. We employ a semi-automated
labeling method to annotate audit logs based on handcrafted
rules tailored to specific attack techniques.
 To develop specific rules for each ability, three authors applied their expert knowledge based on the MITRE ATT&CK Fig. 5. APT28 Attack pattern template example.
framework [15] to define rules for identifying attack-related
events. In the case of T1566.001, the ability of T1566.001
involves using the Invoke-WebRequest cmdlet of Powerfor the creation of new attack patterns. This approach facilitates
Shell, which indicates network activity connecting to the
 greater flexibility and diversity in the generation of new attack
GitHub website. Furthermore, the flag -OutFile and parameinstances.
ter \$env:TEMP\PhishingAttachment.xlsm suggests that a file
 We abstract each attack pattern into an attack template, which
named PhishingAttachment.xlsm will be created on the target
 specifies its prerequisites, outcomes, timings, and the corresystem. To ensure accurate labeling, rules are designed and
 sponding stage and Technique in the attack lifecycle. This metaapplied using both forward and backward tracing, since not
 information serves as a blueprint for generating diverse attack
all events generated during an attack should be considered
 instances while maintaining consistency among the generated
malicious and labeled with the Technique identifier. Some may
 instances. Fig. 4 shows the attack template model, which is
represent background or system activities. Only events exhibitexplained in more detail with an example in Fig. 5. Algorithm 1
ing these specific malicious actions and artifacts are considered
 shows the details of template generation.
malicious for this particular ability, and custom labeling rules are
 Attack Identification: The entity Attack Identification includes
crafted to capture this behavior. We validated these rules using
 the attack stage and Technique, which together define the identity
a set of manually labeled logs and through cross-verification via
 of the attack pattern template, as shown in Fig. 4. For example,
code review among the three authors.
 lines 1–3 of Fig. 5 illustrate an attack pattern template associated
 When given a CALDERA-generated report, SAGA uses
 with Technique T1566.001 Spearphishing Attachment and the
the attack-related Process ID (PID) as the root to construct a
 stage Initial Compromise in the adversary lifecycle.
comprehensive process family tree that captures all associated
 Attack Pattern: The entity Attack Pattern is associated with an
processes. By mapping these process IDs to the corresponding
 attack identity and consists of a sequence of events generated by
audit logs and applying handcrafted rules, SAGA can accurately
 a specific ability, categories and descriptors of artifacts presented
assign the appropriate technique ID to the relevant log entries.
 in the event. In this context, the category provides a broad classification, while the descriptor offers a more specific identifica-
B. Attack Pattern Templates Abstraction tion. For example, if an event contains the artifact Firefox, it falls
 Each attack pattern corresponds to a specific instance of a into the category process with the descriptor browser. To support
Technique with particular parameter values. To enable the gener- the generalization of attack pattern templates, Table I outlines
ation of a wider variety of attack patterns, it is essential to abstract a collection of categories and descriptors used in SAGA, which
these patterns into a more abstract form. These abstractions can can be considered as forming a hypernym relationship. The
then be instantiated with legitimate parameter values, allowing table outlines six categories, File, Network, Cmdline, Process,
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3757

 TABLE I information table records previously executed attacks and the
 CATEGORIES AND DESCRIPTORS USED IN THIS STUDY
 system entities utilized, as well as the system entities provided
 by the external environment, to facilitate Prerequisite matching.
 An attack pattern is generated only when all Prerequisite are
 satisfied; more details are given in Section III-C2.
 Outcome: The entity Outcome lists the artifacts produced after
 executing this attack (line 11 of Algorithm 1) , such as a phishing
 file (as indicated on line 17 of Fig. 5), collected sensitive information, and changes in system state. In a complete APT attack
 chain, Outcome may serve as prerequisites for subsequent attack
 patterns. Therefore, defining the Outcome within the template is
 crucial, as it not only impacts the immediate effects of the attack,
 but also has long-term implications for future attack strategies
 and defensive measures.

 C. APT Lifecycle and Technique Selection
 SAGA supports both random and user-specified APT cam-
 Algorithm 1: Generate Attack Pattern Template. paign generation, and in this subsection, the random APT
 Input: Attack pattern A and events E campaign generation is introduced. The generation of an APT
 Output: Attack pattern template P campaign is conditioned on the adversary lifecycle, involving
 1: Let T AB that stores known system entities and their lifecycle stage transitions, attack template selections, and attack
 descriptors and categories, as defined in Table I. pattern instantiation. The transition process of the lifecycle stage
 2: Initialize P with the stage and Technique, as described determines the subsequent stage according to the current status.
 in Subsection “Attack Identification”. An example of an adversary Mandiant lifecycle is shown in
 3: for each event e in E do Fig. 2 a . The attack template selection process chooses the
 4: for each system entity s in E do attack templates for each stage, while the artifact substitution
 5: if s already used then process instantiates the events for an attack pattern.
 6: Replace s with its descriptor d from T AB. 1) Lifecycle Stage Transitions: As described in Section II-B,
 7: else threat actors follow a systematic, strategic approach, executing
 8: Find its descriptor d and replace s. actions sequentially. An APT campaign begins with two initial
 9: Set the descriptor as a prerequisite. stages: initial compromise (IC) and establish foothold (EF). This
 10: end if is followed by an incubation period consisting of four stages:
 11: Set d as an outcome if it still exists. escalate privileges (EP), internal reconnaissance (IR), move
 12: Insert e into P . laterally (ML), and maintain presence (MP). The incubation
 13: end for period may occur once or multiple times, and within each
 14: end for incubation period, individual stages may be omitted or repeated.
 15: return P Finally, the last stage, complete mission (CM), is executed once
 or not at all, marking the successful completion of the attack. The
 Context-Free Grammar representation of a campaign generation
Registry, and System, each subdivided into specific descriptors. is presented in Table II. The lifecycle is defined in line 6. As
Refer to lines 3-6 of Algorithm 1. an example, in Fig. 2 b , the stages of APT28 include Initial
 Subsequently, additional attack instances can be generated by Compromise, Establish Foothold, Internal Reconnaissance, and
instantiating these attack pattern templates during the generation Complete Mission.
of synthetic audit logs. Using the same running example, three 2) Attack Template Selection: For each stage of an APT camsystem entities (artifacts) are involved in phishing: Firefox ac- paign, the number of attacks can be either randomly determined
cessing Microsoft Exchange and downloading IOC_09_11.rar or specified by the user. An attack template (TQ) may also be
through the browser. These entities can be substituted with randomly selected based on the current stage and prerequisites,
hypernyms (as shown in line 12 of Algorithm 1 and lines 7-10 or as specified by the user. Note that there may be benign
of Fig. 5), such as replacing Firefox with Process.browser and events (BE) preceding the attack pattern templates (TQ) that the
IOC_09_11.rar with File.phishing. operation is described in line 8 of Table II. In line 8, malicious
 Prerequisite: The entity Prerequisite specifies conditions re- audit logs (MA) consist of either a sequence of benign events
lated to the system resources required for the execution of an at- (BE), the selected attack pattern instance (In(T Q)), malicious
tack pattern (lines 8-9 of Algorithm 1) , such as process.browser audit logs (MA), or sequences of benign events (BE) and the
and file.phishing (as shown in lines 12-15 of Fig. 5) of the selected attack pattern instance (In(T Q)). Next, the abstracted
attack pattern template T1566.001 of APT28. To generate a arguments of the template are replaced with artifacts to generate
specific malicious audit log (i.e., an attack pattern), a campaign diverse audit events, as the instantiation of an attack pattern
3758 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II
 CONTEXT FREE GRAMMAR FOR CAMPAIGN GENERATION
 Algorithm 2: Synthetic Audit Log Generation.
 Input: Lifecyle {LC}, Attack pattern instances
 {ln(T Q)}, Benign audit log {BA}
 Output: Synthetic audit events SA
 1: while while LCi in LC exists do
 2: for each stage in LCi do
 3: // Include an attack pattern instance ln(T Q) in the
 stage. Line 8 of Table II.
 4: M A = BE + In(T Q) + M A | BE + In(T Q)
 5: where In(T Q) is an instantiated attack template,
 as Line 10 of Table II. BE is a short list of benign
 events.
 6: end for
 7: end while //Obtain all malicious audit logs {M A}
 8:
 9: Initialize SA with given background events.
 10: for each BAi in {BA} do
 11: // Perform Cb (SA, BAi ), as Line 1 of Table II.
 12: for each evt in {BAi } do
 13: evt.start = BAi .start + evt.relative
described in line 10 (In(T Q)) and elaborated in Section III-C3. 14: end for // Insert event evt to synthetic audit log.
The construction of the malicious audit log continues until all 15: SA = SA ∪ BAi
stages have been completed. 16: end for // Insert benign audit log BEi .
 A campaign information table, as depicted in Fig. 4, is created 17: for each M Ai in {M A} do
to maintain information about the executed attack templates, 18: // Perform Cm (SA, M A), as Line 1 of Table II.
including their associated lifecycle stage, as well as the system 19: for each In(T Qj ) in {M Ai } do
entities used and their statuses. Given the current stage, the 20: for each evt in {In(T Qj )} do
prerequisites of a template are examined against the campaign 21: evt.start = In(T Qj−1 ).end +
information table to determine whether they are satisfied. For In(T Qj ).lapse + evt.relative
example, if a threat actor uses a phishing email template during 22: end for // Insert event evt to synthetic audit log.
the initial compromise stage, the campaign information table 23: SA = SA ∪ In(T Qj )
will record the details of the phishing email template, including 24: end for // Insert technique In(T Q) to synthetic log.
the entity File.phishing. In the second stage (EF), the templates 25: end for // Insert malicious audit log M A to synthetic
for this stage will refer to the campaign information table to audit log.
check whether their prerequisites are met. Only if the prerequisites are met can they be considered potential templates for this
APT campaign.
 can extract a file %APPDATA%\ ... \Startup\twainResolver.lnk.
 3) Attack Pattern Instantiation: In Section III-B, we discuss
 The dropped file, twainResolver.lnk, is classified under the systhe creation of attack templates through the generalization of
 tem entity type file, as indicated in the ‘file’ section of the
system entities. While instantiating an attack pattern template,
 VirusTotal report. It is then recognized as ‘file.short’ based on
these generalized system entities are replaced by appropriate and
 regular expression matching, and a shortcut file in the Winmeaningful artifacts (or a hyponym) to form a validated attack
 dows startup folder to implement an attack behavior such as
pattern. This approach enables the generation of a wide range
 T1547.009 Shortcut Modification.
of attack instances.
 The second source of artifacts, such as usernames and process
 There are two methods for collecting the hyponyms of gen-
 IDs, which are indicated with ∗ Table I, is generated using the
eralized system entities. The first method involves using arti-
 Faker library in Python [21]. Faker efficiently generates realisticfacts collected from real-world data, such as malware names,
 looking random data that mimics real-world information. These
attack-related file names, and registry paths. To gather these arrandom artifacts are used to populate attack instances within
tifacts, we leveraged VX-Underground [22] and VirusTotal [23].
 the templates. Once attack patterns are generated for all stages
VX-Underground provides approximately 10,000 malware hash
 as a chronological sequence of labeled events, the prerequisites
values associated with APT campaigns collected over the past
 for every attack pattern must be satisfied to validate the attack
five years. Each hash was subsequently queried on VirusTotal to
 sequence, which is then considered an APT campaign.
extract relevant artifacts from the behavioral analysis reports. In
total, 157,806 artifacts were obtained and mapped to the gener-
 D. Synthetic Audit Log Generation
alized system entities defined in the attack templates for subsequent instantiation. For example, by querying VirusTotal using A synthetic audit log comprises several benign and APT
a sample hash value 78a3e4702d9fc13b2ef917211cd65b44, we campaign audit logs, with their composition methods detailed in
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3759

 normal system operations, mitigating the risk of generating
 disjointed or unrealistic event flows.
 There are still tasks that need to be addressed, such as establishing process relationships. For example, in an audit log,
 the ProcMon operation ProcessCreate (as shown in Fig. 1)
 creates a new process, and their parent-child relationship must be
Fig. 6. Composition of synthetic audit log.
 preserved. SAGA treats artifacts with the same descriptor within
 a single attack pattern template as belonging to the same process.
 Otherwise, operations from different templates are considered
Algorithm 2. A benign audit log is recorded from normal soft- independent processes.
ware activities, such as web browsing, Windows Office usage,
file downloads, etc., and is represented as a sequence of events, as IV. USEFULNESS STUDY OF SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG
defined in lines 2 and 3 of Table II. Each benign audit log includes
 In this section, we evaluate the usefulness of synthetic audit
a start time (BA.start) and log length (BA.length), with each
 logs for various detection methods in different APT attack
event having a relative time (evt.relative) to the log start time.
 scenarios. First, we show the variety of synthetic audit logs
The notation Cb (SA, BA) in the first line of Table II denotes
 that SAGA can produce, from those that mimic real-world
the composition of a benign audit log BA into a synthetic audit
 APT attacks (denoted as the C Group) to randomly generated
log SA. The composition involves setting the starting time of
 logs (denoted as the G group), and finally to composite both
the first event to the specified time of the benign audit log, and
 groups (denoted as the M group). Next, we assess whether
adjusting the start times of all other events by adding the log
 state-of-the-art audit log-based and provenance-based malicious
start time to their relative times. The procedure is described in
 detection methods can effectively use the synthetic audit log as
lines 9 to 14 of Algorithm 2.
 their target datasets. In addition, we discern the performance
 For the composition of an APT campaign audit log into a
 and operation differences of these methods when applying their
synthetic audit log, denoted as Cm (SA, M A) in the first line
 original datasets versus various synthetic data logs. Note that
of Table II, it merges each pair of benign events (BE) and
 the objective of this study is not to identify the best-performing
attack technique events (ln(T Q)) sequentially until all pairs
 methods or models, as each approach has its own specific focus,
are combined. A BE is usually a short sequence of benign
 design considerations, and inherent limitations.
events that occurs before the particular Technique (ln(T Q)).
 This section begins by outlining the settings for the empirical
The composition of BE follows the same method as that for
 study, including the synthesized datasets, labeling, metrics, and
BA. The composition of T Q, which refers to the audit log events
 machine hardware and software configurations. Our analysis
representing a particular Technique, provides flexibility in both
 focuses on three sets of empirical studies to demonstrate the
the start time and duration. This means that a Technique audit
 usefulness of the synthesized attack datasets: 1) assessing the
log can begin at any time and span any length. The start time of
 effectiveness of APT intrusion detection by, 2) evaluating the
a Technique audit log is set to the end time of the preceding
 accuracy of Technique hunting, and 3) gauging the effectiveness
Technique plus the lapse time ln(T Q).lapse, which can be
 of campaign attribution. Finally, we will conduct a case study to
specified by the user or determined randomly by SAGA. The
 evaluate the effect of model training using synthetic audit logs
procedure is described in lines 15 to 22 of Algorithm 2.
 to test the model on an unseen dataset.
 Fig. 6 depicts a composition of 3 benign audit logs and 4
APT audit logs. Note that the logs may overlap and the APT
audit logs can be extended for any duration. SAGA explicitly A. Evaluation Settings
leverages process identifiers, parent-child process relationships, Datasets: The experiments utilize synthetic audit log datasets
and event timestamps to preserve the underlying process struc- generated by SAGA (hereafter referred to as the SAGA dataset),
ture, temporal ordering, and causal dependencies that are critical which is publicly available at [24]. A synthetic audit log, as
for contextual consistency in audit logs. To avoid unrealistic described in Section III, includes both benign behaviors and macombinations of events, SAGA maintains semantic coherence licious APT attack scenarios. Similarly to previous research [5],
at both the process and artifact levels. For example, when two [25], the benign audit logs cover a variety of everyday activities,
events involve shared entities, such as a file, registry key, or such as watching YouTube videos, downloading and compiling
named pipe, SAGA preserves these dependencies to ensure that source code from GitHub, writing and sending emails, running
the resulting logs reflect plausible and continuous behavior. As Python programs, playing video games, reading news articles,
illustrated in Section II-C, a user downloads a malicious attach- and composing Word documents. This diversity ensures that
ment IOC_09_11.rar via a browser (T1566.001: Spearphishing the synthetic audit logs accurately reflect typical user behavior.
Attachment), and subsequently opens it using Microsoft Word For malicious events, we prepared 169 abilities executed on the
(T1204.002: Malicious File Execution). Although these steps MITRE CALDERA [19] red-team emulator to generate labeled
span separate processes, their interaction through a shared ar- malicious audit events. These events were then processed into
tifact forms a coherent and realistic attack sequence. In this attack pattern templates for further synthetic audit log generaway, SAGA ensures that injected attack behaviors are not only tion. Each of the 169 attack pattern templates was instantiated
chronologically plausible but also contextually consistent with with artifact replacements, as described in Section III-B, to form
3760 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

the datasets used in the empirical study. The training dataset TABLE III
 COMPUTATION OVERHEAD OF AUDIT LOG GENERATION
for Technique hunting consists of 16,900 attack patterns, each
of which is an instantiation of a attack pattern template. This
dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets in an 8:1:1
ratio.
 Given the limited availability of audit logs labeled with
Techniques, we used the attack pattern templates to create
APT campaigns. These scenarios include eight APT attack codes are publicly available and the systems can be installed and
campaigns (“known” group) based on cyber threat intelligence executed without issues.
reports from real-world APT campaigns, including Higaisa [26], For Technique hunting, we used the Sigma rules [35], an open
admin338 [27], APT28 [17], FIN7 [28], CobaltGroup [29], signature-based rulebase contributed by numerous security prac-
Gamaredon [30], Patchwork [31], and GorgonGroup [32]. More- titioners, and SFM [36], a deep learning approach that provides
over, using SAGA random generation capability, we produced Technique hunting functionality. We selected Sigma as a base-
20 APT campaigns (“random generated group”). From these 28 line because it is a widely adopted, community-driven detection
APT campaigns, we randomly selected 3 to create new com- framework, actively maintained by practitioners worldwide. As
posite scenarios involving multiple APT campaigns targeting a noted by [37], Sigma has also been shown to align closely
single victim host, resulting in 10 composite campaigns (“com- with several commercial rulesets, making it a meaningful and
posite” group). To demonstrate the versatility and flexibility of representative point of comparison. A major portion of these
SAGA, each of the above APT campaigns was generated over rules align with the MITRE ATT&CK framework with 70 rules
three different time periods: 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d. mapped to the Techniques identified in this study. SFM integrates
 Labeling: For each generated APT campaign, SAGA labels three key technologies: anomaly detection to mitigate the impact
malicious events with APT stages, Techniques, abilities, manip- of data imbalance, a multi-class classifier for Technique hunting,
ulated system entities, and other operation-related attributes. In and subgraph matching for APT campaign attribution. SFM
addition, it includes threat actors, when applicable. Malicious was selected because it was one of the few systems specifiaudit events are labeled using the BIO2 scheme [33] covering cally designed to address both the Technique hunting task and
7 attack stages, 80 Techniques, and 169 abilities, as shown in APT campaign attribution, making it particularly suited for the
Table S1 of Supplementary Material A. evaluation of complex attack scenarios. All models and methods
 Evaluation Metrics: We adopt three evaluation metrics for were installed with configurations as close as possible to those
different tasks: APT intrusion detection, Technique hunting, and described in their original publications. Code modifications were
APT campaign attribution. The APT intrusion detection task only made to ensure compatibility with the structure of the
aims to identify any APT intrusions or anomalies within the synthetic audit logs.
dataset under examination. Technique hunting seeks to identify Computation Configurations: For empirical studies, we used
Techniques violated based on MITRE ATT&CK definitions. a Windows 10 operating system with 8 GB of memory with an
APT campaign attribution aims to determine the most probable Intel i9-10900F CPU as our victim system. For defender model
APT campaign present in the dataset. To evaluate performance, development, we employed AMD EPYC 7282 16-Core Proceswe use standard classification metrics: precision (P), recall (R), sor CPU running Ubuntu 20.04 system with 1 TB of memory
F1 score (F1), and accuracy (ACC). and two NVIDIA A100 80 GB GPUs. Neural network training
 For APT intrusion detection, we frame it as a binary classifi- was performed using PyTorch 1.13.1 and Python 3.10. The
cation problem, determining whether a malicious event exists computational overhead of generating malicious audit events
in the audit log. Since different target systems or methods and audit log composition was measured and listed in Table III.
apply their own tests to detect APT intrusion on an event, a
graph, or a time window interval, we adapt to their respective
evaluation designs to assess performance. Technique hunting is B. APT Dataset Generation
treated as a multi-class classification task, where each classifier In this section, we provide a more detailed discussion on
determines whether a specific Technique has been employed in the considerations for generating the APT dataset, focusing
one or more events. For APT campaign attribution, we analyze primarily on generation guidance, attack scenarios, and duration.
the Techniques identified from the Technique hunting task to Generation Guidance: SAGA offers flexibility in generating
determine the most likely APT campaign for the audit log. We APT campaigns, based on user specifications, randomly, or
rank the ground truth against the predictions and employ a Top-K through a combination of both. For example, SAGA generates
measurement to evaluate the performance of the APT campaign eight known APT campaigns (denoted from C1 to C8) folattribution. lowing user specifications, with their lifecycles and Techniques
 Established Baselines: For APT intrusion detection, we presented in Table IV. To further illustrate SAGA’s versatility,
demonstrate the usefulness of generated attack datasets using we also used its random generation capabilities to create 20
three types of systems: event-based (AirTag [6]), graph-based additional campaigns (denoted from G1 to G20), showcasing
(Unicorn [34]), and time window-based (KAIROS [7]) intrusion its capacity to create varied attack scenarios. The lifecycles
detection systems. The reasons for choosing the three systems and Techniques of these randomly generated campaigns are
are not only that they are established baselines, but also that their presented in Table S2 of Supplementary Material A, while
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3761

 TABLE IV
 APT ATTACK SCENARIOS BASED ON CYBER THREAT INTELLIGENCE REPORTS

 TABLE V
 STATISTICS FOR THE THREE TIME DURATIONS IN THE EIGHT APT ATTACKS

the detailed statistics, including sizes, number of entities, and 14,263,393.25 for 1-day audit logs. This variability reflects the
number of events, are provided in Table S3 also in Supple- evolving nature of APT attacks, which are not constrained by
mentary Material A. This flexibility highlights the scalability fixed timeframes, highlighting SAGA ability to generate audit
and adaptability of our approach in simulating a wide range of logs of various durations. It also allows for a more thorough
cyberattack scenarios, enabling the creation of customized and examination of how different detection methods perform over
diverse testing environments to thoroughly evaluate detection varying time intervals.
methods.
 Attack Scenario: We introduce two variations in attack scenarios: one involving a single campaign targeting the system and C. APT Intrusion Detection
another featuring three simultaneous campaigns. This variation APT intrusion detection is defined as the task of identifying
in attack composition allows for a comprehensive assessment potential APT attacks within an audit log, as established in
of detection methods in more complex, multi-campaign situ- previous studies [6], [7], [34]. To demonstrate the usefulness
ations. For instance, the M1 attack scenario consists of three of SAGA datasets in supporting APT intrusion detection, we
separate attacks, Higaisa, G1, and admin338, each employing present the detection results using their own evaluation schemes
distinct Techniques and targeting the same compromised host. of various methods and then discuss the causes of performance
Additional details on the ten generated composite campaigns difference, considering the following factors: test granularity,
can be found in Table S4 in Supplementary Material A, due to Technique used, attack scenario, and duration. Table VI presents
the constraints of the manuscript space. the performance of the three intrusion detection systems, AirTag
 Attack Duration: To account for the variability in the duration (event-based), Kairos (time window-based) and Unicorn (graphof the attack, we generated synthetic audit logs with durations based) across various SAGA datasets. More details can be found
of 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d. Although SAGA can create logs in Tables S5, S6, and S7 of Supplementary Material B. Perforof any length, we limited the maximum duration to 1 d in this mance data for E3-CADETS, E3-THEIA, and E3-ClearScore
study, considering the computational overhead of the intrusion were copied directly from their respective original papers. Unidetection systems discussed in Section IV-C Table V, Table S3 corn, which analyzes the entire provenance graph to detect
and Table S4 in Supplementary Material A, presents statistical anomalies, generally performed well in both precision and recall.
descriptions of logs for each duration. As shown in Table V, the AirTag, on the other hand, which identifies intrusions by analyzaverage number of events increases with log length: 910,711 ing individual events, struggled with high rates of false positives
for 15-minute audit logs, 1,184,512.5 for 1-hour audit logs, and and false negatives. When exposed to SAGA’s broader technique
3762 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE VI
 AVERAGE PERFORMANCE OF THE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

coverage, multi-stage campaign structure, and temporal varia- Attack Scenario Impact: SAGA is capable of generating syntion, AirTag, a one-class SVM anomaly detection model built thetic audit logs containing multiple APT campaigns, referred to
on a customized BERT embedding, struggles to find a stable as composite campaigns (M group), designed to reflect complex
decision boundary across such diverse contexts. Kairos was real-world scenarios. Details of these composite campaigns,
designed with specific assumptions about event sequence timing, labeled M1 to M10, are provided in Table S7 in the Supplemenwhich may not align with the more flexible and richly structured tary Material B. As the complexity of the M group audit logs
scenarios generated by SAGA. By grouping events within time increases, the detection performance gradually declines (e.g.,
windows, Kairos tended to reduce both false positives and false from C_15 min to M_15 min), as shown in Table VI.
negatives, resulting in relatively low precision but higher recall. Duration Impact: To demonstrate its ability to generate syn-
 Test granularity: Test granularity refers to the unit of target thetic audit logs of varying length, 15 minute and 1 h attack
tested in a detection method. For example, the text granularity of scenarios were generated to detect APT intrusions. An APT at-
AirTag is based on individual events. In a test using the APT28 tack typically employs a “low-and-slow” approach, maintaining
campaign dataset (15 minutes), AirTag generated 301,069 false a prolonged presence on the target machine, which makes the
positives and missed 14,098 malicious events out of 1,209,895 intrusion difficult to detect. As shown in Table VI, the detection
total events. On the other hand, Kairos, which uses time window performance gradually decreases with longer durations for the
as its test granularity, incorrectly flagged 42 benign windows same context.
and missed just one malicious window out of 67 total windows. In summary, synthetic audit logs can be tailored in terms of
Table VI presents the performance of the three detection sys- duration, the number and type of embedded APT campaigns,
tems, each using its own scoring method (i.e., a formula to and the types of APT campaigns. As the complexity of these
calculate the performance metrics). This highlights the sig- scenarios increases, the performance of detection methods tends
nificant influence of the test granularity and scoring method to degrade.
on the reported results, making direct comparisons between
performance data difficult and, at times, not meaningful. Since
SAGA provides labels for each event, its datasets are ver- D. Evaluation on Technique Hunting
satile enough to support various test granularity and scoring To demonstrate the practical utility of fine-grained Technique
methods. labeling, Technique hunting is the task of identifying poten-
 Technique impact: The generated campaigns (G) feature a tial threats, specifically Techniques, as defined by the MITRE
greater number and diversity of Techniques compared to the ATT&CK framework. SAGA follows Algorithm 2 to generate
synthetic known campaigns (C). To assess the impact of varying attack campaigns, where each event is labeled with its correthe number and types of Techniques used in different campaigns, sponding Technique identifier. This structured synthetic audit
we provide details of the audit logs for the known campaigns in log allows detection methods to effectively perform Technique
Table IV, and for the generated campaigns in Table S2 of Supple- hunting. The approaches are used for Technique hunting; one is
mentary Material A. As shown, the audit logs for the generated SFM and the other is using Sigma rules. The performance results
campaigns contain more and a broader range of Techniques than of Technique hunting for each APT attack campaign are reported
those in the synthetic known campaigns. Table VI presents the in Table VII that details are given in Table S9 in the Supplemenaverage performance of each detection system, showing that the tary Material C. The results indicate significant performance
C group consistently outperforms the G group. This decline in distinctions between SFM and Sigma rules, regardless of the
performance is directly correlated with the increasing number generation method, attack scenario, or duration. SFM is capable
and diversity of Techniques. of recognizing attack patterns by learning from synthetic data,
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3763

 TABLE VII
 THE PERFORMANCE OF TECHNIQUE HUNTING

 Fig. 7. The top k ranking results of APT campaign detection by SFM.

whereas Sigma rules are limited to detecting attack patterns that a series of coordinated attack patterns. In line with the MITRE
match pre-defined signatures. This underscores the importance ATT&CK framework, an APT campaign can be described as a
of the generated datasets in facilitating the advancement of sequence of Techniques. SFM leverages this structure to detect
learning-based model methodologies. the most likely APT campaign by comparing the discovered
 However, both methods showed significant performance fluc- Techniques (Gq ) against a pool of known APT campaigns (Gc ).
tuations across various attack scenarios. For example, the aver- In this empirical study, Gc includes 8 known campaigns and
age standard deviations of precision during the 15-min scenarios 30 randomly generated APT campaigns. Fig. 7 illustrates the
were 33.92% and 32.25% for SFM and Sigma rules, respectively. ranking of each SFM-identified campaign over three different
Several factors contributed to this variability. First, there was durations, 15 minutes, 1 h, and 1 d. SFM successfully identified
a high incidence of false positives associated with specific most campaigns within the top 3 rankings across all three time
attack behaviors. Second, the substantial imbalance between the durations: 74% for 15 minutes, 84% for 1 h, and 79% for
number of malicious events and the overwhelming prevalence 1 d. Notably, 50% of the campaigns were ranked first in both
of benign activities skewed the evaluation of attack behaviors. 1 h and 1 d scenarios. One reason for this success could be
Lastly, benign activities and malicious events were intertwined that the temporal causal relationships is established among the
and exhibited different patterns in various datasets, complicating Techniques discovered by SFM, which effectively distinguishes
the recognition of attack patterns. the most probable campaign from others. Furthermore, SFM
 For instance, recognizing T1105 Ingress Tool Transfer (ITT3) demonstrated resilience to discrepancies between the discovered
requires identifying the following sequence of audit events ability graph Gq and the campaign Techniques Gc . However,
within interleaved benign event sequences: <browser.exe, TCP the M group, consisting of multiple campaigns in a single
connect, XXX.com>, <browser.exe, FileCreate, payload.exe>, scenario, posed a greater challenge compared to the groups of
and <xxx, Process Create, payload.exe>. This sequence indi- single campaigns. In addition, the results further suggest that as
cates that a malicious payload was downloaded from an external the duration of audit log grows, the complexity of identifying
C2 server and executed on a compromised machine. These APT campaigns also increases. In conclusion, this evaluation
malicious events are causally correlated and in audit log, they highlights the potential of SAGA in effectively supporting the
were intertwined with benign and background events, making detection of APT campaigns.
the recognition of this Technique particularly challenging.
 On the other hand, while Sigma rules perform efficiently, they
 F. A Case Study of Unseen APT Campaign
are based on contributions from human experts and may not
encompass all attack behaviors, such as T1055.002 Portable Ex- In this section, we investigate the effectiveness of SAGA synecutable Injection (PEI) and T1491 Defacement (DF2) identified thetic audit log datasets in training an APT campaign model to
in this empirical study. As a result, certain malicious behaviors be applied to previously unseen APT campaigns, even when the
went undetected in the APT campaigns C-6, C-8, G-11, and campaign audit logs follow a different format and organization.
G-13. These findings address the limitations of manually crafted, Specifically, SFM was trained using SAGA datasets and tested
signature-based detection methods and highlight the impor- on the DARPA TC E3 Fivedirection dataset to detect attack
tance of datasets like those generated by SAGA, which provide behaviors (i.e., Techniques) within the logs.
comprehensive logs from red-team emulation campaigns. Such The E3 Fivedirection dataset includes a complex attack scedatasets support the development and evaluation of both rule- nario (4.4 Phishing Email with Excel Macro [38]). As illusbased detection systems and learning-based models in a realistic trated in Fig. 8, the attacker used a phishing attachment to
environment. lure the victim into downloading and executing malware that
 triggered subsequent malicious activities, including establishing
 a remote command shell and gathering various system informa-
E. APT Campaign Detection Evaluation
 tion. From the detection results, it shows that SFM was able to
 APT campaign detection involves identifying a potential APT successfully identify part of the attack sequence. For example,
campaign embedded in an audit log, which is characterized by during the initial compromise phase, the SFM successfully
3764 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 8. The DARPA TC E3 Fivedirection attack graph.

flagged the system events corresponding to the victim down- dataset [10], StreamSpot [25] ADFA [40], and DARPA Transloading the phishing attachment, <thunderbird.exe, WriteFile, parent Computing (TC) [8], as well as OpTC [9]. CERT’s
BoviaBenefitsOE.xlsm>, as T1566.001 Spearphishing Attach- dataset provides synthetic background data alongside malicious
ment. Additionally, during the Establish Foothold phase, the operations, such as logon and email activities, carried out
system events corresponding to the execution of the phishing by multiple threat actors across five distinct attack scenarios.
attachment, <Excel.exe, CreateFile, BoviaBenefitsOE.xlsm>, LANL’s dataset consists of 58 consecutive days of event data
were also correctly flagged as T1204.002 User Execution: Ma- collected from LANL’s corporate computer network, includlicious File. ing logon events, process events, DNS lookups, network flow
 However, some attack behaviors were not correctly iden- events, and a set of well-defined red teaming events repretified by SFM. For example, during the Establish Foothold senting malicious activities. StreamSpot includes one attack
phase, when the attacker used PowerShell to download a mali- activity—a drive-by download initiated by visiting a malicious
cious payload (update.ps1) from a C2 server, SFM successfully URL that gains root access to the visiting host—along with
marked the system events related to the download activity, five benign activities forming three scenarios. However, these
<powershell.exe, CreateFile, update.ps1>, as T1105 Ingress datasets primarily focus on event action types (i.e., operations)
Tool Transfer, but it failed to include the system events, Pow- and timestamps, lacking critical details regarding the underlying
erShell connection to the C2 server, <powershell.exe, TCP system entities involved in the audit events. This absence limits
connect, 208.75.117.5> in T1105. This limitation could be their ability to clearly describe the full context of each event,
attributed to gaps in the SAGA dataset’s representation of cer- which is essential for comprehensive attack pattern analysis and
tain attack behaviors, or SFM’s difficulty in detecting subtle detection.
variations in event sequences. ADFA comprises three datasets: ADFA-LD (Linux), ADFA-
 However, these results highlight the practical value of the WD (Windows), and ADFA-WD-SAA (Windows for Stealth At-
SAGA dataset in supporting practical cybersecurity applications tacks). Among these, ADFA-WD is the most relevant to SAGA.
and providing a solid foundation for future improvements to However, it only contains DLL traces of processes collected by
dataset generation strategies. They also underscore the need Procmon and includes twelve zero-day attacks executed on a
for further improvements in APT campaign detection models host.
to enhance their capability and accuracy. DARPA’s TC program included five engagements and the
 OpTC dataset. The E3 and E5 engagements, featuring two
 and eight multi-stage APTs respectively, are widely used for
 V. RELATED WORK intrusion detection, alongside benign background activity. The
 Existing Benchmarks for Host-based Intrusion Detection: OpTC dataset, created to assess scalability, simulated a three-day
As noted in the survey by [3], the majority of studies on APT on a 1,000-host test network during a two-week experhost-based intrusion detection have relied on self-constructed iment. However, these datasets lack thorough documentation
attack scenarios for evaluation. Some works have utilized ex- and labels, which limits their usefulness for precisely evaluating
isting public datasets such as CERT’s dataset [39], LANL’s attack behaviors and audit events.
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3765

 TABLE VIII representation methods used in Unicorn [34], Kairos [7], and
 COMPARISONS WITH SYNTHETIC APT DATASET GENERATION
 MAGIC [46]; translation-based embedding techniques in WAT-
 SON [48] and ShadeWatcher [45]; and language models in
 AirTag [6] and DrSec [47]. Our research demonstrates that applying event-based [6] and graph-based intrusion detection [7],
 [34] to our synthesized campaign datasets results in effective
 detection of intrusion events.
 Technique Hunting: HOLMES [49] generates detection signals by matching 16 predefined attack patterns and constructing
 a high-level scenario graph embedded with TTPs to indicate
 APT campaign activities. RapSheet [50] creates a tactical provenance graph using 67 rules within a commercial EDR tool,
 aligning it with MITRE ATT&CK. KRYSTAL [51] leverages
 Sigma rules [52] to detect known attack patterns, converting
 them into SPARQL queries for threat detection. Although these
 rule-based approaches are effective, their manual creation and
 upkeep are resource-intensive. Our study addresses this limita-
 Synthetic APT Dataset Generation: While there are some tion by introducing a flexible approach to APT dataset generpublicly available attack datasets, few research focus on con- ation using a red-team emulator for audit event collection, enstructing datasets for simulating multi-stage APT attacks [41], abling a learning-based methodology. Additionally, we propose
[42], [43], [44]. To steal organization data, DAPT2020 [41] a straightforward method (SFM) for identifying attack patterns,
imitated the exploited web vulnerability in a production network, providing a baseline for future research.
and Unraveled [43] created skeletons of user profiles to emulate
user behavior based on predefined job pipelines. These datasets
 VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
encompass network traffic and multi-host log information, covering limited attacks (i.e., 10 and 15) within attack stages over This study presents a generative APT campaign framework,
a fixed collection duration (i.e., 1 week or 6 weeks), In contrast, SAGA, designed to synthesize synthetic audit logs for nearly
our generated APT dataset includes and labels 7 attack stages, any configuration. These logs support the training of various
80 techniques, and 169 abilities, offering configurable attack machine learning-based APT-related detection machine learning
patterns and collection duration on single-host audit events. This models and facilitate the evaluation of various APT-related
flexibility allows for more detailed and customizable simulation detection methods. To demonstrate the usefulness of SAGA’s
of attack behaviors. synthetic datasets, a collection of empirical studies were con-
 PWNJUTSU [42] and LADEMU [44] considered adver- ducted across multiple established baselines for APT intrusion
saries’ TTPs, defining the operational semantics of Techniques detection, Technique hunting, and APT campaign detection.
as specifications for procedures. PWNJUTSU utilized a semi- In light of the observation of artifact leakage, distributional
automated approach where each attack step was crafted by shift, benign syntheticity, and attack covertness in the synthetic
professional human Red Teamers, providing a highly skilled datasets [11], we emphasize that the SAGA-generated datasets
yet partially manual campaign construction process. In contrast, are not limited to single-campaign training or evaluation. They
LADEMU offered a proof-of-concept (PoC) implementation can be flexibly composed to include multiple campaigns, time
using the red-team emulator Caldera and demonstrated the use spans, and benign activities, allowing researchers to design
of a single attack scenario, APT29. Our study introduces a training and testing splits that better reflect real-world conditions
workflow of campaign generation with event logs, enabling and capture diverse, multi-stage attack behaviors. Furthermore,
fully automated APT simulations based on TTPs specified in SAGA enables researchers to explore distributional shifts by
the MITRE ATT&CK framework. This approach eliminates generating stage-specific audit logs, supporting the training and
the need for manual intervention, ensuring more consistent and evaluation of models on early-stage versus late-stage attack
scalable attack simulations. Table VIII contrasts SAGA with behaviors.
previous framework and highlights SAGA’s unique advantages, The authenticity of SAGA-generated logs is grounded in two
particularly its configurability (in terms of duration, techniques, factors: the faithful implementation of attack techniques and the
and campaign design), fine-grained labeling, and high degree of construction of realistic attack sequences. SAGA relies on a redautomation. team emulator (i.e., Caldera) to execute concrete implementa-
 Host-based Provenance analysis: Learning-based prove- tions of ATT&CK techniques. The more faithfully the emulator
nance analysis methods have shown notable improvements in reproduces adversary behaviors, the more realistic the resulting
the detection of intrusions and have accelerated the investigative logs. For sequence construction, SAGA supports both expertprocess of various attacks [3], [5], [6], [7], [34], [45], [46], [47]. instructed campaigns, emulating real-world APT scenarios as
 These learning-based models employ a range of represen- defined by domain experts (similar to manual red-teaming), and
tation learning techniques to encode provenance graphs, en- sampled sequences, assembled from statistically plausible and
abling effective anomaly detection. Examples include graph logically coherent technique transitions. This design enables
3766 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

SAGA to generate scalable and scenario-driven audit logs, ad- [14] Lockheed Martin Corporation, “Gaining the advantage: Applying cyber
dressing the broader need for labeled and scenario-driven log kill chain methodology to network defense,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
 https://www.lockheedmartin.com/content/dam/lockheed-martin/rms/
data for learning-based APT detection research. documents/cyber/Gaining_the_Advantage_Cyber_Kill_Chain.pdf
 The quality of SAGA datasets depends on access to exten- [15] B. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. Miller, K. Nickels, A. Pennington, and
sive, high-quality campaign knowledge and diverse Technique C. Thomas, “MITRE ATT&CK: Design and philosophy,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/publications/primplementations. The current implementation of SAGA uses 18-0944-11-mitre-attack-design-and-philosophy.pdf
169 abilities and 80 Techniques, with ongoing efforts to expand [16] M. Google Cloud, “Targeted attack life cycle,” Accessed: Aug. 24, 2020.
these numbers to enhance the usefulness of SAGA datasets and [Online]. Available: https://cloud.google.com/security/resources/
 insights/targeted-attack-lifecycle
cover more sophisticated APT campaigns. While the ATT&CK [17] APT28, “Cve-2023–38831 exploited by pro- Russia hacking groups
framework is continuously evolving, SAGA is designed to be in ru-ua conflict zone for credential harvesting operations,” 2023.
extensible. New techniques can be integrated by either updating [Online]. Available: https://blog.cluster25.duskrise.com/2023/10/12/cve-
 2023-38831-russian-attack
Caldera with additional abilities as they become available, or [18] A. Applebaum, D. Miller, B. Strom, C. Korban, and R. Wolf, “Intelligent,
manually constructing new attack templates through expert- automated red team emulation,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur.
guided red-team emulation. Furthermore, we also recognize Appl., 2016, pp. 363–373.
 [19] “Mitre caldera,” 2023, [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mitre/
the potential of advanced tools such as large language models caldera
(LLMs) used in [53] to assist in the automatic attack gener- [20] “Atomic red team,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://atomicredteam.io/
ation – a promising direction for future research. Given the [21] R. Bordet and other contributors, “Faker: Python package that generates
 fake data,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://faker.readthedocs.io
inherent differences between synthetic and real-world data, we [22] “Vx underground,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://vx-underground.
caution that experimental results obtained using SAGA should org/
be interpreted carefully, as synthetic logs may not present in [23] “Virus total,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.virustotal.com/gui/
 home/upload
real environments. As highlighted in [11], careful evaluation [24] S. Dataset, “The synthetic audit log dataset with APT campaign,” 2024.
is necessary to avoid overestimating generalization capabilities [Online]. Available: https://saga-tw.github.io/dataset/
due to unintended signals in synthetic datasets. In this work, the [25] E. Manzoor, S. M. Milajerdi, and L. Akoglu, “Fast memory-efficient
 anomaly detection in streaming heterogeneous graphs,” in Proc.
Windows operating system is used as the target environment; 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
however, the concept can be readily applied to other platforms pp. 1035–1044.
as well. [26] Malwarebytes, “New lnk attack tied to higaisa APT discovered,” 2020.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.malwarebytes.com/blog/news/2020/06/
 higaisa
 REFERENCES [27] Mandiant, “China-based cyber threat group uses dropbox for malware
 communications and targets Hong Kong media outlets,” 2015. [Online].
 [1] Y.-T. Huang, C. Y. Lin, Y.-R. Guo, K.-C. Lo, Y. S. Sun, and M. C. Available: https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/china-based-threat
 Chen, “Open source intelligence for malicious behavior discovery and [28] Mandiant, “Fin7 evolution and the phishing lnk,” 2017. [Online]. Availinterpretation,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 2, able: https://www.mandiant.com/resources/blog/fin7-phishing-lnk
 pp. 776–789, Mar./Apr. 2022. [29] Ptsecurity, “Cobalt strikes back: An evolving multinational threat to
 [2] G.-W. Wong, Y.-T. Huang, Y.-R. Guo, Y. Sun, and M. C. Chen, “Attention- finance,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.ptsecurity.com/upload/
 based API locating for malware techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics corporate/ww-en/analytics/Cobalt-2017-eng.pdf
 Secur., vol. 19, pp. 1199–1212, 2024. [30] CERT-EE, “Gamaredon infection: From Dropper to entry,” 2021.
 [3] M. Zipperle, F. Gottwalt, E. Chang, and T. Dillon, “Provenance-based [Online]. Available: https://www.ria.ee/sites/default/files/content-editors/
 intrusion detection systems: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, kuberturve/tale_of_gamaredon_infection.pdf
 pp. 1–36, 2022. [31] Cymmetria, “Unveiling patchwork-the copy-paste apt,” 2016. [Online].
 [4] M. Engenuity, “Att&ck evaluations,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https:// Available: https://web.archive.org/web/20180825085952/https://s3-usattackevals.mitre-engenuity.org/ west-2.amazonaws.com/cymmetria-blog/public/Unveiling_Patchwork.
 [5] A. Alsaheel et al., “{ATLAS}: A sequence-based learning approach pdf
 for attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, [32] Unit 42, “The gorgon group: Slithering between nation state and cyberpp. 3005–3022. crime,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://unit42.paloaltonetworks.com/
 [6] H. Ding, J. Zhai, Y. Nan, and S. Ma, “{AIRTAG}: Towards automated unit42-gorgon-group-slithering-nation-state-cybercrime/
 attack investigation by unsupervised learning with log texts,” in Proc. [33] E. F. T. K. Sang and F. D. Meulder, “Introduction to the conll-
 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.), 2023, pp. 373–390. 2003 shared task: Language-independent named entity recognition,”
 [7] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation 2003, arXiv:1909.01315.
 using whole-system provenance,” 2023, arXiv:2308.05034. [34] X. Han, T. Pasquier, A. Bates, J. Mickens, and M. Seltzer, “Unicorn:
 [8] DARPA, “Transparent computing engagement,” 2021. [Online]. Avail- Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced persistent threats,” in
 able: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020.
 [9] DARPA, “Operationally transparent cyber (optc) data release,” 2021. [35] “Sigma rule repository,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data SigmaHQ/sigma
[10] A. D. Kent, “Comprehensive, multi-source cyber-security events data set,” [36] Y.-T. Huang, Y.-R. Guo, G.-W. Wong, and M. C. Chen, “A cascade
 Los Alamos National Lab. (LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), approach for apt campaign attribution in system event logs: Technique
 Tech. Rep. LA-UR–15-23810, 2015. hunting and subgraph matching,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.
[11] J. Liu, M. A. Inam, A. Goyal, A. Riddle, K. Westfall, and A. Bates, “What org/abs/2410.22602
 we talk about when we talk about logs: Understanding the effects of dataset [37] A. Virkud, M. A. Inam, A. Riddle, J. Liu, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “How
 quality on endpoint threat detection research,” in Proc. 2025 IEEE Symp. does endpoint detection use the {mitre}{att&ck} framework,” in Proc.
 Secur. Privacy, 2025, pp. 112–129. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 3891–3908.
[12] D. Arp et al., “DoS and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” [38] A. D. Keromytis, “Transparent computing engagement 3 data release,”
 in Proc. 31st USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-
[13] A. S. Jacobs, R. Beltiukov, W. Willinger, R. A. Ferreira, A. Gupta, and L. Computing/blob/master/README-E3.md
 Z. Granville, “AI/ml for network security: The emperor has no clothes,” [39] J. Glasser and B. Lindauer, “Bridging the gap: A pragmatic approach
 in Proc. 2022 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2022, to generating insider threat data,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE Secur. Privacy
 pp. 1537–1551. Workshops, 2013, pp. 98–104.
HUANG et al.: SAGA: SYNTHETIC AUDIT LOG GENERATION FOR APT CAMPAIGNS 3767

[40] G. Creech, “Developing a high-accuracy cross platform host-based in- Yu-Sheng Yang is currently working toward the mastrusion detection system capable of reliably detecting zero-day attacks,” ter’s degree in computer science with National Taiwan
 Ph.D. dissertation, UNSW Sydney, 2014. University. His research focuses on large language
[41] S. Myneni et al., “Dapt 2020-constructing a benchmark dataset for ad- models (LLMs) and computer vision.
 vanced persistent threats,” in Proc. Deployable Mach. Learn. Secur. Defense: First Int. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, 2020, pp. 13–163.
[42] A. Berady, M. Jaume, V. V. T. Tong, and G. Guette, “PWNJUTSU: A
 dataset and a semantics-driven approach to retrace attack campaigns,”
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 5252–5264,
 Dec. 2022.
[43] S. Myneni et al., “Unraveled—a semi-synthetic dataset for advanced
 persistent threats,” Comput. Netw., vol. 227, 2023, Art. no. 109688.
[44] J. Gjerstad, F. Kadiric, G. Grov, E. Kjellstadli, and M. L. Asprusten,
 “LADEMU: A modular & continuous approach for generating labelled
 apt datasets from emulations,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data,
 2022, pp. 2610–2619. Guo-Wei Wong received the master’s degree in ther-
[45] J. Zengy et al., “SHADEWATCHER: Recommendation-guided cyber mal and fluid science from the National Yunlin Unithreat analysis using system audit records,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Symp. versity of Science and Technology, in 2017. He is
 Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 489–506. currently working towards the PhD degree of CSIE
[46] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “Magic: Detecting with the National Taiwan University. His primary
 advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation learning,” research interests include deep learning in fluid dy-
 2023, arXiv:2310.09831. namics and for complicated applications, including
[47] M. Sharif et al., “DrSec: Flexible distributed representations for efficient malware analysis and PM2.5 prediction.
 endpoint security,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024,
 pp. 145–145.
[48] J. Zeng, Z. L. Chua, Y. Chen, K. Ji, Z. Liang, and J. Mao, “WATSON:
 Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via aggregation of contextual semantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021.
[49] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of suspicious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, Yu-Zih Jheng is currently working toward the maspp. 1137–1152. ter’s degree in Information management with Na-
[50] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis tional Taiwan University. Her research interests infor endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. clude static and dynamic malware analysis, red team-
 Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189. ing, and penetration testing.
[51] K. Kurniawan, A. Ekelhart, E. Kiesling, G. Quirchmayr, and A. M. Tjoa,
 “Krystal: Knowledge graph-based framework for tactical attack discovery
 in audit data,” Comput. Secur., vol. 121, 2022, Art. no. 102828.
[52] “Sigma - generic signature format for siem systems,” 2024. [Online].
 Available: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma
[53] B. Singer, K. Lucas, L. Adiga, M. Jain, L. Bauer, and V. Sekar, “On the
 feasibility of using LLMS to autonomously execute multi-host network
 attacks,” 2025, arXiv:2501.16466. Yeali S. Sun received the BS degree from the Computer Science and Information Engineering department of National Taiwan University, and the MS and
 PhD degrees in computer science from the University
 of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). From 1988 to
 1993, she was with Bell Communications Research
 Inc. In August 1993, she joined National Taiwan University and is currently a professor of the Department
 Yi-Ting Huang received the PhD degree in informa- of Information Management. Her research interests
 tion management from National Taiwan University, in are in the areas of Internet security and forensics,
 2015. She is an assistant professor with the National Quality of Service (QoS), cloud computing and ser-
 Taiwan University of Science and Technology. She vices, and performance modeling and evaluation.
 was a postdoctoral fellow at Academia Sinica. Her
 primary research interests include malware analysis,
 cyber threat intelligence analysis, deep learning, and
 natural language processing.

 Jessemyn Modini is an IT leader and cyber security
 researcher. Jess holds 5 master’s qualifications in Cybersecurity Operations, Systems Engineering, Space
 Operations, Project Management and International
 Ying-Ren Guo is a research assistant in Academia Relations (Security). Jess is currently undertaking a
 Sinica. His research interests include malware reverse doctorate in Cyber Security, focusing on applications
 engineering and analysis, and cybersecurity. of epidemiology to cyber security (Cyber Epidemiology) for threat modelling and cyber herd immunity at scale. Jess is currently a senior Technologist
 with Amazon Web Services where she drives global
 technology strategy. Prior to AWS, Jess was the Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) Engineering Manager. Jess is passionate
 about security, global cyber threat intelligence sharing and multidisciplinary
 approaches to resilience.
3768 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Timothy Lynar received the PhD degree from the Meng Chang Chen received the PhD degree in com-
 University of Newcastle, Australia, in 2011. He is a puter science from the University of California, Los
 senior lecturer with UNSW Canberra. He worked at Angeles. He was with AT&T Bell Labs and is now a
 IBM research for 7.5 years where he was a research research fellow/professor of research center for inforstaff member and master inventor, before joining mation technology innovation, Academia Sinica, Tai-
 UNSW, in 2019. Tim’s primary research focus is wan. His current research interests include computer
 the application of machine learning to Cyber secu- and network security, wireless network, deep learning
 rity. Tim has a background in simulation, modelling for complicated applications, data and knowledge
 and distributed computing including cloud and IoT engineering.
 systems.