3376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 Saliency-Guided Transformer Attention With
 Pixel-Level Contrastive Learning for Weakly
 Supervised Defect Localization
 Dejene M. Sime , Nan Ouyang , Kai Sheng , Member, IEEE, Getu T. Fellek , Wenkang Wan ,
 Adnan A. Qaseem , Xiaojiang Ren , and Shehui Bu

 Abstract—Weakly supervised learning has emerged as challenges, such as overlapping activations and ambigua powerful paradigm for image segmentation, provid- ous boundaries. Through extensive experiments and abing a practical solution to reduce the dependence on lation studies, the proposed method demonstrates supecostly, pixel-level annotated datasets. By leveraging par- rior performance compared to state-of-the-art approaches
tial annotations, such as image-level tags, this approach across three defect segmentation datasets. We also evalsignificantly reduces the labeling burden while main- uated the generalization of our approach on the PAStaining competitive performance. However, weakly su- CAL VOC segmentation and MVTec anomaly detection
pervised methods inherently face challenges, including datasets.
overlapping activation regions and insufficient localization due to sparse and noisy signals from image-level Index Terms —Class-specific class activation map (CAM),
tags, often leading to suboptimal segmentation perfor- contrastive learning, defect localization and segmentation,
mance. These issues are further exacerbated in indus- transformer attention, weakly supervised learning.
trial defect localization, where datasets present unique
complexities, including low-contrast object boundaries, inconsistent shapes, interclass similarities, and substantial intraclass variations. To address these limitations, I. INTRODUCTION
we introduce a novel saliency-guided transformer atten-
 N RECENT years, deep learning-based solutions for visual
tion with contrastive learning framework. The proposed
framework leverages Transformer attention to generate
localization maps and enhances the learning of chal-
 I tasks have emerged as one of the most researched and applied
 advancements in the field of artificial intelligence (AI). Within
lenging foreground and background information through intelligent manufacturing, the rapid progress in AI algorithms,
saliency-guided cues. In addition, a pixel-level contrastive Big Data, and advanced computing technologies has positioned
learning module is employed to refine feature map representations by bringing positive pairs closer together deep learning as a leading research area. These advancements
and pushing negative pairs apart, effectively addressing serve as key enablers driving the future of manufacturing automation, including improved productivity, enhanced product
 quality, greater flexibility, and reduced operating costs [1]. One
 Received 16 October 2025; accepted 21 December 2025. Date of
publication 15 January 2026; date of current version 6 April 2026. prominent application of deep learning in manufacturing is
This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of the automation of machine vision processes, enabling indus-
China under Grant 2022YFB4300700, in part by the Qin Chuangyuan trial machines and equipment to interpret visual information
High-Level Innovative and Entrepreneurial Talent Project under Grant
QCYRCXM-2022-21, and in part by the Guangdong High-Level Innova- for tasks, such as inspection, guidance, process control, and
tion Research Institution Project under Grant 2021B0909050008. Paper more. Automated visual inspection, in particular, plays a vital
no. TII-25-7258. (Corresponding authors: Kai Sheng; Xiaojiang Ren.) role in modern manufacturing. While traditional methods for
 Dejene M. Sime and Kai Sheng are with the Faculty of Infor-X, Xidian
University, Xi’an 710071, China, and also with the Guangzhou Institute industrial defect inspection have been used for decades, they
of Technology, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China (e-mail: simede- are often error-prone, inflexible, and expensive. In contrast,
jenemengistu@xidian.edu.cn; kaisheng@xidian.edu.cn). deep learning-based systems provide an efficient, accurate, and
 Nan Ouyang, Wenkang Wan, and Adnan A. Qaseem are with the
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China adaptable alternative that easily accommodates the dynamic
(e-mail: ouyangnan@stu.xidian.edu.cn; wanwk@stu.xidian.edu.cn; ad- changes in the manufacturing settings [1], [2]. Despite these
nan.qaseem@stu.xidian.edu.cn). advantages, the application of deep learning-based methods to
 Getu T. Fellek is with the McWilliams School of Biomedical Informatics, UTHealth Houston, Houston, TX 77030 USA (e-mail: getu.t.fellek@ industrial defect inspection is still a relatively recent developuth.tmc.edu). ment and remains a highly active area of research. One of the
 Xiaojiang Ren is with the Guangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian primary challenges lies in the reliance of these solutions on
University, Guangzhou 510555, China (e-mail: xjren@xidian.edu.cn).
 Shehui Bu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineer- annotated datasets, making it difficult to develop generalized
ing, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China and scalable approaches, especially for tasks requiring precise
(e-mail: bushehui@scut.edu.cn). defect localization and analysis, such as defect segmentation.
 The implementation code for this study is available online. Code is
available online at https://github.com/djene-mengistu/STAC. Consequently, recent research works have shifted toward label-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TII.2025.3648429 efficient methods, including semisupervised [2], [3], [4], [5] and
1941-0050 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
 Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html
 for more information.
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3377

 Fig. 2. Illustration of the class-specific localization capability of the
 proposed method (STAC) versus selected methods.

Fig. 1. Challenges in weakly supervised segmentation for industrial
images. Despite high-confidence classification, the localization heatmap to enhance foreground–background separation in challenging
fails to accurately highlight defect regions, exposing a misalignment industrial images with low contrast and complex backgrounds.
between classification decisions and spatial attention. This underscores
the limited explainability of such models, where accurate classification In addition, a pixel-level contrastive learning module (PCM)
does not guarantee true learning of relevant features. is introduced to improve feature discriminability by reducing
 interclass confusion and handling intraclass variability in defect
 regions (see Fig. 2). Transformers are well suited due to their
weakly supervised learning approaches [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], ability to capture global context through self-attention, enabling
[11], [12], [13]. better localization of fine-grained and ambiguous defects. Un-
 Weakly supervised segmentation relies on partial annotations, like CNN-based CAMs that often focus on limited discrimisuch as image-level tags, bounding boxes, and scribble annota- native regions, Transformer attention maps provide richer spations, to achieve precise object localization, primarily using class tial cues without requiring architectural modifications or addiactivation maps (CAM) to highlight highly activated regions in tional passes. The contributions of the study are summarized as
an image. Although there is a common challenge of a supervi- follows.
sion gap between classification and segmentation models, this 1) We propose a novel weakly supervised learning frameapproach has demonstrated remarkable performance in common work that leverages Transformer attention to generate a
object segmentation, achieving precise object boundaries and localization map, which is then enhanced by saliency cues
localization map. However, unlike common object segmenta- and pixel-level contrastive learning for improved defect
tion datasets, industrial defect data exhibit high variability in localization and segmentation.
shape, object boundaries, appearance, and contrast [2], [6], [7]. 2) We present an effective framework for generating class-
This variability makes it difficult for CAM-based methods to to-patch attention, which produces class-specific localaccurately localize and delineate object boundaries. In addition, ization maps, by leveraging the pairwise attention maps
inconsistencies in background–foreground contrast, shape, and of a Transformer. This attention is further enhanced by
appearance lead to substantial imbalances, such as interclass a CNN-based auxiliary CAM refinement module, which
differences and intraclass similarities. These challenges exacer- subsequently enhances foreground and background learnbate the co-occurrence problem in weakly supervised segmen- ing via saliency cues.
tation, where the same regions may be activated for different 3) We propose a PCM that enhances feature representation
classes due to overlapping features, further complicating precise by minimizing intraclass variance and maximizing interlocalization [6], [7], [14]. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, class separation, using positive and negative pairs derived
the classification network activates irrelevant regions despite from progressively refined CAMs.
achieving near-perfect classification confidence. Even when the 4) We validated our approach on three different defect segclassification result is correct, this does not guarantee that the mentation datasets: NEU-Seg [23], DAGM [24], and
model accurately identifies the underlying defect regions, further MTD [25], and demonstrated that the proposed method
highlighting the challenges in weakly supervised segmentation resulted in state-of-the-art performance compared to sevof industrial images. eral methods. Furthermore, we evaluated our method’s
 While several methods have been proposed to improve CAM, generalization across domains on the common object
including multitask learning [15], [16], self-supervision [17], segmentation with PASCAL VOC2012 [26] dataset and
[18], and Transformer attention mechanisms [19], [20], [21], on anomaly detection with the MVTec [27] dataset.
their effectiveness has been mainly demonstrated on natural
image datasets, such as COCO and Pascal-VOC [14]. Industrial II. RELATED WORKS
images, however, introduce additional challenges that make it
difficult for these methods to achieve precise defect localiza- A. Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS)
tion [22]. WSSS aims to achieve accurate pixel-level classification in
 Addressing these challenges, this article proposes a novel semantic segmentation tasks using partial annotations, such as
saliency-guided Transformer attention-based CAM framework image-level labels, bounding boxes, saliency cues, or scribbles.
with contrastive learning for weakly supervised defect lo- Unlike fully supervised methods that require precise pixel-level
calization and segmentation. The proposed method leverages annotations, WSSS relies on cost-effective and accessible an-
Transformer attention guided by class-agnostic saliency cues notations while maintaining competitive accuracy. This makes
3378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

it a practical solution for large-scale image segmentation tasks, TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF THE MIOU METRICS OF THE GENERATED CAM WITH THE
particularly in areas, such as medical image analysis and defect PROPOSED METHOD AND OTHER SOTA METHODS
segmentation, where pixel-level training samples are scarce or
expensive to obtain [14], [28].
 1) CAM-Based Methods: The most commonly used approach in WSSS involves utilizing image-level tags to generate
CAMs, which provide coarse localization based on the most
activated regions in an image classification network. These
generated CAMs are then employed as pseudolabels to train a
segmentation network. However, since the generated CAMs often fail to capture precise object boundaries, their performance is
typically suboptimal in providing effective supervision signals.
As a result, various methods have been proposed to enhance
the quality of CAMs, including multitask learning [15], [16],
contrastive representation learning [18], [29], [30], [31], consistency under image transformations [17], [31], self-supervised whereas L2G [18] proposed consistency of attention between
learning [17], [18], [32], [33], and cross-image semantic infor- multiple randomly cropped local patches of an image with the
mation learning [30], [34]. global image attention, enhancing local-to-global knowledge
 AuxSNet [16] employs an auxiliary multitask learning ap- transfer for better localization of CAMs.
proach that integrates multilabel classification and saliency de- 2) Transformer Attention-Based Methods: Transformer nettection with the primary segmentation task, while EPS [15] works have become a popular approach for image recognition
proposed explicit pseudosupervision using image-level labels tasks in recent years. By employing self-attention mechanisms,
combined with saliency cues to optimize the object boundaries Transformers model long-range dependencies by dynamically
and localization maps of CAMs. ACR [35] employs an adver- assigning weights to different parts of the input sequence, ensarial learning framework, pitting an image classifier against an abling a comprehensive understanding of the global context.
image reconstructor to promote multitask learning and develop This attention mechanism can be adapted to generate CAMs
richer representations, which enhance localization performance. by associating attention scores with spatial regions, effectively
For the defect inspection task, FB-SAM [11] extended the CAM- highlighting areas relevant to specific classes. These CAMs
based approach by introducing a localization method enhanced can then be refined and utilized as pseudolabels for semantic
with spatial attention association to better focus on small defects. segmentation, facilitating precise region localization without re-
Similarly, CSS [13] proposed a category-agnostic strategy for quiring pixel-level annotations. Consequently, numerous methsurface defect localization by clustering features and selectively ods have been proposed to enhance object region localization in
suppressing nondefect activations, while CAAWSL-Net [12] WSSS settings by leveraging the powerful attention mechanisms
further refined the CAM-based framework through background- of Transformer networks [19], [20], [21], [34], [37], [38].
constrained training in a multistage setting. In addition, building T-CAM [37] applied attention weights from the Transformer
upon the initial CAM seeds, several approaches have employed network to explicitly refine the CAMs generated by a CNN
deep level set learning and shape priors to enhance segmentation branch. MCT+ [19] applies multiclass tokens with Transformer
accuracy [8], [10], [36]. However, these methods still rely on attention to achieve class-specific localization of attention maps,
CAM, which struggles to accurately localize challenging and encouraging learning interactions between the class tokens and
complex defects characterized by low contrast and ambiguous patch tokens. ToCo [20] introduces class token contrastive
boundaries. learning to enforce consistency between class tokens of local
 Self-supervised and contrastive learning methods have also image patches and the global image, where SeCo [21] introduces
been proposed to enforce consistency across different views a method to decouple co-context in the image space to enand scales, ensuring that CAMs generated from various trans- hance class-specific representations and address co-occurrence
formed versions of the image remain aligned [17], [18], [31], or overlapping activation issues. Extending on the concept of
[32]. Through spatial transformation consistency, this approach ToCo [20], CTFA [38] applied auxiliary decoders to improve
encourages the model to learn enhanced representations by activation of the foreground areas in remote sensing scenes.
capturing spatial, semantic, and contextual relationships. Self- Although existing methods have shown strong performance
supervised equivariant attention mechanism (SEAM) [17] ap- in weakly supervised segmentation of common objects with
plied consistency on the CAMs generated from various trans- consistent boundaries and regions, as reported on datasets, such
formed images for supervision signal in a self-supervised set- as COCO and PASCAL VOC, challenges, such as overlapping
ting, while sub-category exploration (SCE) [32] introduces self- activations and imprecise localization stemming from the sparsupervised dataset-level image feature clustering to generate sity of image-level labels, remain significant and are still an
subcategories for each class and encouraging the network to active area of improvement in recent research works [14], [21],
perform more challenging tasks beyond focusing on the most [34]. These limitations make the application of such methods
discriminative object part. P2P [31] proposed cross-view fea- particularly challenging in industrial defect localization and
ture semantic consistency across different views of an image, segmentation. Addressing these issues requires the development
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3379

Fig. 3. Overall framework of the proposed method. The Transformer network is trained using image-level labels to generate attention maps (Apa )
and Token features (fcem and fpem ). The attention map Aca is extracted and refined with auxiliary CAM (Apcam ) from PEM module to generate Aref .
The saliency map then guides the localization of the refined attention map. The refined CAMs then guide the selection of positive and negative pairs
for pixel-level contrastive learning using the representations computed from the PCM module. The framework consists of: (A) multilabel classification
loss, (B) saliency-guided CAM refinement module, and (C) CAM-guided PCM.

of tailored approaches that account for these complexities to V ∈ R(C+M )×De . Using the MHA, standard scaled dots product
achieve accurate defect localization and segmentation. attention is applied to calculate the attention score between all
 elements of the query and key sequences (1). By aggregating the
 III. METHODS attention weights from all the token sequence, each token will
 be updated dynamically
A. Overview of the Proposed Method  √ 
 In this study, we propose a novel saliency-guided transformer A(Q, K, V ) = Softmax Q.K T / D .V. (1)
attention framework with pixel-level contrastive learning for The computation yields a pairwise attention map, Apa , with
defect localization and segmentation. Our approach leverages shape R(C+M )×(C+M ) , which represents the interactions bea Transformer network to generate class-specific CAMs from tween each token. In addition, the Transformer encoder produces
attention maps. These CAMs are further refined through a series the feature map embeddings, R(C+M )×De , which are subseof enhancement techniques to produce high-quality localiza- quently processed by the auxiliary CNN-based CAM module
tion maps and segmentation pseudolabels, which are subse- and the contrastive learning module.
quently used to train segmentation networks. The proposed
framework consists of three key components: a Transformer B. Class-Specific CAM Generation and Refinement
encoder block, a CNN-based CAM generation module, and a
contrastive learning module, as depicted in Fig. 3. An image After computing the pairwise attention map in (1), Apa , the
is first divided into N × N patches, which are then vectorized class attentions to patches, Aca , is extracted as Aca = Apa [1 :
and projected into patch tokens (fp ∈ RM ×De ), where De is the C, C + 1 : C + M ], resulting in Aca ∈ RC×M , where values
embedding dimension and M = N 2 . In addition, C class tokens represent the attention score of each class to patches. This
(fc ∈ RC×De ) are appended for each label in the multiclass task. attention map is computed across all Transformer layers (L). The
These inputs, in addition to the positional embeddings, are fed final class-specific attention map is computed by aggregating the
to the Transformer encoder network. The overall shape of the attention maps from different layers, with the impact of aggreinput is F ∈ R(C+M )×De . The transformer encoder consists of gation depth is evaluated in the ablation study (see Section IV-E)
multihead attention (MHA), batch-norm, and multilayer perceptron (MLP). In this article, we adapt the standard configuration L
 
of the DeiT [39] Transformer. In Transformer encoder, the At = 1/L Aca (2)
input is projected into three sequences of vectors representing 

query, Q ∈ R(C+M )×De , key, K ∈ R(C+M )×De , and value, where the resulting attention is At ∈ RC×N ×N .
3380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

C. Patch Embedding-Based Refinement Module (PEM) map highlights a foreground region, the summation prioritizes
 contributions from the foreground class associated with the
 The Transformer encoder outputs patch token feature map emdefect in the image, while suppressing activations from other
beddings, Fem ∈ R(C+M )×De , from which class embeddings,
 foreground classes. This behavior is enforced through gradient
fcem ∈ RC×De , and patch embeddings, fpem ∈ RM ×De , are exupdates guided by the image-level label, which indicates the
tracted. The class token embeddings are passed to global average
 presence of specific defect classes. Consequently, the saliency
pooling (GAP) for multilabel classification, while the patch
 map facilitates foreground–background separation, while the
token feature maps are processed by an auxiliary CNN-based
 classification network ensures that attention is focused on the
CAM module (PEM) and a projection head for contrastive
 correct foreground class over the training iterations
learning. The PEM module processes input of shape RM ×De to
produce class-specific CAM outputs, Apcam ∈ RC×N ×N , where Aref − minh,w Aref
 Afg =
C is the number of classes. This CAM refines the Transformer maxh,w Aref − minh,w Aref + 
attention map from (2) through elementwise multiplication, as  (b,c,h,w)
 Rcam = Afg ∈ RB×1×H×W
shown in (3). The refined attention map (Aref ) is then evaluc
ated against precomputed saliency cues to sharpen its focus
on relevant foreground objects (defects), while the multilabel cam = F.mse(Rcam , Rsal ). (5)
classification guides the identification of specific classes within 3) CAM-Guided Pixel-Level Contrastive Loss: In pixel-level
the foreground (see Section III-E-2) contrastive learning, the selection of positive and negative pairs
 Aref = At .Apcam . (3) is guided by the refined CAM (see Fig. 3). To minimize the
 impact of noisy or uncertain predictions, we apply thresholding
D. Pixel-Level Contrastive Learning Module on these CAMs to derive pseudopixel-level labels, selecting
 high-confidence pixels for contrastive learning. This ensures that
 The PCM takes the Transformer patch embeddings, fpem ∈
 the most reliable regions are used for training and dynamically
RM ×De , as input. The PCM module processes these patch token
 adapt to CAM quality as the training progress
feature embeddings through a series of operations: a 3 × 3
 Aref − minh,w Aref
convolution, batch normalization, rectified linear unit (ReLU) Afg = T
activation, a 1 × 1 convolution, and upsampling. This trans- maxh,w Aref − minh,w Aref + 
formation produces feature representations, frep ∈ RCp ×W ×H , Pbcg = 1 − max Afg
 c
where Cp denotes the projection channel dimension, which is set
to 256, and W and H correspond to the input image dimensions. P = Pbcg ⊕ Afg ∈ RB×(C+1)×H×W
The resulting frep is then used to sample positive and negative
pairs for computing contrastive loss (see Section III-E-3). Ppseudo = arg max P ∈ {0, 1}B×(C+1)×H×W
 c
  
E. Training Process M = 1 max P (b,c,h,w) ≥ η (6)
 c
 1) Multilabel Classification Loss: The network is trained uswhere T ∈ 0, 1B×C : target labels for present classes, : elemening the standard multiclass classification loss with image-level
 twise multiplication with broadcasting, Pbcg : background probalabels, enabling it to detect the presence of specific defect
 bility, : small constant for numerical stability, ⊕: concatenation
classes in an image, while the attention map highlights the
 of channels, and η: confidence threshold for reliable pixels (set
regions that are likely to contain the described class of deto 0.6). The computed pseudolabels (Ppseudo ) and mask (M ) will
fects. We used multilabel soft margin loss (4) for classification.
 then guide the selection of positive and negative keys from the
GAP is applied to the class token embeddings, transforming
 GAP representations (frep ) for contrastive learning.
RC×De ←−− to ycls = RC The contrastive loss encourages queries pq to be similar
 C
 1  i  i      i  to the positive keys p+ k , and dissimilar to the negative keys
 cls = − y log α ycls + 1 − y i log 1 − α ycls . p− , bringing the related feature maps together and pushing
 C i=1 k
 the unrelated (different class) features away from each other.
 (4)
 The queries and keys are sampled from the projection module
 2) Saliency-Guided CAM Refinement Loss: For the saliency
 output, which is explained in Section III-D: pq , pk+,− ∈ P, where
guidance, we first compute saliency cues from pretrained and
 details and impacts of different sampling strategy are analyzed
fine-tuned PFAN [40] for each dataset. To align with the original
 in ablation study (see Section IV-E-4). Our implementation
input image dimensions, the refined CAM, Aref , is upsampled usof the contrastive loss is inspired by the implementation of
ing linear interpolation, resulting in a class-specific map of shape
 Liu et al. [41], and the overall formulation of the contrastive
RC×W ×H . We then applied normalization and elementwise sum
 loss, Con , is presented as follows:
across the class dimension to produce a class-agnostic attention  
map, Rcam , with shape R1×W ×H , as shown in Fig. 3, part B, Con =
for comparison with the precomputed saliency map, Rsal . This c∈C pq ∼Pqc
process yields total activation strength at each pixel location,
 exp(pq · pc,+
 k /τ )
with values approaching 1 for foreground regions and 0 for − log
background regions. To evaluate the alignment between Rcam exp(pq · pc,+
 k /τ ) + p−
 −
 c exp(pq · p /τ )
 k ∼Pk k
and Rsal , we compute MSE loss, as in (5). When the saliency (7)
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3381

 Algorithm 1: Saliency-guided Transformer attention with IV. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND RESULTS
 pixel-level contrastive learning (STAC). A. Dataset Details
 We conducted experiments on three defect segmentation
 datasets to validate our proposed method. The NEU-Seg [23]
 dataset consists of 3630 images of steel strip surface defects for
 training and 840 test samples. The second dataset, DAGM [24],
 is a commonly used benchmark for industrial defect detection.
 We selected six defect classes from this dataset, comprising
 1080 training samples and 270 test samples. The third dataset,
 MTD [25], focuses on magnetic tile defects with five defect
 types. To increase the number of samples in MTD, we applied
 various affine transformations, expanding it to 980 training samples and 190 test samples. We employed standard preprocessing
 and data augmentation techniques in our experiments.
 For the PASCAL VOC2012 dataset [26], we used 10 582
 training samples and reported results on the 1449 validation
 images. Similarly, for the MVTec anomaly detection dataset,
 we selected five representative categories (Bottle, Carpet, Grid,
 Hazelnut, and Leather) for experimentation. Since the training
 set contains only normal images, we added augmented defective
 samples generated based on the test set through different spatial
 transformations and added them to the training set for each
 category, creating a training set of 600 images for each category.
 The results were then reported on the original defective samples.
 Further details on dataset preprocessing and implementation are
 available in the accompanying code.

 B. Implementation Details
 1) Backbone Networks: We used the DeiT [39] Transformer
 as a backbone for our framework. For the segmentation tasks,
 we implemented DeepLabV3+ [42], a CNN architecture, and
 SegFormer [43], a Transformer-based architecture. We evaluated the performance of the segmentation models using various
where C is a set with classes present in the mini-batch, τ is backbone networks, including Wide-ResNet [44], ResNet [45],
the softness control temperature value, Pqc denotes a query set and EfficientNet [46]. For computing the saliency map for
comprising all representations related with class c, Pkc denotes the training samples, we fine-tuned the pretrained PFAN [40]
a negative key set consisting of all representations whose labels model and iteratively improved the consistency of the generated
do not correspond to class c, and pc,+k denotes the positive key saliency maps using conditional random fields and postprocesswith mean representation of class c. Assuming that δ is a set ing. Other saliency-detection methods [47] can also be used to
of all pixel representations with the same resolution as P, the improve the quality of the saliency cues.
queries and keys are computed as follows: 2) SOTA Methods: We compare our method with several
   recent state-of-the-art WSSS methods. Among the methods are
 Pqc = 1 y[i,j] = c p[i,j] (8)
 [i,j]∈δ
 EPS [15], SEAM [17], AuxSNet [16], P2P [31], L2G [18],
   T-CAM [37], MCT+[19], CTI [34], ToCo [20], CTFA [38],
 Pkc = 1 y[i,j] = c p[i,j] . (9) and SeCo [21]. The details of these methods are summarized
 [i,j]∈δ in Section II.
 The mean representation of the positive keys are represented 3) Training Details: All the experiments are implemented on
as pc,+
 k = 1/|Pqc | pq , where ∀pq ∈ Pqc . NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 using the PyTorch deep learning
 The total loss for training the proposed method is given as framework. We trained the networks for 100 epochs using an
follows: Adam optimizer with a base learning rate of 1 × 10−3 for defect
 localization and 1 × 10−4 for PASCAL VOC with the cosine
 L = cls + λcam + γCon (10)
 annealing method for learning rate scheduling. We used a batch
where λ and γ are the coefficients to balance the loss contribu- size of 16 with standard random data augmentations and resized
tions to the overall objective function. The overall training pro- all samples to 224 × 224 for defect localization and a batch
cess of the proposed method is given in the pseudoalgorithm 1. size of 4 with all samples randomly resized and cropped to
3382 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

448 × 448 for the PASCAL VOC dataset. The loss balancing performance on the NEU-Seg dataset. However, as dataset varihyperparameter, λ and γ, are set to 1.5 and 0.2, respectively (see ability increases, as seen in the DAGM and MTD datasets, the
Section IV-E-5). For the SOTA methods, we followed the origi- performance of most methods declines significantly. In contrast,
nal implementation settings, except for the data loader pipeline, our proposed method consistently outperformed others, demonwhich was improved to better align with defect segmentation strating the effectiveness of incorporating Transformer attention,
datasets. Further implementation details are provided in the saliency cues, and contrastive learning in guiding challenging
accompanying code. localization tasks.
 To further assess the generalization capability of the proposed
C. Evaluation Metrics model across different domains, we conducted experiments on
 the PASCAL VOC2012 common object segmentation dataset.
 Following the commonly used metrics, we report the results
 As presented in Table II, our method achieves a notable improveon CAM and segmentation maps using mean intersection over
 ment over the baseline. As originally motivated in this study,
union (mIoU). In addition, we report the false positive (FP) and
 although integrating saliency maps and contrastive learning
false negative (FN) rates for detailed analysis of the CAM results.
 brings some performance gains, the improvement is relatively
The mIoU evaluation is computed at different scales for better
 limited compared to MCT+[19]. This is because the base model,
results. Following previous implementation in [19], [21], and
 pretrained on common objects, already exhibits strong local-
[34], we set the scales to [1.0, 0.5, 1.5, 2.0] for testing the CAM
 ization ability. Consequently, the additional benefits are less
results.
 pronounced on this dataset than in defect segmentation tasks,
 highlighting the necessity of a tailored approach for industrial
D. Results and Discussion defect localization.
 1) CAM Seed Result Analysis and Discussion: The WSSS Furthermore, the proposed method was evaluated on the
method primarily aims to generate high-quality pseudolabels MVTec anomaly detection task, as given in Table III, including
from image-level tags. To evaluate the quality of the generated implementations using CNN-based CAM generation. The re-
CAM, we evaluated the proposed method and other SOTA sults indicate that while both the CNN-based and Transformermethods using the mIoU metric. As given in Table I, the based baseline methods perform well, the proposed approach
proposed method consistently outperformed other approaches consistently achieves substantially better performance across
across the three datasets. Despite most models achieving a all selected defect categories in the MVTec dataset. It is also
classification score of over 99%, their localization accuracy worth noting that since the training involves only binary clas-
(mIoU) is significantly lower. This highlights the challenges sification (defective versus normal), the baseline already perof the industrial image dataset, where models tend to focus on forms relatively well compared to other defect localization
nonrelevant areas for classification due to substantial variations datasets.
in the images. In contrast, our proposed method demonstrates 2) Segmentation Results: To further validate the proposed
superior localization of specific defect regions, attributed to the method, we trained segmentation networks using pseudolabels
integration of saliency cues and contrastive learning that help derived from the refined CAM. The results, given in Tables IV
the model to learn discriminative features for better localization. and V, demonstrate that these pseudolabels effectively super-
Specifically, on the MTD and DAGM datasets, most compared vised the segmentation models. Notably, the pseudolabel supermethods performed poorly because the backgrounds and tex- vision achieved performance comparable to the fully supervised
tures in these datasets are highly variable and inconsistent, DeepLabV3+[42] with ResNet [45], as indicated in the top
making class-specific localization more challenging only using row of Table IV. This demonstrates the effectiveness of the
the image level tags. The CAM seed generated by the proposed proposed method in enabling annotation-efficient training and
approach achieved an mIoU score of 74.71% on the test set of addressing the challenges of pixel-level annotation in industrial
the NEU-Seg dataset, while the next best methods, EPS [15] and defect segmentation. Furthermore, we evaluated the segmen-
AuxSNet [16], achieved mIoU scores of 68.25% and 63.64%, tation performance against other weakly supervised learning
respectively. Similarly, on the MTD and DAGM datasets, our methods, specifically those using level set learning for refineproposed method significantly outperformed other approaches, ment, WDLS [8] and PLDL [10]. Although the results are
achieving mIoU scores of 67.17% and 66.53%, respectively. reported from the original papers, the segmentation methods
 Despite the strong performance of Transformer-based models trained with the refined CAM significantly outperformed these
on large image datasets, such as PASCAL VOC and COCO, methods.
their performance in defect localization, as given in Table I, is 3) Visualization of Localization Results: To further illustrate
not significantly better than other methods. This suggests that the effectiveness of the approach, we present visualizations of
the pretrained weights provide limited guidance for object local- the generated localization map. As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, the
ization, unlike in common object images, which have consistent proposed method generated consistent localization maps, even in
shapes, boundaries, and appearances. The multitask-based CAM images with challenging boundaries and contrast. Furthermore,
refinement approaches, such as EPS [15] and AuxSNet [16], the visualizations of the results on the PASCAL VOC and
have shown better results, primarily due to the incorporation MVTec datasets are presented in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively. As
of saliency cues. In addition, self-supervised learning methods, shown in Fig. 7, the localization produced by the Transformersuch as SEAM [17] and P2P [31], have also demonstrated strong based model is more consistent with the background, whereas
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3383

 TABLE II
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE GENERATED CAM SEED ON PASCAL VOC2012 SEGMENTATION DATASET

 TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED APPROACH VARIANTS ON
 THE MVTEC ANOMALY DETECTION DATASET

 TABLE IV
 SEGMENTATION RESULTS ON THE NEU-SEG DATASET

 Fig. 5. Comparison of the localization map generated by STAC and
 other methods on MTD dataset (top) and DAGM dataset (bottom).

 TABLE V
 SEGMENTATION RESULTS (MIOU) ON THE DAGM AND MT DATASETS

 Fig. 6. Qualitative results on the PASCAL VOC2012 dataset. The
 selected visualizations demonstrate the generalization capability of the
 proposed approach across different domains.

 the CNN-based approach yields less precise results with larger
 FP regions. This indicates that the CNN-based model tends
 to falsely activate nondefective areas, further validating the
 motivation and effectiveness of the proposed approach .
 4) Visualization of Failure Cases: We provide detailed visualizations of failure cases to show and analyze the limitation
 of the proposed method. As depicted in Fig. 8, our approach
 exhibits limitations in precisely localizing defect regions, particularly in scenarios characterized by low contrast, significant
 intraclass variability, and indistinct boundaries. These instances
Fig. 4. Illustration of localization results of CAM on samples from the exemplify practical challenges frequently encountered in in-
NEU-Seg. dustrial defect detection datasets. Nevertheless, despite these
3384 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

 TABLE VII
 EFFECTS OF CAM THRESHOLD (T)

Fig. 7. Visualization of results on the MVTec dataset.

 Fig. 9. Effects aggregating attention map from different Transformer
 layers (L) on mIoU. Increasing depth improves mIoU up to L = 12.

 of auxiliary attention refinement module (PEM), CONT is the
 contrastive learning module, and SAL is the saliency-guided
 refinement module. To further compare with the performance of
 CAMs generated by CNN-based methods, we additionally implemented our approach using the widely adopted ResNet38 [44]
Fig. 8. Comparison of failure cases with different approaches. backbone. As presented in Table VI, each component of the
 proposed method contributes to a notable improvement in per-
 TABLE VI formance, with the combination of all modules yielding the
 EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT MODEL COMPONENTS IMPLEMENTED ON BOTH
 CNN-BASED AND TRANSFORMER-BASED ATTENTION
 best overall results. Moreover, the Transformer-based implementation significantly outperforms its CNN-based counterpart,
 supporting our motivation that Transformer attention maps enable the model to more effectively capture global contextual
 relationships.
 2) Effects of Attention Weight Depth and Layer Index: The
 DEiT Transformer is implemented with a depth of 12 MHA
 layers, designed to capture complex hierarchical representations. However, during model evaluation, aggregating attention
 maps from all these layers may not significantly contribute to
 performance, as redundant or overlapping information might be
 encoded across the layers. To address this, we systematically
 investigated the impact of aggregating attention maps from
 specific layer depths, aiming to identify the optimal combination
complexities, our method consistently demonstrates marginally
 for enhancing model performance. The results of this analysis,
superior localization performance relative to other approaches. highlighting the contribution of different depths, are presented
In addition, it is worth noting that although the proposed method in Fig. 9. As shown in the figure, the aggregation from all layers
achieves superior localization performance compared to the
 improves the localization capability of the CAM improving
other approaches, certain challenging classes, such as Inclusion the mIoU results. This indicate that aggregating attention maps
in the NEU-Seg dataset and Blowhole, Crack, and Uneven in from deep to shallow layers, high-level semantics and low-level
the MTD dataset, remain difficult, leading to higher FP and FN
 spatial detail, improves robustness across diverse defect types.
rates, as given in Tables III, VI, and VII, and Fig. 8 . 3) Effects of CAM Threshold: We applied threshold (T) to
 the computed CAM to distinguish between background and
E. Ablation Study
 foreground predictions during inference. As given in Table VII,
 1) Effects of Model Components and Architectures: Three the choice of threshold values significantly impacts performain components of the model are presented in the proposed mance. It was observed that lower thresholds (e.g., 0.4) tend
approach (see Fig. 3). The baseline method is implemented to introduce FP, particularly in background regions, due to the
only with classification task, then the PT indicates the inclusion inclusion of low-confidence activations. Higher thresholds (e.g.,
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3385

Fig. 10. Effect of Query and Key sampling strategy. Equal sampling is
denoted by single values (e.g., 32), while unequal sampling configurations are labeled as C1 (256–128), C2 (128–256), and C3 (512–256),
where the first value indicates the number of query samples and the
second the number of key samples.

0.8) were found to result in FN, omitting valid but low-activation
defect regions, especially for low-contrast defects, such as Inclusion. No consistent class-specific advantages were noted with
varying thresholds, and a threshold of T = 0.6 was determined Fig. 11. Ablation study on coefficients λ and γ, showing their influence
 on model CAM performance (mIoU). (a) Effect of λ. (b) Effect of γ.
to offer the best tradeoff across all classes.
 4) Effects of Query and Key Sampling Strategy: We evalu-
 TABLE VIII
ated two main strategies to select representative positive and COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS ON INPUT SIZE OF 224×224
negative pixel pairs during training: Equal sampling with a
fixed number of positive and negative samples (e.g., 128 each),
and unequal sampling, where positive and negative samples
are drawn differently (denoted as strategy C in Fig. 10). We
conducted an ablation study to compare these strategies, and the
results show that equal sampling with 256 positive and negative
pairs consistently outperforms other configurations. Based on
this finding, all reported experiments in this article use this
sampling strategy.
 5) Effect of Loss Balancing Coefficients (λ and γ): This section analyzes the impact of individual loss components and their
corresponding weighting coefficients on model performance. including lightweight CNNs and Transformer-based models, as
As illustrated in Fig. 11, training stability and effectiveness are given in Tables IV and V. The analysis reveals well-balanced
highly sensitive to the choice of these balancing coefficients. performance-speed tradeoffs. For example, DeepLabV3+ with
Specifically, lower values of the contrastive loss coefficient a ResNet18 backbone achieves 73.8 mIoU at ∼516 FPS.
(γ) combined with higher values of the saliency consistency
loss coefficient (λ) lead to improved performance. Based on
 V. CONCLUSION
these observations, we set λ = 2.0 and γ = 0.2 for all reported
experimental results. In this work, we propose a novel weakly supervised approach
 6) Backbone Networks and Complexity Analysis: We per- for defect localization and segmentation, addressing key chalform a complexity analysis on both the CAM generation net- lenges in intelligent industrial inspection. Our method leverages
works and the segmentation networks using different backbone saliency-guided, class-specific CAMs derived from Transformer
networks. The analysis is done using NVIDIA RTX 4090, attention, combined with contrastive learning, to generate prebatch size = 1, and input resolution of 224 × 224. We apply cise localization maps. A major challenge in this task is the
“torch.cuda.max_memory_allocated” for all models to deter- presence of inconsistent defect boundaries, interclass similarity,
mine peak memory allocation during inference. As given in and intraclass variation, which make it difficult to accurately
Table VIII, our method has significantly lower parameters and localize defects using CAMs generated from a classification
computational costs. STAC employs a lightweight transformer model. To address this, we refine the CAMs using saliency maps
backbone (DeiT-S), achieving high inference speed, well above to enhance foreground and background learning. The refined
the commonly required 30 FPS threshold for real-time indus- CAMs further guide pixel-level contrastive learning by generattrial applications. However, these results are based on high-end ing positive and negative pairs in the feature space, improving the
hardware, and performance may vary depending on the de- model’s ability to distinguish between different defect classes in
ployment environment. Moreover, generated CAMs are used complex industrial images. Extensive experiments and ablation
to supervise segmentation models as a pseudopixel-level label, studies demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms
3386 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL INFORMATICS, VOL. 22, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

state-of-the-art methods. This research contributes to advanc- [18] P.-T. Jiang, Y. Yang, Q. Hou, and Y. Wei, “L2G: A simple local-to-global
ing weakly supervised learning techniques and enhancing deep knowledge transfer framework for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit., 2022,
learning-based solutions for industrial inspection, particularly pp. 16886–16896.
in scenarios where annotated data is scarce and expensive to [19] L. Xu, M. Bennamoun, F. Boussaid, H. Laga, W. Ouyang, and D. Xu,
obtain. Future work could focus on integrating the proposed “MCTformer : Multi-class token transformer for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46,
method with complementary techniques, such as deep level-set no. 12, pp. 8380–8395, Dec. 2024.
frameworks or multimodal learning, to further enhance its per- [20] L. Ru, H. Zheng, Y. Zhan, and B. Du, “Token contrast for weaklyformance and representation capability. Moreover, extending the supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 3093–3102.
approach toward domain generalization and incremental learn- [21] Z. Yang, K. Fu, M. Duan, L. Qu, S. Wang, and Z. Song, “Separate and
ing would enable it to adapt to newly emerging defect types and conquer: Decoupling co-occurrence via decomposition and representation
maintain robustness against label noise, thereby improving its for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2024, pp. 3606–3615.
scalability and practicality for real-world industrial applications. [22] D. M. Sime, G. Wang, Z. Zeng, and B. Peng, “Deep learning-based
 automated steel surface defect segmentation: A comparative experimental
 study,” Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 2995–3018, 2024.
 REFERENCES [23] H. Dong, K. Song, Y. He, J. Xu, Y. Yan, and Q. Meng, “PGA-Net:
 Pyramid feature fusion and global context attention network for automated
 [1] A. Shojaeinasab et al., “Intelligent manufacturing execution systems: A surface defect detection,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 12,
 systematic review,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 62, pp. 503–522, 2022. pp. 7448–7458, Dec. 2020.
 [2] D. M. Sime, G. Wang, Z. Zeng, W. Wang, and B. Peng, “Semisuper- [24] D. Weimer, B. Scholz-Reiter, and M. Shpitalni, “Design of deep convovised defect segmentation with pairwise similarity map consistency and lutional neural network architectures for automated feature extraction in
 ensemble-based cross pseudolabels,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 19, industrial inspection,” CIRP Ann., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 417–420, 2016.
 no. 9, pp. 9535–9545, Sep. 2022. [25] Y. Huang, C. Qiu, and K. Yuan, “Surface defect saliency of magnetic tile,”
 [3] J. Gao, H. Yang, D. Zhang, Y. Yuan, and X. Li, “Imbalanced aircraft data Vis. Comput., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 85–96, 2020.
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 61, no. 2, [26] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman,
 pp. 1422–1432, Apr. 2025. “The pascal visual object classes (VOC) challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis.,
 [4] H. Qi, X. Kong, Z. Liu, J. Gu, and L. Cheng, “SAIT: Harnessing sparse vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303–338, 2010.
 annotations and intrinsic tasks for semisupervised aeroengine defect seg- [27] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD:
 mentation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 10463–10472, A comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detec-
 Aug. 2024. tion,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2019,
 [5] D. M. Sime, G. Wang, Z. Zeng, and B. Peng, “Uncertainty-aware and pp. 9584–9592.
 dynamically-mixed pseudo-labels for semi-supervised defect segmenta- [28] W. Shen et al., “A survey on label-efficient deep image segmentation,” Comput. Ind., vol. 152, 2023, Art. no. 103995. tion: Bridging the gap between weak supervision and dense prediction,”
 [6] X. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Li, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “A CAM-based weakly supervised IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 9284–9305,
 method for surface defect inspection,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 71, Aug. 2023.
 2022, Art. no. 3511410. [29] I. Alonso, A. Sabater, D. Ferstl, L. Montesano, and A. C. Murillo, “Semi-
 [7] B. Hu, X. Wang, and W. Yu, “Joint weakly and fully supervised learning supervised semantic segmentation with pixel-level contrastive learning
 for surface defect segmentation from images,” Signal Process.: Image from a class-wise memory bank,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
 Commun., vol. 107, 2022, Art. no. 116807. Vis., 2021, pp. 8219–8228.
 [8] H. Qi, L. Cheng, X. Kong, J. Zhang, and J. Gu, “WDLS: Deep level set [30] T. Zhou, M. Zhang, F. Zhao, and J. Li, “Regional semantic contrast
 learning for weakly supervised aeroengine defect segmentation,” IEEE and aggregation for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc.
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 303–313, Jan. 2024. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 4299–4309.
 [9] S. Niu, B. Li, X. Wang, S. He, and Y. Peng, “Defect attention template [31] Y. Du, Z. Fu, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Weakly supervised semantic segmengeneration cycleGAN for weakly supervised surface defect segmentation,” tation by pixel-to-prototype contrast,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
 Pattern Recognit., vol. 123, 2022, Art. no. 108396. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 4320–4329.
[10] H. Qi, X. Kong, Z. Shen, Z. Liu, and J. Gu, “Progressively learning [32] Y.-T. Chang, Q. Wang, W.-C. Hung, R. Piramuthu, Y.-H. Tsai, and M.-H.
 dynamic level set for weakly supervised industrial defect segmentation,” Yang, “Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation via sub-category explo-
 IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 5026814. ration,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit., 2020,
[11] Y. Li, X. Wu, P. Li, and Y. Liu, “Ferrite beads surface defect detection pp. 8991–9000.
 based on spatial attention under weakly supervised learning,” IEEE Trans. [33] T. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Huang, Z. Li, L. Nie, and J. Tang, “Spatial structure
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, 2023, Art. no. 2506812. constraints for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE Trans.
[12] Z. Zhang, Z. Shang, X. Wang, and J. Ma, “Combined anomaly aware Image Process., vol. 33, pp. 1136–1148, 2024.
 weakly supervised lightweight model for surface defect inspection,” IEEE [34] S.-H. Yoon, H. Kwon, H. Kim, and K.-J. Yoon, “Class tokens infusion
 Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 6652–6663, Apr. 2024. for weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
[13] S. Jiang, M. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Ma, and Y. Wang, “Category-agnostic Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, pp. 3595–3605.
 cluster-guided selective suppression for weakly supervised surface [35] H. Kweon, S.-H. Yoon, and K.-J. Yoon, “Weakly supervised semandefect localization,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, 2025, tic segmentation via adversarial learning of classifier and reconstruc-
 Art. no. 2514212. tor,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023,
[14] Z. Chen and Q. Sun, “Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation with pp. 11329–11339.
 image-level labels: From traditional models to foundation models,” ACM [36] Y. He, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, S. Hu, and J. Fu, “PA-WSDIS: A prior-aware
 Compu. Surveys, vol. 57, no. 5, 2023, Art. no. 111. weakly supervised defect instance segmentation model for car body sur-
[15] M. Lee, S. Lee, J. Lee, and H. Shim, “Saliency as pseudo-pixel super- face,” Adv. Eng. Informat., vol. 65, 2025, Art. no. 103254.
 vision for weakly and semi-supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE [37] R. Li, Z. Mai, Z. Zhang, J. Jang, and S. Sanner, “TransCAM: Trans-
 Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 12341–12357, former attention-based CAM refinement for weakly supervised semantic
 Oct. 2023. segmentation,” J. Vis. Commun. Image Representation, vol. 92, 2023,
[16] L. Xu, W. Ouyang, M. Bennamoun, F. Boussaid, F. Sohel, and D. Xu, Art. no. 103800.
 “Leveraging auxiliary tasks with affinity learning for weakly supervised [38] Z. Hu, J. Gao, Y. Yuan, and X. Li, “Contrastive tokens and label activation
 semantic segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, for remote sensing weakly supervised semantic segmentation,” IEEE
 pp. 6984–6993. Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62, 2024, Art. no. 5620211.
[17] Y. Wang, J. Zhang, M. Kan, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “Self-supervised [39] H. Touvron, M. Cord, M. Douze, F. Massa, A. Sablayrolles, and
 equivariant attention mechanism for weakly supervised semantic segmen- H. Jégou, “Training data-efficient image transformers & distillatation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit., 2020, tion through attention,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021,
 pp. 12275–12284. pp. 10347–10357.
SIME et al.: SALIENCY-GUIDED TRANSFORMER ATTENTION WITH PIXEL-LEVEL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING 3387

[40] T. Zhao and X. Wu, “Pyramid feature attention network for saliency Getu T. Fellek received the B.Sc. and M.Sc.
 detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit., 2019, degrees in industrial engineering from Mekelle
 pp. 3085–3094. University, Mekelle, Ethiopia, in 2014 and 2016,
[41] S. Liu, S. Zhi, E. Johns, and A. J. Davison, “Bootstrapping semantic respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in informasegmentation with regional contrast,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Repre- tion systems engineering from Waseda Universentations, 2022, pp. 1–17. sity, Shinjuku, Japan, in 2024
[42] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam, “Encoder- He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher
 decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmenta- with the McWilliams School of Biomedical Intion,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2018, pp. 801–818. formatics, UTHealth Houston, TX, USA. His
[43] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo, research interests include deep reinforcement
 “SegFormer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with learning, multimodal representation learning,
 transformers,” Adv. neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 12077–12090, AI-agents, and applications .
 2021.
[44] Z. Wu, C. Shen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Wider or deeper: Revisiting
 the ResNet model for visual recognition,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 90,
 pp. 119–133, 2019.
[45] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image Wenkang Wan received the M.Eng. degree in
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. pattern Recognit., 2016, vehicle engineering from Shihezi University, Shipp. 770–778. hezi, China, in 2022. He is currently working
[46] M. Tan and L. Quoc, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convo- toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineerlutional neural networks,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019, ing with the School of Electronic Engineering,
 pp. 6105–6114. Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
[47] H. Zhu et al., “I can find you! Boundary-guided separated attention network His research interests include artificial intelfor camouflaged object detection,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, ligence, autonomous vehicle, vehicle dynamics
 pp. 3608–3616. and control, Big Data processing, reinforcement
 learning, and large language model .

 Dejene M. Sime received the B.Sc. degree in
 industrial engineering from Bahir Dar University,
 Bahir Dar, Ethiopia, in 2010, the M.Sc. degree Adnan A. Qaseem received the B.Sc. degree in
 in industrial engineering from Addis Ababa Uni- network technology and computer security from
 versity, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in 2013, and the Sana’a University, Sana’a, Yemen, in 2014, and
 Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering (intel- the M.Sc. degree in software engineering from
 ligent equipment and manufacturing) from the Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in
 University of Electronic Science and Technol- 2022. He is currently working toward the Ph.D.
 ogy of China (UESTC), Chengdu, China, in degree in electronics science and technology
 2023 with the School of Electronic Engineering, Xid-
 He is currently a Postdoctoral Researcher ian University, Xi’an, China.
with Xidian University, Xi’an, China. His research interests include intel- His research interests include deep learnligent systems, industrial automation, intelligent transportation, machine ing, intelligent transportation systems, and auvision, deep learning, image segmentation, and large vision foundation tonomous driving .
models.

 Nan Ouyang received the B.Eng. degree in
 Xiaojiang Ren received the Ph.D. degree in
 electronic science and technology from the Beicomputer science from Australian National Unijing Institute of Technology, Zhuhai, Zhuhai,
 versity, Canberra, ACT, Australia, in 2016.
 China, in 2020, and the M.Eng. degree in elec-
 He is an Associate Professor with Xidian Unitronic information from Foshan University, Fosversity, Xi’an, China. His research interests inhan, China, in 2023. He is currently working
 clude intelligent transport systems, the Intertoward the Ph.D. degree in electronic science
 net of Things, wireless sensor networks, routing
 and technology with the School of Electronic
 protocol design for wireless networks, and opti-
 Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China.
 mization problems.
 His research interests include deep learning
 and intelligent transportation systems .

 Kai Sheng (Member, IEEE) received the B.E.
 degree in information engineering from Central
 Shehui Bu received the Ph.D. degree in
 South University, Changsha, China, in 2000,
 engineering from the University of Tsukuba,
 and the Ph.D. degree in risk engineering from
 Tsukuba, Japan, in March 2006.
 the University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan, in
 Since October 2008, he has been a Lecturer
 2006.
 with the School of Computer Science and Engi-
 He was an Engineer with CARMATE (Japan)
 neering, South China University of Technology,
 and Dongfeng Motor Corporation (China). He
 Guangzhou, China. His research interests inis currently a Professor with Xidian Univerclude artificial intelligence, speech analysis, and
 sity, Xi’an, China. His research interests include
 image detection.
 computational intelligence, autonomous driving,
 and smart resilience systems.