IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 4699

 Self-Contrastive Learning to Boost Weakly
 Supervised Anomaly Detection
 Jingyou Chen , Zhangfa Wu , Yi Hua , Hongqi Li , Member, IEEE, Yilei Shi ,
 and Hongping Gan , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Weakly supervised anomaly detection methods identification of potential anomalies, thus attracting extensive
(WADMs) can effectively utilize incomplete label data to address research. As the complexity and scale of data continue to grow,
the issue of imbalanced samples, thereby reducing the reliance the application of advanced anomaly detection techniques
on the quantity of labeled data and demonstrating superior
anomaly detection capabilities in network and service manage- becomes crucial for ensuring the effectiveness of network and
ment. However, when confronted with significant label noise service management systems [1], [2], [3]. This importance is
and missing labels, existing WADMs still struggle to adequately further highlighted in various engineering applications, such as
extract the deep feature information of samples, leading to blockchain networks [4], mobile network management [5], the
a decline in model performance. To tackle this challenge, we Internet of Things (IoT) [6], [7], large-scale services [8], and
propose a self-contrastive enhanced weakly supervised anomaly
detection framework, called SEAD-Net, which enhances the large-scale engineering collaboration projects [9]. In network
feature representation capability of data in the model’s fea- and service management, anomaly detection plays a vital
ture space, thereby improving the accuracy and robustness of role in real-time monitoring and fault diagnosis, helping to
anomaly detection. Specifically, we first design a personalized prevent network performance degradation and service quality
data enhancement module that augments data representation by deterioration. Additionally, it enables real-time monitoring
applying various transformations to the raw data. Subsequently,
a self-contrastive enhanced learning module is introduced to and analysis of Quality of Service (QoS) parameters, thereby
impose hybrid constraints on the augmented samples, construct- ensuring the stability and efficiency of network services. As
ing the overall distribution structure while learning deep sample a result, researchers propose numerous anomaly detection
feature spaces under complex scenario disturbances. Finally, we methods, which not only enhance the performance of anomaly
extract contrastive enhancement features within the deep sample detection but also significantly improve the response speed
feature space and perform probabilistic generation to enable
effective decision-making via an anomaly probability generation to data anomalies, thereby reducing the costs associated with
module. Experimental results on a series of public benchmark managing and handling anomalous behaviors [10].
datasets demonstrate that our SEAD-Net outperforms the second- Traditional anomaly detection methods primarily determine
best WADM by 5.95% in average AUC-ROC and 16.28% in whether data deviates from a normal distribution by anaaverage AUC-PR. lyzing its statistical properties [11]. However, these methods
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, deep learning, data enhance- exhibit significant disadvantages when handling large-scale,
ment, self-contrastive learning. high-dimensional data. In contrast, Deep Learning (DL)-based
 I. I NTRODUCTION anomaly detection methods can model nonlinear data, auto-
 NOMALY detection significantly enhances data qual- matically learn deep features, and uncover hidden distributions
A ity and system reliability by enabling the timely in large-scale data, thereby improving anomaly detection
 performance [12]. Recent application-oriented studies further
 Received 12 October 2025; revised 30 January 2026 and 21 April 2026; demonstrate the effectiveness of learning-based representaaccepted 8 May 2026. Date of publication 20 May 2026; date of current tions in related scenarios, such as encrypted industrial traffic
version 27 May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant 62471395, in part by the Basic anomaly detection [13] and indoor localization of uncrewed
Research Programs of Taicang under Grant TC2024JC17. The associate editor aerial vehicles [14]. Specifically, these data-driven methods
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was can be categorized into three groups: unsupervised, supervised,
T. Yu. (Corresponding author: Hongping Gan.)
 Jingyou Chen is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical and weakly supervised methods. Unsupervised methods iden-
University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China, and also with the School of Cyber tify anomalies by modeling normal samples and capturing the
Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China. overall structure and latent representations of the data [15],
 Zhangfa Wu is with the School of Electronic Information, Northwestern
Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China. [16], [17]. However, these methods have poor generalization
 Yi Hua is with the College of Information and Artificial capabilities due to their difficulty in capturing complex data
Intelligence, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225127, China (e-mail:
yihua@mail.nwpu.edu.cn).
 relationships and their inability to utilize label information.
 Hongqi Li and Yilei Shi are with the School of Software, Northwestern Supervised techniques involve training models with labeled
Polytechnical University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China. normal and anomalous samples, allowing them to adjust to
 Hongping Gan is with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical diverse data distributions and improve overall performance
University (NPU), Xi’an 710072, China, and also with the Yangtze River Delta
Research Institute, NPU, Taicang 215400, China (e-mail: ganhongping@ [18], [19]. Nevertheless, these methods necessitate labels of
nwpu.edu.cn). high integrity and precision. In scenarios where labels are
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2026.3694683, provided by the authors.
 absent or corrupted, performance experiences a noticeable
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3694683 decline due to the dependency of supervised methods on
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

accurate labels for maintaining correct associations between category structures and enables SEAD-Net to autonomously
inputs and outputs [20]. distinguish differences among samples by learning both sur-
 To address challenges such as label scarcity, contamina- face and deep features. Importantly, these two modules are
tion, and class imbalance, researchers have turned to Weakly complementary: DEM provides additional learnable infor-
Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods (WADMs) [21], mation to SCLM, while SCLM amplifies the enhancement
[22]. These approaches utilize Convolutional Neural Networks benefits offered by DEM. Finally, an anomaly probability
(CNNs) [23], Residual Networks (ResNets) [24], or Autoen- generation module processes the features to obtain anomaly
coders (AEs) [25] to construct feature extractors that capture probabilities, which guide the model’s decision-making. The
essential information from samples and feed it into anomaly main contributions of this work are as follows:
detection classifiers. WADMs integrate the advantages of both • We propose a self-contrastive enhanced weakly superunsupervised and supervised methods, alleviating the poor vised anomaly detection framework, called SEAD-Net,
generalization capability of unsupervised methods while effec- which enhances the feature representation capability of
tively utilizing incomplete label data to handle imbalanced data in the model’s feature space, thereby improving the
samples. Nevertheless, the existing WADMs still exhibit the accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection.
following limitations: • We introduce a self-contrastive enhanced learning module
 • Incomplete and inaccurate data annotation stems from the for SEAD-Net, which utilizes hybrid constraints to enable
 difficulty and high cost of obtaining data labels, which the model to autonomously discern differences and simileads to a decrease in WADMs model performance. larities among normal data samples, encouraging deeper
 • The scarcity of data annotation and insufficient model feature learning.
 learning capabilities limit WADM’s ability to fully extract • We conduct extensive experiments and analyses, demonthe complete distribution and deep feature information strating that our SEAD-Net achieves superior detection
 of the data, adversely affecting its generalization perfor- performance compared to other methods.
 mance and robustness. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
 Recently, the remarkable success of self-supervised pre- Section II reviews the related work on anomaly detection
training demonstrates that instance-level contrastive learning methods. Section III provides a detailed description of the procan become a powerful feature extractor even without manual posed SEAD-Net. Sections IV and V analyze the experimental
labels, thereby enhancing the ability to capture the complete results of SEAD-Net and provide corresponding discussions,
data distribution and deep feature representations. Pioneering respectively. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.
frameworks such as MoCo [16] and SimCLR [17] employ
memory queues, momentum-updated encoders, and aggressive
data augmentations to learn discriminative representations by II. R ELATED W ORKS
contrasting positive and negative pairs. Although these meth-
 A. Unsupervised Anomaly Detection Approaches
ods are originally designed for large-scale image recognition,
their core principles, namely dynamic dictionary maintenance Unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms have garnered
and robust augmentation invariance, provide valuable insights significant attention due to their advantages, including the
for anomaly detection. Therefore, we migrate and adapt these lack of reliance on expert-annotated sample data, adaptability
mechanisms to the WADM scenario by customizing the aug- to changing environments, the ability to discover unknown
mentation pool to accommodate streaming data characteristics anomalies, and the capacity to handle rare events. Li et al. [26]
and incorporating the contrastive objective into the pretraining proposed COPOD, which models multivariate distributions
stage. An effective balancing coefficient trades off between using empirical Copulas and quantifies data extremity via tail
preserving fine-grained details (reconstruction) and learning probabilities for efficient detection. Li et al. [27] developed
separable latent structures (contrast), thereby leading to per- ECOD, which estimates anomaly scores through empirical
formance improvements on benchmark anomaly detection cumulative distribution functions across dimensions. Liu et al.
datasets. [28] introduced an unsupervised anomaly detection method,
 Consequently, we propose a Self-contrastive Enhanced called “iForest”, which explicitly isolates anomalous samples
Weakly Supervised Anomaly Detection framework, termed by constructing a collection of isolation trees. Xu et al. [29]
SEAD-Net. SEAD-Net extracts comprehensive data repre- extended this concept to DIForest, leveraging deep neural netsentations through a customized Data Enhancement Module works to map data into nonlinear feature spaces for improved
(DEM) and a Self-contrastive Enhancement Learning Module isolation. Ahmed et al. [30] designed a graph-regularized
(SCLM). Specifically, DEM is utilized to enrich and enhance autoencoder that enhances anomaly detection and clustering
the robustness of input data. By applying various transfor- by preserving local neighborhood structures. Zong et al. [31]
mations to the raw data, it introduces real-world noise and proposed DAGMM, an unsupervised anomaly detection techanomalies, effectively compensating for deficiencies in data nique that uses a deep AE to extract latent representations
feature representation. Furthermore, existing anomaly detec- and reconstruction errors for each sample, optimizing the
tion models typically emphasize learning distinctions among parameters of both the AE and a Gaussian mixture model in an
samples from different categories while overlooking the intrin- end-to-end manner. Schlegl et al. [32] introduced AnoGAN, an
sic relationships among samples within the same category. unsupervised deep convolutional Generative Adversarial Net-
However, our SCLM ensures comprehensive learning of all work (GAN) with an anomaly scoring scheme that maps from
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4701

image space to latent space, effectively capturing local anoma- latent information from deep autoencoders into crucial coding
lies and improving the recognition rate of abnormal images. elements, thereby enhancing detection performance. Ruff et al.
While unsupervised learning methods offer a cost-effective and [42] proposed Deep-SAD, a deep semi-supervised anomaly
efficient training approach, overlapping distributions between detection method that integrated a small number of labeled
normal and anomalous samples, ambiguous class boundaries, anomalies and employed an information-theoretic loss to minand the presence of substantial noise or contamination in the imize the entropy of normal samples while maximizing that
observed data make reliable separation difficult. of anomalous ones, thus improving class separability. Li et al.
 [43] introduced Dual-MGAN, a GAN-based semi-supervised
B. Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods anomaly detection method that trained two generators to model
 the distribution of normal data for anomaly discrimination. It
 These methods rely on labeled training data to identify incorporated distribution construction and data augmentation
anomalies by learning the differences between normal and
 modules to enhance weakly supervised learning across diverse
abnormal samples. Compared with unsupervised methods,
 datasets. Mirzaei et al. [44] utilized only normal-class labels
supervised methods can generally achieve better stability and
 and employed a text-image diffusion model to convert normal
performance when sufficient labels are available. For instance,
 samples into “pseudo anomalies” that were semantically and
Liu et al. [33] proposed a quasi-periodic time-series anomaly pixel-wise close to real anomalies, enabling robust anomaly
detection framework that combines an innovative segmentation detection without access to real anomalous data.
algorithm with a hybrid attention model to achieve high accu-
 WADMs can effectively reduce the cost of obtaining data
racy. Steinwart et al. [34] reformulated anomaly detection as a
 labels and have a broader range of applications. However,
binary classification problem and developed a support vector
 current WADMs primarily focus on learning shallow feature
machine (SVM)-based approach with a sampling strategy for
 representations and do not fundamentally address the issue of
artificially labeled data. Sundarkumar et al. [35] developed a insufficient deep structural feature capture caused by the comhybrid model combining k-reverse nearest neighbors and one- plexity of the data itself. Compared with existing methods, our
class SVM, and demonstrated high sensitivity in fraud-related
 proposed SEAD-Net first customizes specific data enhanced
prediction tasks. Yang et al. [36] introduced an active learning
 representations for different data sources, making complex
method for anomaly detection in the Internet of Things (IoT),
 data structures more amenable to be learned. Subsequently,
which improves labeling efficiency under data imbalance.
 a self-contrastive enhanced learning module is introduced to
Ding et al. [37] proposed a multi-generator generative adver- further explore the latent feature representations of the data,
sarial network (GAN) framework that integrates a classifier effectively addressing the issue of insufficient model depth in
and a feature extractor, and improves inter-class separability
 WADMs.
for intrusion detection. Overall, supervised anomaly detection
performs well when labeled data are sufficient, task objectives
 III. A RCHITECTURE OF SEAD-N ET
are clear, and sample classes are relatively balanced, but
its applicability remains limited when anomaly labels are A. Overview of SEAD-Net
extremely scarce and expensive to obtain. As shown in Fig. 1, SEAD-Net includes the three key modules: a Data Enhancement Module (DEM), a Self-Contrastive
C. Weakly Supervised Anomaly Detection Methods Enhancement Learning Module (SCLM), and an Anomaly
 Probability Generation Module (APM). Specifically, the cus-
 WADM is an anomaly detection paradigm that lies between
 tomized DEM applies several augmentations to generate the
supervised and unsupervised learning methods. It addresses
 enhanced representation x0 of the input data x. Subsequently,
the problem of data imbalance by leveraging a small amount
 x0 passes through the SCLM to learn deep representations
of labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data to train
 of the samples. Note that the SCLM, within a traditional
models. Starting with an illustration, Snell et al. [38] proposed
 deep autoencoder framework, combines reconstruction and
a prototype network, FSNet, to address few-shot learning
 contrastive constraints to transform the input sample into more
by classifying samples based on distances to learned class
 meaningful enhanced representations f. Finally, APM utilizes
prototypes, thereby achieving effective generalization under
 the obtained enhanced feature representation f, along with
limited supervision. Pang et al. [39] introduced REPEN, an
 other factors: the reconstruction error e and the reconstruction
efficient weakly supervised anomaly detection method that
 residuals vector , to calculate the anomaly probability y 0 of
combines ranking-based representation learning with anomaly
 the original data x, which enables effective decision-making
detection. By exploiting a small amount of labeled data
 on anomalous samples.
as prior knowledge, REPEN learned more expressive and
task-relevant representations. Building on this line of work,
Pang et al. [40] developed DevNet, which leveraged a limited B. Data Enhancement Module
number of labeled anomalies and prior probabilities to per- To address the issues of incomplete labels and noise conform end-to-end anomaly score learning through neural bias tamination in the input data, we elaborately design a Data
optimization, rather than focusing solely on feature extraction. Enhancement Module (DEM) to improve sample diversity
Zhou et al. [41] proposed an anomaly detection network, and robustness. Specifically, DEM applies a series of trans-
FEWAE, which utilized a pre-trained model to pre-encode formations and patterns to the original dataset T, including
and extract features from data. It effectively transformed representative operations such as Random Crop, Random
4702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 1. The proposed SEAD-Net architecture consists of the customized Data Enhancement Module (DEM), the Self-Contrastive Enhancement Learning
Module (SCLM), and the Anomaly Probability Generation Module (APM). Specifically, the DEM enhances the input data x, after which the SCLM extracts
enhanced features f1 , the reconstruction error e, and the reconstruction residuals vector  from the augmented inputs x01 and x02 . Finally, the APM generates
the anomaly probability y 0 based on the extracted features (f1 , e, ).

 Rp (x) = Random Permuted(x, block size); (8)
 Rz (x) = Random ZeroReplace(x, replace prob); (9)
 Rct (x) = Random Contrast(x, contrast range); (10)
 Rb (x) = Random Brightness(x, brightness range); (11)
 Rs (x) = Random Scale(x, scale factor range); (12)
 Fs (x) = Fixed Scale(x, scale factors); (13)
 Rba (x) = Random BlockAug(x, num slices, aug methods).
Fig. 2. An illustrative representation of DEM. The original input data x from
the dataset T undergoes a series of carefully designed augmentation operators: (14)
Rc , Rt , Rf , Mi , generating a pair of augmented data x01 and x02 .
 Here, Random Crop randomly selects a continuous segment of
Translation, Random Flip, and Mirroring, as well as addi- length crop dim from the input data x and pads it with zeros
tional transformations from the augmentation library such to match the original sequence length; Random Translation
as Random ZeroReplace, Random Noise, Random Permuted, cyclically shifts x along the temporal axis by a random offset
Random Contrast, Random Scale, Random Brightness, Fixed max shift; Random Flip flips the sequence x along the central
Scale, Opposite Time, and Random BlockAug, which better axis flip axis; Mirroring performs a reflection of x along the
simulate the complexity of real-world data. To better illus- axis mirror axis; Random Noise adds stochastic perturbations
trate the enhancement process, we select four representative of type gaussian with intensity noise level to x; Opposite
transformations as examples. As shown in Fig. 2, DEM Time reverses x along the temporal axis time axis; Random
transforms the samples x ∈ RM from T into augmented data Permuted partitions x into fixed-size blocks block size and ranx0 ∈ RM through a series of augmentation processes, where domly permutes the first N −1 blocks; Random ZeroReplace
M represents the dimensionality of the sample. We denote this randomly replaces elements in x with zeros at a probability
series of augmentations by the augmentation operator ∇aug : replace prob; Random Contrast adjusts the contrast of x by
 x0 = ∇aug (x) = Rc ◦ Rt ◦ Rf ◦ Mi (x), (1) a factor within contrast range; Random Brightness modifies
 the brightness of x by adding a random offset within brightwhere, ◦ denotes the sequential application of these processes; ness range; Random Scale rescales the amplitude of x using a
and Rc , Rt , Rf , Mi are defined as: random scaling factor sampled from scale factor range; Fixed
 Rc (x) = Random Cropping(x, crop dim); (2) Scale applies a fixed scaling factor randomly selected from a
 predefined set scale factors; and Random BlockAug divides
 Rt (x) = Random Translation(x, max shift); (3) x into num slices blocks, randomly rearranges the first N −1
 Rf (x) = Random Flip(x, flip axis); (4) blocks, and applies a specified set of augmentation methods
 Mi (x) = Mirroring(x, mirror axis). (5) aug methods to each block.
 For each original input data x, DEM introduces the two
Additionally, the definitions of other augmentation methods in parallel transformations:
the enhancement library are as follows: (
 Rn (x) = Random Noise(x, gaussian, noise level); (6) x01 = ∇aug (x);
 (15)
 Ot (x) = Opposite Time(x, time axis); (7) x02 = ∇aug (x),
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4703

where x01 and x02 are two corresponding augmented data. Due Encoder1 and Encoder2 , respectively. The encoding process
to inherent randomness, the same augmentation steps applied is represented as:
to x twice may yield different results. It is important to note (
 f1 = ge1 (x01 ; We1 ),
that we manually select different customized augmentation (18)
steps for each dataset based on specific requirements to ensure f2 = ge2 (x02 ; We2 ),
the effectiveness of the augmentation process. The necessity where, ge1 and ge2 represent the encoding processes, with
and effectiveness of these dataset-specific customization strate- We1 and We2 denoting the weights of the Encoder1 and
gies are further verified in the ablation study of Section V-B Encoder2 , respectively:
and in Section S-V of the Supplementary Material. Next, the compressed representation f1 and f2 are further
 compressed through an additional encoding step, resulting in
C. Self-Contrastive Enhancement Learning Module q1 and q2 : (
 q1 = H1 (f1 ; Wh1 ),
 As illustrated in Fig. 1, the augmented data x01 and x02 (19)
undergo parallel dual-constraint branches for self-contrastive q2 = H2 (f2 ; Wh2 ).
enhancement learning: 1) Reconstruction branch, which is Here, H1 and H2 represent the compression encoding proused to construct the sample feature space (ϕ); 2) Contrastive cesses, and Wh1 and Wh2 denote the weights of the
branch, which is used to enhance the sample feature space corresponding compression encoding layers. The compressed
(ψ). Here, the enhanced feature space, generated through features q1 and q2 are aligned with the dimensions of the
multi-constraint training, represents the intrinsic structure and original data classes and are used as positive encoded pairs in
correlations of the input data. the subsequent feature self-contrastive strategy.
 1) Reconstruction Branch: Within the autoencoder Ae , Specifically, the feature self-contrastive strategy computes
samples are constructed into a more compact latent fea- the similarity between positive encoding pairs qi1 and qi2 ,
ture space. Specifically, Ae consists of an Encoder and a and negative samples stored in a memory queue qt2 to qk2
Decoder: (i ∈ [t ∼ k]). The similarity between qi1 and qt2 to qk2
 • Encoder: The encoder is responsible for mapping the is minimized, encouraging the Ae to differentiate features
 input sample x0i ∈ RM to a lower-dimensional feature in normal data and establish specific correlations. Simulspace ϕ(x0 ), extracting the compressed representation taneously, the similarity between qi1 and qi2 is maximized
 fi ∈ Rm . The encoding process is defined as ge (·; We ) : to ensure consistency of features for the same data across
 X M → ϕ(x0 ), where X M is the original sample space of different augmentation modes. It is noteworthy that at the
 x, with M denoting the dimensionality of x and m denot- beginning of training, we initialize a memory queue to store
 ing the dimensionality of fi . We represents the encoder’s qi2 . Additionally, by imposing constraints on the deep encoded
 weights, and ge (·) denotes the encoding function. Given features q1 and q2 , the strategy enhances the representational
 the input sample x0i , the compressed representation fi is capacity of the latent features f1 and f2 , thus improving the
 as follows: discriminative ability between positive and negative samples.
 fi = ge (x0i ; We ). (16) The process of the feature self-contrastive strategy is concisely
 presented in Algorithm 1.
 • Decoder: The decoder maps the compressed representa- Overall, this dual-branch optimization strategy not only
 tion fi from the feature space ϕ(x0 ) back to the original differentiates between positive and negative samples, but also
 sample space X M , reconstructing the full representation. establishes constraint relationships among positive samples.
 The decoding process is defined as gd (·; Wd ) : ϕ(x0 ) → This approach helps in identifying anomalous data by leverag-
 X M , where Wd represents the decoder’s weights, and ing the advantages of unsupervised learning in distinguishing
 gd (·) denotes the decoding function. Given the com- unknown data. At the same time, it mitigates the overfitpressed representation fi , the reconstructed sample x̃i is ting issue of labeled samples in supervised learning, thereby
 obtained as follows: improving the model’s generalization performance on unseen
 data.
 x̃i = gd (fi ; Wd ). (17)
 Finally, we extract several feature factors: the enhanced
 Finally, we obtain the compressed representation f encoded compressed representation f 1 , the reconstruction error e, comby Ae and the reconstructed outputs x̃, which conforms to the puted as the L2 norm of the difference between the input and
original data distribution, to construct the feature space ϕ(x0 ) its reconstruction (e = kx0 − x̃k2 ), and the reconstruction
for the original samples. residual vector , which characterizes the directional compo-
 2) Contrastive Branch: The reconstruction process of Ae nent of the reconstruction error. These factors are combined to
facilitates the construction of global features for normal data; form the feature set xcat = [f 1 , e, ]. This set xcat encapsulates
however, it lacks the ability to capture fine-grained features the essential representations of the data, thereby guiding the
and establish local connections between normal samples. model to effectively identify anomalies.
Therefore, we design the following steps to address these
limitations. D. Anomaly Probability Generation Module
 First, x01 and x02 are encoded into latent compressed rep- We integrate the APM and SCLM into a unified framework,
resentations f1 and f2 by two separate encoders, denoted as where the parameters of Ae are initialized with pre-trained
4704 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Algorithm 1 Dual-Branch Training for Self-Contrastive structure effectively balances the weights among different
Enhancement Learning factors, enabling the model to achieve better performance in
 Parallel branch 1: Reconstruction more complex tasks.
Inputs: Augmented data x01 ∈ RM ×batch After a series of dimensionality reduction steps, the output
Outputs: Compressed representations f 1 ∈ Rm , reconstruc- layer zout generates an anomaly probability y 0 . A value of y 0
 tion outputs x̃1 , and reconstruction loss LRE close to 1 indicates a potential anomaly, while a value close
 1: Randomly initialize query encoder ge1 and query decoder to 0 suggests that the sample is normal.
 gd1
 2: for i = 1 to epoch1st do
 E. Training Procedure
 3: for each minibatch x01 do
 4: Encode input to compressed representations f 1 The training process for SEAD-Net is divided into two
 5: Decode f 1 to reconstruction outputs x̃ distinct stages, aiming to progressively optimize the model
 6: Compute reconstruction loss LRE between x01 and x̃ in identifying anomalous elements. In the first training stage,
 7: Update encoder ge1 and decoder gd1 by backpropa- the SEAD-Net is pre-trained to simultaneously optimize two
 gation w.r.t. LRE branches, acquiring enhanced latent representations of the
 8: end for data. In the second training stage, the SEAD-Net is trained
 9: end for in an end-to-end manner to accurately calculate the anomaly
10: Return: Compressed representations f 1 , reconstruction probability of the data.
 outputs x̃, and reconstruction loss LRE 1) The First Training Stage: In the reconstruction branch,
 Parallel branch 2: Contrastive the encoding-decoding process of Ae is optimized by the
Inputs: Augmented data x01 ∈ RM ×batch , x02 ∈ RM ×batch , reconstruction error loss function LRE :
 query encoder ge1 , key encoder ge2 , memory queue Q LRE = kx̃1 − x01 k2 . (21)
Outputs: Compressed representations f 1 ∈ Rm
 1: Randomly initialize ge1 , ge2 , and memory queue Q Here, kx̃1 −x01 k2 represents the Euclidean distance between the
 2: for i = 1 to epoch1st do input sample x01 and the reconstructed sample x̃1 . A smaller
 3: for each minibatch (x01 , x02 ) do Euclidean distance indicates better reconstruction performance
 4: Encode input to compressed representations f 1 , f 2 of Ae .
 5: Encoding compressed features: In the contrastive branch, the similarity computation process
 is optimized using the InfoNCE loss LNCE :
 q1 ← H1 (f 1 ), q2 ← H2 (f 2 ) !
 exp(qi1 · qi2 /τ )
 6: Compute positive logit: l+ ← q1 · q2 LNCE = − log PK j
 , (22)
 i
 7: Compute negative logits: l− ← q1 · Q j=0 exp(q1 · q2 /τ )
 8: Compute InfoNCE loss LNCE from l+ and l− where τ is the temperature parameter, which controls the
 9: Update query encoder ge1 by backpropagation w.r.t. sharpness of the learning process. When qi1 is similar to the
 LNCE positive sample qi2 and dissimilar to all negative samples in
10: Momentum update key encoder ge2 from ge1 the memory queue qt2 ∼ qk2 , the loss is minimized, where
11: Enqueue new key q2 into Q j ∈ [t, k]. Notably, we employ an exponential moving average
12: Dequeue the oldest key from Q to maintain its size technique to smoothly update the parameters from A1e to A2e ,
 at K which aids in learning more robust global representations.
13: end for The overall task objective for the first stage of the dual-
14: end for branch training is as follows: 1) Maximize the fitting accuracy
15: Return: Compressed representations f 1 in the positive sample feature space by minimizing the reconstruction error e when training Ae ; 2) Maximize the similarity
 between positive encoding pairs, i.e., maximize the similarity
weights. The APM consists of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP), between qi1 and qi2 ; 3) Maximize the distinction between
which transforms the feature set xcat into an anomaly probabil- positive samples by minimizing the similarity between the
ity y 0 . Specifically, the feature set xcat is fed into the first layer positive sample encoding qi1 and the negative sample encoding
of the MLP, z1 , to learn the weights between different feature set qt2 ∼ qk2 . Combining Eqs. (21) and (22), the total loss
components. We adopt a feature-enhanced MLP architecture to function for the first training stage, L1st , can be obtained as
amplify the focus on low-dimensional feature e. Specifically, follows:
the low-dimensional feature e is integrated into each layer of
the MLP, where the structure of each layer zj is described as L1st = λ · LRE + (1 − λ) · LNCE
 !
follows: exp(qi1 · qi2 /τ )
 = λ · kx̃i − x0i k2 − (1 − λ) · log ,
 zj = MLP(wjz zj−1 + wje e + bj ), (20) PK i j
 j=0 exp(q1 · q2 /τ )
 (23)
where j is the layer index, wje and wjz represent the weights of
each layer, and bj is the bias, and z1 = (w1f f 1 +w1 +w1e e+ where the hyperparameter λ balances the optimization weights
b1 ), where w1f and w1 are the weights as well. This enhanced between the two tasks. This strategy ensures that the training
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4705

 TABLE I samples are defined according to fixed anomaly criteria or
 D ETAILED I NFORMATION A BOUT VARIOUS DATASETS substantial deviations from the majority class, thereby ensuring
 that the anomaly labels remain consistent with dataset-specific
 semantics.
 To improve cross-dataset comparability and training stability, we apply a unified preprocessing pipeline to all datasets,
 including mean imputation for missing values, one-hot encoding for categorical attributes, and feature normalization.

 B. Experimental Setup
 We evaluate the performance of the proposed SEAD-Net
 against several state-of-the-art anomaly detection algorithms,
process can be tailored to each dataset, thereby enhancing the including Copod [26], Ecod [27], iForest [28], DIForest [29],
model’s effectiveness and applicability. REPEN+ [39], FSNet+ [38], DevNet [40], FEWAE [41], Dual-
 2) The Second Training Stage: In the second stage of train- MGAN [43], and Deep SAD [42]. Consistent with FEWAE,
ing, we optimize the complete SEAD-Net using a conditional we use 80% of the samples for training and 20% for testing,
loss function, with the objective as follows: 1) Cluster the while maintaining the same anomaly ratio in both sets, and
normal samples around a region centered at zero; 2) Push the perform weakly supervised training with 30 anomalous samanomalous samples away from this central region. The second- ples. We adopt AUC-ROC and AUC-PR as evaluation metrics,
stage training loss L2nd is defined as: following the protocol in [45], and additionally report the F1-
 X score to further assess model reliability. For reproducibility,
 L2nd = (1 − yi )(|F(xcat )| + ei ) models are saved using the optimal parameter settings.
 i Detailed hyperparameter settings and implementation details
 + yi (max(0, a0 − F(xcat )) + max(0, a0 − ei )). are provided in Section S-II-B of the Supplementary Mate-
 (24) rial. Moreover, the Supplementary Material and source code
 are available at: https://github.com/pumpkinyouge/SEAD-Net.
Here, F(xcat ) represents the output of the APM, and yi denotes
the label of the data. It can be seen that the optimization C. Comparison Results
process effectively constrains the reconstruction error and
anomaly probability. When a sample is normal, i.e., yi = Tab. II shows the comparison of SEAD-Net with various
0, the model optimizes the first part of the loss; when a competitive methods in terms of AUC-PR and AUC-ROC
sample is anomalous, i.e., yi = 1, the model optimizes the metrics. It is worth noting that FSNet+ and REPEN+ are
second part. a0 is a predefined constant that controls the manually tuned versions of FSNet and REPEN, respectively.
deviation of anomalous samples, preventing the model from The last row shows the average performance of different
over-optimizing for anomalies. In essence, the first part of the competitive methods across all datasets.
loss restricts the latent features and anomaly probabilities of According to Tab. II, we can see that SEAD-Net demonnormal samples within a hypersphere centered at zero, while strates significant performance improvements compared to
the second part ensures that anomalous samples significantly all competing methods. Specifically, for AUC-PR, SEADdeviate from the distribution of normal data, maintaining a Net surpasses the competing methods by 34.35% (Copod),
reasonable distance. 34.23% (Ecod), 38.13% (iForest), 44.21% (DIForest), 24.34%
 In summary, the complete two-stage training procedure of (REPEN), 19.81% (Dual-MGAN), 37.25% (FSNet), 16.47%
SEAD-Net is provided in Section S-I of the Supplementary (Deep-SAD), 16.76% (DevNet), and 16.28% (FEWAE), on
Material. average. Regarding AUC-ROC performance, SEAD-Net also
 shows remarkable advantages, outperforming the competing methods by 17.36% (Copod), 16.42% (Ecod), 21.92%
 IV. E XPERIMENTS
 (iForest), 26.49% (DIForest), 10.97% (REPEN), 8.85%
 This section first introduces the datasets and experimental (Dual-MGAN), 18.50% (FSNet), 7.54% (Deep-SAD), 5.95%
settings. Subsequently, we discuss the performance of SEAD- (DevNet), and 5.96% (FEWAE), respectively.
Net. Furthermore, we also compare the best results of all comparative algorithms on each dataset. In terms of AUC-PR values,
A. Dataset SEAD-Net demonstrates advantages over the best results, with
 We evaluate the performance of the proposed SEAD-Net on improvements of 1.26% (NSL-KDD), 1.57% (Shuttle), 7.49%
multiple public datasets, which cover applications in network (Fraud), 12.50% (Bank), 6.19% (Census), 4.96% (CelebA),
security identification, financial service fraud detection, and 45.92% (Thyroid), and 17.26% (Mammography). For
bank marketing detection. Detailed datasets’ information can AUC-ROC values, SEAD-Net shows advantages over the best
be found in Tab. I, where Ano denotes the percentage of results, with improvements of 1.18% (NSL-KDD), 0.09%
anomalous samples in the training data. Further details on (Shuttle), 1.16% (Fraud), 6.84% (Bank), 5.55% (Census),
the individual datasets are provided in Section S-II-A of 0.66% (CelebA), 14.45% (Thyroid), and 1.33% (Mammograthe Supplementary Material. Across all datasets, anomalous phy). It is noteworthy that on datasets where AUC-PR values
4706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE II
C OMPARISON OF THE AUC-PR AND AUC-ROC P ERFORMANCE OF SEAD-N ET W ITH VARIOUS C OMPETING M ETHODS . T HE B EST R ESULT I S
 H IGHLIGHTED BY B OLDFACE AND U NDERLINING , W HILE THE S ECOND -B EST R ESULT I S U NDERLINED

are generally low such as Fraud, Bank, Census, CelebA, TABLE III
Thyroid, and Mammography, SEAD-Net consistently achieves C OMPARISON OF THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY OF SEAD-N ET AND
improvements by double digits compared to the best results. M ATCHING A LGORITHMS
On NSL-KDD and Shuttle datasets, SEAD-Net also significantly enhances performance from high AUC-PR values of
0.9715 and 0.9745 to 0.9841 and 0.9902 respectively.
 Furthermore, we present F1-score comparisons between our
approach and competing methods on the Bank, CelebA, Fraud,
and Mammography datasets in Section S-III of the Supplementary Material. Under the same experimental setup, these
results consistently validate that SEAD-Net achieves a clear
and consistent overall advantage over representative baselines.

D. Computational Complexity
 To evaluate the practical applicability and deployment
feasibility of SEAD-Net, we conduct a comprehensive computational complexity analysis by comparing it with five
representative baseline models across multiple dimensions,
including floating-point operations (FLOPs), parameter count,
per-sample training time, per-sample inference time, and GPU
memory consumption. For a fair comparison, the computational costs of two-phase methods are aggregated. The
quantitative results are summarized in Tab. III.
 As shown in Tab. III, SEAD-Net exhibits higher spatial complexity, measured in terms of parameter count and
memory usage, than most baselines, which is primarily
 microsecond-level inference latency, significantly outperformattributed to its dual-branch architecture. Despite this increase,
 ing DevNet and FEWAE.
the peak GPU memory consumption of SEAD-Net remains
within the lightweight regime (below 190 MB), ensuring
 V. D ISCUSSIONS
compatibility with common resource-constrained deployment
scenarios. In addition, SEAD-Net demonstrates outstanding A. Sample Efficiency
temporal efficiency: it achieves the fastest per-sample training To evaluate the sample efficiency of SEAD-Net, we vary
time among all evaluated two-phase methods and maintains the number of labeled anomaly samples in the training set
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4707

Fig. 3. Comparison of the AUC-PR performance of SEAD-Net and competing methods with different numbers of labeled anomaly samples. As shown in
the figure, SEAD-Net (red solid line with markers) achieves high-precision anomaly detection with extremely low labeling costs. It consistently outperforms
other methods across all labeling levels, demonstrating its superior sample efficiency.

 TABLE IV
from 5 to 120, while keeping all other experimental settings C OMPARISON OF THE AUC-ROC AND AUC-PR P ERFORMANCE OF
unchanged. The AUC-PR performance under different labeling SEAD-N ET AND I TS VARIANTS W ITH VARIOUS
budgets is reported in Fig. 3. C OMPETING M ETHODS
 As shown in Fig. 3, SEAD-Net consistently outperforms
competing methods across all labeling regimes, particularly
under limited anomaly supervision, demonstrating strong
robustness and effective utilization of scarce anomaly samples. While most methods achieve their peak performance
when sufficient anomaly labels are available, their performance degrades noticeably as the number of labeled anomalies
decreases. In contrast, SEAD-Net maintains stable and superior detection capability even under low-label conditions.
 More importantly, except for the Census dataset, SEAD-Net
trained with only 30 labeled anomaly samples achieves higher
AUC-PR performance than all competing methods trained
with 120 labeled anomalies, with improvements of 0.06%
(NSL-KDD), 2.04% (Shuttle), 9.48% (Fraud), 8.76% (Bank),
1.89% (CelebA), 14.63% (Thyroid), and 11.81% (Mammography). When only 15 labeled anomalies are available on
the Census dataset, SEAD-Net exhibits a notable performance drop, which may be attributed to noise introduced by the joint reconstruction–contrastive dual-branch design within
newly labeled anomalies or substantial distributional diver- SCLM, we construct additional variants by removing indigence among anomaly samples, thereby hindering effective vidual branches: Vrecon , which retains only the reconstruction
distribution fitting. branch, and Vcontra , which retains only the contrastive branch.
 Overall, these results indicate that SEAD-Net can more In addition, by incorporating the customized DEM into Vrecon ,
effectively exploit a limited number of anomaly samples, we obtain Vrecon D to evaluate the effectiveness of DEM under
leading to improved representation learning, stronger gener- a baseline reconstruction setting. All variants are compared
alization performance, and enhanced robustness compared to with the full SEAD-Net, DevNet, and FEWAE under consisexisting methods. tent experimental settings.
 As reported in Tab. IV, Vrecon D outperforms Vrecon , achiev-
B. Ablation Study ing an average AUC-PR improvement of 0.51%, indicating
 1) Comparison of the Performance of Different SEAD-Net that DEM enhances representation learning by introducing
Variants: We introduce the variant VSCLM , which contains data diversity. Similarly, VSCLM outperforms Vrecon on most
only the SCLM module, to examine the impact of removing datasets, with an average AUC-PR improvement of 0.12%,
the customized DEM from SEAD-Net. To further assess validating the advantage of the dual-branch structure over
4708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

Fig. 4. Comparison of the AUC-ROC performance of SEAD-Net with baseline methods under varying anomaly contamination rates (c ∈ [0.01, 0.99]).

single-branch reconstruction. Notably, SEAD-Net achieves the
largest overall gain, with an average AUC-PR improvement of
0.97%, exceeding the combined improvements of Vrecon D and
 Fig. 5. Visualization of dataset-wise Performance Gain (PG) induced by
VSCLM , which indicates a strong synergistic effect between the individual enhancement methods.
customized DEM and self-contrastive learning.
 Moreover, across all datasets, Vrecon consistently outperforms Vcontra , suggesting that the reconstruction branch serves
as the primary driver of performance, while the contrastive
branch functions as an effective regularizer.
 2) Robustness Analysis Against Anomaly Contamination:
We evaluate the robustness of SEAD-Net under label noise
using a controlled anomaly contamination setting. Synthetic
anomalies are generated via a Feature Swapping strategy with
a small swap ratio of 0.05 and injected into the training set
as normal samples, while the contamination rate varies from
0.01 to 0.99. Fig. 4 compares the AUC-ROC performance
of SEAD-Net with three baselines (Deep-SAD, DevNet, and
FEWAE) under increasing anomaly contamination.
 As the contamination rate increases, the performance of all
methods degrades. Deep-SAD exhibits pronounced instability,
while DevNet and FEWAE deteriorate rapidly at moderate
contamination levels. In contrast, SEAD-Net shows a smoother Fig. 6. Visualization of t-SNE projections of latent representations produced
degradation trend and consistently maintains a clear per- by SEAD-Net and baseline methods.
formance margin, even under extreme contamination. These
results suggest that the self-contrastive learning mechanism multiple enhancement choices. These observations indicate
effectively regularizes the latent space, thereby enabling robust that, while individual augmentations have limited generality,
anomaly detection in the presence of severe label noise. the proposed enhancement library provides broad coverage and
 3) Visualization of Dataset-Specific Enhancement Effects: supports dataset-specific augmentation selection.
To analyze the effectiveness of the proposed enhancement 4) t-SNE Visualization of Latent Representations: To
library, we define the Performance Gain (PG) as the per- further examine whether the final SEAD-Net preserves repreformance difference between each enhancement setting and sentational advantages over competing methods, we visualize
the corresponding no-enhancement baseline. We then visualize the learned latent representations using t-SNE. Unlike the
the PG values of individual enhancement methods across previous visualization, which analyzes internal SEAD-Net
five datasets to reduce heuristic dataset-specific augmentation variants, Fig. 6 compares the final SEAD-Net with three
selection. The resulting heatmap uses warm and cool colors baselines, namely Deep-SAD, DevNet, and FEWAE.
to indicate positive and negative effects, respectively, with As illustrated in Fig. 6, the latent representations produced
datasets and enhancement methods arranged along the hori- by Deep-SAD and DevNet exhibit poorly defined cluster
zontal and vertical axes in Fig. 5. structures. FEWAE forms comparatively clearer class pat-
 As shown in Fig. 5, individual enhancements exhibit terns; however, samples within the same class remain more
dataset-dependent effectiveness and do not consistently benefit dispersed. In contrast, SEAD-Net generates noticeably more
all datasets. Nevertheless, each enhancement provides advan- compact intra-class representations while maintaining clear
tages on a subset of datasets, and every dataset benefits from inter-class separation. This observation is further supported by
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4709

 TABLE V
 that the progressive introduction of customized enhancement
 C OMPARISON OF SEAD-N ET P ERFORMANCE U NDER D IFFERENT and self-contrastive learning consistently improves represen-
 E NHANCEMENT M ODULES
 tation quality and leads to clearer separation between normal
 and anomalous samples.

 VI. C ONCLUSION
 This paper proposes SEAD-Net, a weakly supervised
 anomaly detection framework based on self-contrastive learning, which enhances the feature representation capability of
quantitative clustering metrics: SEAD-Net achieves the highest data in the model’s feature space, thereby improving the
Silhouette Coefficient (Sil) and the lowest Davies–Bouldin accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection. Specifically, we
Index (DB), confirming superior intra-class compactness and enhance the representation ability of each sample through our
inter-class separation. Overall, these results indicate that customized data augmentation module. Simultaneously, we
SEAD-Net preserves class separability while substantially design a self-contrastive learning module to boost the model’s
enhancing intra-class compactness, leading to more clearly ability to learn complex patterns within the data. Through
structured anomaly boundaries. these complementary steps, SEAD-Net extracts features that
 5) Comparison of DEM With State-of-the-Art Enhancement effectively represent critical information from the raw data,
Methods: This subsection evaluates the improved DEM mod- thereby addressing the issues of inaccurate or insufficient
ule in SEAD-Net. Under identical experimental settings, we data features. Compared with other WADMs, our SEAD-Net
compare it with two state-of-the-art enhancement approaches: can significantly improve anomaly detection performance and
a GAN-based data augmentation method (TMG-GAN) [37] sample utilization efficiency. Experimental results demonstrate
and a diffusion-based data generation method (RODEO) [44]. that SEAD-Net outperforms other competing methods in both
The quantitative results are summarized in Tab. V. performance and labeled sample utilization rate.
 From Tab. V, we observe that replacing DEM under
the same settings leads to a significant performance degra- R EFERENCES
dation for SEAD-Net. On average, SEAD-Net outperforms
 [1] J. Qi et al., “LogEncoder: Log-based contrastive representation learning
diffusion-based models by 11.40% in AUC-PR and 5.32% in for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20,
AUC-ROC, and surpasses GAN-based models by 5.89% in no. 2, pp. 1378–1391, Jun. 2023.
AUC-PR and 2.11% in AUC-ROC. This performance gap [2] C. Han, B. Guan, T. Li, D. Kang, J. Qin, and Y. Wu, “Few-shot log
 anomaly detection based on matching networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
may stem from the limited ability of diffusion-based models Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2909–2925, Jun. 2024.
to capture discriminative features in streaming data, as they [3] W. Shao, Y. Wei, P. Rajapaksha, D. Li, Z. Luo, and N. Crespi, “Loware primarily designed for image generation. For GAN-based latency dimensional expansion and anomaly detection empowered secure
 IoT network,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3,
approaches, newly generated samples under extremely low- pp. 3865–3879, Sep. 2023.
label conditions (e.g., 30 labeled samples) tend to distort [4] Y. Song, F. Wei, K. Zhu, and Y. Zhu, “Anomaly detection as a service:
the original feature distribution, thereby degrading detection An outsourced anomaly detection scheme for blockchain in a privacypreserving manner,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 4,
performance. pp. 3794–3809, Dec. 2022.
 Notably, both diffusion- and GAN-based methods exhibit [5] A. Dridi, C. Boucetta, S. E. Hammami, H. Afifi, and H. Moungla,
dataset-specific strengths: diffusion models perform better on “STAD: Spatio-temporal anomaly detection mechanism for mobile network management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 1,
Shuttle and Thyroid, whereas GAN-based methods achieve pp. 894–906, Mar. 2021.
stronger results on NSL-KDD, Bank, Census, and CelebA. [6] J. Tang et al., “Anomaly detection in social-aware IoT networks,” IEEE
Overall, the DEM module in SEAD-Net adopts customized Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 3162–3176, Sep. 2023.
 [7] J. Huang et al., “PhyFinAtt: An undetectable attack framework against
multi-dimensional stochastic augmentation strategies, includ- PHY layer fingerprint-based WiFi authentication,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
ing random cropping, flipping, shifting, and mirroring. These Comput., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 7753–7770, Jul. 2024.
strategies generate diverse, robust, yet faithful data variants [8] R. Xiao, H. Chen, J. Lu, W. Li, and S. Jin, “AllInfoLog: Robust
 diverse anomalies detection based on all log features,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
while preserving the original feature distribution, even under Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2529–2543, Sep. 2023.
extremely limited supervision. [9] X. Chen, Q. Shi, C. Xiao, D. Zhao, and K. Tang, “Unveiling and
 Moreover, additional ablation evidence is provided in the evaluating the collaboration in engineering projects through a two-layer
 information collaboration network model,” J. Manage. Eng., vol. 40,
Supplementary Material. Section S-IV-A shows that SEAD- no. 3, May 2024, Art. no. 04024014.
Net remains stable across a broad range of a0 values, with [10] W. T. Lunardi, M. A. Lopez, and J.-P. Giacalone, “ARCADE: Advera0 = 1.5 serving as an effective default choice, while Section sarially regularized convolutional autoencoder for network anomaly
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2,
S-IV-B indicates that better performance is achieved when pp. 1305–1318, Jun. 2023.
λ ∈ [0, 10−4 ], highlighting the need to maintain a suitable [11] N. Forti, L. M. Millefiori, P. Braca, and P. Willett, “Bayesian filtering for
balance between reconstruction and contrastive optimization. dynamic anomaly detection and tracking,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron.
 Syst., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1528–1544, Jun. 2022.
Section S-V-A further shows that appropriate pairwise aug- [12] X. Ma et al., “A comprehensive survey on graph anomaly detection
mentation combinations can yield additional gains, although with deep learning,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
overly strong transformations may introduce feature distortion pp. 12012–12038, Dec. 2023.
 [13] Z. Wu, H. Li, Y. Hua, N. H. Tran, and H. Gan, “Frequency-domain
on specific datasets. Finally, Section S-V-B presents the latent anomaly detection for encrypted traffic in industrial control systems,”
feature-space visualization of SEAD-Net variants, confirming IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 7859–7869, Oct. 2025.
4710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[14] C. Yin et al., “CiUAV: Scalable device-free indoor UAV localization [37] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
 via multiobjective optimized network using channel state information,” Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for net-
 IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 15297–15307, Apr. 2026. work intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19,
[15] Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Wang, and Z. Pan, “Unsupervised deep anomaly pp. 1156–1167, 2024.
 detection for multi-sensor time-series signals,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data [38] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-
 Eng., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 2118–2132, Feb. 2023. shot learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017,
[16] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for pp. 1–16.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [39] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738. ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,”
[17] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Jul. 2018, pp. 2041–2050.
 37th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., vol. 119, 2020, pp. 1597–1607. [40] G. Pang, C. Shen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Deep anomaly detection
[18] M. S. E. Sayed, N.-A. Le-Khac, M. A. Azer, and A. D. Jurcut, “A flow- with deviation networks,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl.
 based anomaly detection approach with feature selection method against Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 353–362.
 DDoS attacks in SDNs,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, [41] Y. Zhou, X. Song, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, C. Zhu, and L. Liu, “Feature
 no. 4, pp. 1862–1880, Dec. 2022. encoding with autoencoders for weakly supervised anomaly detection,”
[19] Y. Zhao et al., “Generating visual spatial description via holistic 3D IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2454–2465,
 scene understanding,” in Proc. 61st Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Jun. 2022.
 Linguistics, 2023, pp. 7960–7977. [42] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” 2019,
[20] C. Wang et al., “Limited-data SAR ATR causal method via dual- arXiv:1906.02694.
 invariance intervention,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 63, [43] Z. Li, C. Sun, C. Liu, X. Chen, M. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Dual-MGAN:
 Jan. 2025, Art. no. 5203319. An efficient approach for semi-supervised outlier detection with few
[21] G. Pang, C. Shen, H. Jin, and A. van den Hengel, “Deep weakly- identified anomalies,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data, vol. 16,
 supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. no. 6, pp. 1–30, Dec. 2022.
 Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 1795–1807. [44] H. Mirzaei et al., “RODEO: Robust outlier detection via expos-
[22] H. Gan, H. Zheng, Z. Wu, C. Ma, and J. Liu, “TFD-Net: Transformer ing adaptive out-of-distribution samples,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf.
 deviation network for weakly supervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Mach. Learn., Jul. 2025, pp. 35744–35778. [Online]. Available: https://
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 941–954, Jan. 2024. proceedings.mlr.press/v235/mirzaei24a.html
[23] H. Gan, H. Zheng, J. N. Selva, Y. Chen, Z. Wu, and F. Ullah, “TCAD- [45] G. O. Campos et al., “On the evaluation of unsupervised outlier
 Net: Integrating transformer and convolution for weakly supervised detection: Measures, datasets, and an empirical study,” Data Mining
 anomaly data discovery,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, Knowl. Discovery, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 891–927, Jul. 2016.
 pp. 5475–5488, May 2025.
[24] M. Z. Zaheer, A. Mahmood, M. Astrid, and S.-I. Lee, “Clustering
 aided weakly supervised training to detect anomalous events in surveillance videos,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 35, no. 10, Jingyou Chen received the M.Eng. degree in
 pp. 14085–14098, Oct. 2024. software engineering from the School of Soft-
[25] W. Guan, J. Cao, H. Zhao, Y. Gu, and S. Qian, “WAKE: A weakly ware, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
 supervised business process anomaly detection framework via a pre- China, in 2024. He is currently pursuing the
 trained autoencoder,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 6, Ph.D. degree in cyber science and engineering with
 pp. 2745–2758, Jun. 2024. Southeast University, Nanjing, China. His research
[26] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and X. Hu, “COPOD: Copula- interests include website fingerprinting and network
 based outlier detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM), traffic anomaly detection.
 Nov. 2020, pp. 1118–1123.
[27] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Hu, N. Botta, C. Ionescu, and G. H. Chen,
 “ECOD: Unsupervised outlier detection using empirical cumulative
 distribution functions,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 pp. 12181–12193, Dec. 2023.
[28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. Zhou, “Isolation-based anomaly detection,”
 ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data (TKDD), vol. 6, no. 1, Zhangfa Wu received the M.S. degree in elecpp. 1–39, 2012. tronic science and technology from the School of
[29] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for Electronic Information Engineering, Northwestern
 anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12, Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China, in 2020,
 pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023. where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
[30] I. Ahmed, T. Galoppo, X. Hu, and Y. Ding, “Graph regularized in electronic science and technology. He is supautoencoder and its application in unsupervised anomaly detection,” ported by China Scholarship Council (CSC). He
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 4110–4124, is a Visiting Scholar with Nanyang Technologi-
 Aug. 2022. cal University, Singapore, from September 2025
[31] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for to September 2026. His research interests include
 unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., anomaly detection, network security, deep learning,
 2018, pp. 1–19. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ signal processing, and image processing.
 forum?id=BJJLHbb0-
[32] T. Schlegl, P. Seebóck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
 G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
 networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Process.
 Med. Imag., May 2017, pp. 146–157. Yi Hua received the Ph.D. degree in aerospace
[33] F. Liu et al., “Anomaly detection in quasi-periodic time series based on science and technology from the School of Aeronauautomatic data segmentation and attentional LSTM-CNN,” IEEE Trans. tics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an,
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 2626–2640, Jun. 2022. China, in 2025. From 2023 to 2025, he was with
[34] I. Steinwart, D. Hush, and C. Scovel, “A classification framework for the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
 anomaly detection,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, no. 8, pp. 211–232, Science, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
 2005. QLD, Australia, as a Visiting Scholar sponsored by
[35] G. G. Sundarkumar and V. Ravi, “A novel hybrid undersampling method China Scholarship Council. He is currently with the
 for mining unbalanced datasets in banking and insurance,” Eng. Appl. College of Information and Artificial Intelligence,
 Artif. Intell., vol. 37, pp. 368–377, Jan. 2015. Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China. His research
[36] K. Yang, J. Ren, Y. Zhu, and W. Zhang, “Active learning for wireless IoT interests include distributed signal processing, netintrusion detection,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 19–25, work security, image processing, graph signal estimation, and data fusion of
 Dec. 2018. multiple aircraft.
CHEN et al.: SELF-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING TO BOOST WEAKLY SUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION 4711

 Hongqi Li (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. Hongping Gan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree in mechanical engineering from Beijing Insti- degree in communication and information engineertute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is ing from the State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian
 currently an Associate Professor with the School University, Xi’an, China, in 2020. From 2018 to
 of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2019, he was with the School of Information Tech-
 Xi’an, China. He has authored refereed journal nology and Electrical Engineering, The University
 articles in IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON F UZZY S YS - of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, as a Visiting
 TEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C YBERNETICS , Scholar sponsored by China Scholarship Council. He
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NTELLIGENT T RANS - is currently an Associate Professor with the School
 PORTATION S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University,
 AUTOMATION S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING, IEEE China. His current research interests include deep
T RANSACTIONS ON B IOMEDICAL E NGINEERING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS learning, compressed sensing, image processing, and network security.
ON H UMAN -M ACHINE S YSTEMS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NSTRUMEN -
TATION AND M EASUREMENT , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL S YS -
TEMS AND R EHABILITATION E NGINEERING , and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
B IOMETRICS , B EHAVIOR , AND I DENTITY S CIENCE. His research interests
include biomechatronics, human–machine interaction (HMI), human–robot
collaboration, brain-actuated robots, system modeling and simulation, signal
processing, and deep learning.

 Yilei Shi received the Ph.D. degree in bioengineering from Auckland Bioengineering Institute, the
 University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand,
 in 2021. From 2021 to 2022, he was a Senior
 Research Engineer with the OPPO Research Institute. He is currently an Associate Professor and
 a Master’s Supervisor with the School of Software, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an.
 His research interests include artificial intelligence
 (AI), 3-D computer vision, AI-generated content
 (AIGC), and human–computer interaction (HCI),
 among other related fields.