IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026 6815

 Shattering Weak Facades: Trustworthy Detection
 of Encrypted Malicious Traffic via
 Uncertainty-Aware Fusion
 Meihui Zhong , Chengtai Cao , Wenxin Tai , and Fan Zhou , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are promising for cybersecurity. Deep learning has emerged as a powerful solution
Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection (EMTD), yet practical de- to this challenge, exhibiting remarkable capabilities in extracting
ployments often face weak information: broken graph structures, intricate patterns and adapting to dynamic networks [1], [2]. In
incomplete node features, and scarce training data. Prior methods
partially mitigate these issues but still suffer from (i) restricted particular, graph-based methods [3] have garnered substantial
information propagation range in graph structures, (ii) imprecise attention due to their inherent ability to leverage structural
graph structure reconstruction resulting in erroneous or missing relationships within encrypted communications, significantly
connections, and (iii) absence of a unified framework to address improving detection accuracy.
multiple facets of information sparsity jointly. In response, we
 While Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have demonstrated
propose TrustWI, an uncertainty-aware multi-view framework. It
builds three complementary views to recover and enrich signal remarkable effectiveness in EMTD, their success heavily relies
under weak information: (i) long-range propagation to expand on the completeness and reliability of input graph data [4],
information flow, (ii) post-propagation structural augmentation [5]. Unfortunately, this assumption is rarely satisfied in realto repair broken connections, and (iii) view interaction modeling world encrypted traffic scenarios. This gap between the ideal of
to capture cross-view synergy. We further develop an evidential,
 complete data and the operational reality gives rise to what we
uncertainty-aware fusion that quantifies prediction uncertainty at
both the view level and the global level, yielding robust decisions. term weak information, rooted in three interrelated challenges:
Extensive evaluations across three benchmarks validate the effec- Structurally, network-level disruptions like packet loss lead to
tiveness of TrustWI, demonstrating substantial improvements in fragmented connections, while identity obfuscation from NAT
accuracy and trustworthiness under weak information conditions. and VPNs results in broken graph topologies. Semantically,
Notably, our approach advances the state-of-the-art AUC from
 protocol-level ambiguities such as port sharing and traffic mul-
85.45% to 89.57% in extreme information-constrained scenarios.
 tiplexing dilute the meaning of a flow, making node features
 Index Terms—Encrypted malicious detection, multi-view inconsistent. Practically, the high cost and complexity of expert
learning, graph neural network (GNN), uncertainty fusion, annotation for encrypted threats lead to a scarcity of labeled data.
evidential deep learning.
 These real-world factors jointly produce ambiguous host interactions and diluted semantic features, manifesting as broken graph
 I. INTRODUCTION structures, incomplete node features, and limited labeled data,
 ETWORK encryption protocols serve as a fundamental thereby undermining the reliability of detection models [4], [6].
N safeguard for users’ digital activities against unauthorized
access. While these protocols strengthen privacy protection and
 This pervasive information sparsity significantly impairs GNNs’
 capability for effective message propagation and representation
data security, they inadvertently enable cyber-attackers to con- learning, ultimately undermining detection efficacy [7], [8].
ceal their malicious behaviors and circumvent detection systems. Recent efforts [6], [9], [10] have introduced feature gen-
This evolving security landscape has elevated Encrypted Mali- eration and edge completion techniques to address informacious Traffic Detection (EMTD) to a critical concern in modern tion deficiency. Nevertheless, these approaches exhibit several
 fundamental limitations. Firstly, existing feature generation
 methods [9] attempt to reconstruct incomplete node features
 Received 11 August 2025; revised 20 February 2026; accepted 21 February
2026. Date of publication 25 February 2026; date of current version 12 May by leveraging available feature information and neighborhood
2026. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of structures. To mitigate notorious over-smoothing effects [10],
China under Grant 62572097. (Corresponding author: Fan Zhou.) these techniques predominantly employ short-range propagation
 Meihui Zhong and Wenxin Tai are with the School of Information and
Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of mechanisms, thereby failing to capture essential long-range
China, Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: mh.zhong1225@outlook.com; wx- dependencies. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), the red and purple
tai@outlook.com). nodes are connected by both short- and long-range edges under
 Chengtai Cao is with the Department of Computer Science, City University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: chengtcao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk). ideal conditions. However, when the shorter edge is missing,
 Fan Zhou is with the Key Laboratory of Digital Media Technology in Sichuan current models struggle to facilitate effective information ex-
Province, Chengdu 610054, China, and also with the School of Information change between them, resulting in suboptimal feature generaand Software Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China, Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: fan.zhou@uestc.edu.cn). tion. Secondly, current edge completion approaches [6] adopt a
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2026.3667905 pre-propagation paradigm, where edge enhancement precedes
 1545-5971 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6816 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 views, our approach systematically captures the uncertainty
 associated with each view’s predictions. The final fusion process
 employs Dempster-Shafer theory [11], providing a rigorous
 mathematical framework for integrating these uncertainty-aware
 opinions.
 We conduct comprehensive empirical evaluations on
 three real-world datasets, benchmarking our proposed
 TrustWI against several state-of-the-art baselines. Experimental
 results demonstrate TrustWI’s superior performance across
 diverse weak information scenarios, achieving particularly
 substantial improvements in detection accuracy when processing extremely sparse signals. Furthermore, TrustWI provides
 reliable uncertainty estimates for its predictions at both
 view-specific and global levels, significantly enhancing the
Fig. 1. Sketch of limitations with weak information. (a) Short-range prop- overall trustworthiness of detection results.
agation fails to facilitate information exchange between two colored nodes.
(b) Pre-propagation edge-completion adds erroneous edges and omits existing
ones.
 II. RELATED WORK
 This section reviews three primary research streams relevant
 to our work, contextualizing our contributions in each domain.
message passing. In scenarios with incomplete node features,
this dependence on partial feature information frequently leads
 A. Encrypted Malicious Traffic Detection
to erroneous edge generation or failure to identify legitimate
connections (cf. Fig. 1(b)). Furthermore, existing methods typ- Traditional malicious traffic detection methods primarily foically address individual aspects of information deficiency in cused on analyzing plaintext packet payloads [7]. However, the
isolation, neglecting the interdependent nature of feature and widespread adoption of encryption has rendered these methstructural incompleteness that co-occurs in real-world scenarios. ods largely ineffective, catalyzing the development of learning-
 To overcome these limitations, we propose TrustWI, an based solutions. A pioneering example is Kitsune [2], which
uncertainty-aware multi-view learning framework that holis- employs incremental online learning for adaptive feature extically handles various weak information scenarios. Our traction. Recent advancements have witnessed the emergence
framework tackles this challenge through multiple views, each of graph-based methods designed to capture intricate nettargeting specific aspects while considering their potential in- work patterns [13], [14]. Noteworthy contributions include STteractions. For the first challenge, we introduce View-L, a long- Graph [13], which integrates spatial-temporal features through
range propagation mechanism that enables comprehensive infor- graph representations, and ContraMTD [14], which leverages
mation flow across the graph for robust feature reconstruction. graph contrastive learning to model network behaviors.
Leveraging these enhanced representations, View-S enriches the Handling Weak Information: Real-world encrypted traffic
structural information through semantic similarity analysis, op- graphs often suffer from incomplete observations, resulting in
erating in a post-propagation paradigm to ensure more reliable degraded node features and unreliable connectivity. Prior EMTD
edge completion. To capture the dynamic interplay between fea- studies address such weak information through data completure enhancement and structural refinement, we further develop tion [8], [15], [16] or robust graph architectures. For example,
View-P, a novel pseudo-view that models how the augmented MI-GNN [17] fuses complementary views via multi-task learnedges from View-S reciprocally influence the information prop- ing, and RAPIER [8] leverages traffic regularities for anomaly
agation patterns in View-L. relabeling. Nonetheless, jointly handling broken structures and
 In TrustWI, the reliability of predictions from each view incomplete features remains challenging.
exhibits considerable variation across different samples, neces- Beyond EMTD, similar challenges have been extensively
sitating the development of an effective fusion strategy. While studied in the broader graph learning literature under incomplete,
traditional fusion approaches utilize either fixed weights or partial, or noisy graph settings. Representative studies in this line
attention mechanisms based on their feature representations to focus on partial and noisy matching, such as size-varied graphs,
combine views, these methods prove inadequate in capturing outlier nodes, and unreliable correspondences. For instance, [18]
the model’s inherent uncertainty in processing different views. formulates unsupervised graph matching under multiple modes
This limitation potentially results in unreliable fusion when and optimizes it via discrepancy minimization; [19] designs a
certain views generate noisy or incomplete signals [11]. To graph-context attention mechanism to improve matching for
achieve robust view fusion, we develop an uncertainty-aware size-varied graphs; ZAC [20] introduces a zero-assignment
strategy grounded in evidential learnin [12]. Specifically, we constraint to explicitly handle outliers; and COMMON [21]
conceptualize each view’s outputs as evidence contributing to models noisy correspondence with a bi-level formulation. While
the formation of uncertainty-aware opinions about the final these works target multi-graph correspondence recovery, they
predictions. Through the implementation of variational Dirichlet highlight the same difficulty of learning robust relational patterns
distributions, parameterized by the collected evidence across from incomplete and noisy signals. In contrast, our work focuses
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6817

on single-graph EMTD and addresses weak information via sharing a common 4-tuple identifier (source IP address, destinauncertainty-aware representation learning and fusion. tion IP address, source port, destination port). This flow-based
 paradigm facilitates fine-grained detection of malicious network
B. Multi-View Learning activities.
 Following established graph-based EMTD approaches [13],
 Multi-view learning leverages complementary information [26], we define a graph G = (V, E, A, H). Here, V is the node
by jointly modeling shared representations and view-specific set with cardinality |V|, where each node vi represents a unique
structure [22]. The paradigm has progressed from classical host identified by its IP address. E denotes the edge set, where
CCA [23] to contrastive frameworks, achieving strong results an eij exists if there is a direct network flow between host vi
in graph clustering [24], [25] and multi-task learning [26]. and host vj . A ∈ {0, 1}(|V|×|V|) is the adjacency matrix, where
 To address view-quality variation, DUA-Nets [27] model Aij = 1 denotes an edge between nodes vi and vj , and Aij = 0
per-view uncertainty as Gaussian variance σ 2 . However, this otherwise. H ∈ R|V|×d denotes the feature matrix, where each
conflates reconstruction difficulty with epistemic uncertainty, row represents a d-dimensional feature vector of network flow
potentially yielding unreliable estimates, for example, by inflat- statistics for a host. Consistent with previous studies [14], [26],
ing σ to suppress reconstruction loss on noisy views. ECNet [26] our proposed model, TrustWI, adopts the semi-supervised learnapplies multi-view learning to malicious traffic detection via ing paradigm. Given NL labeled training flows (i.e., nodes in G),
gated fusion of content and pattern features. While effective, TrustWI aims to learn a mapping function for unlabeled target
it lacks an explicit reliability model. The fusion is fixed and nodes:
agnostic to inter-view uncertainty or disagreement, and its scalar
confidence is computed separately from fusion, limiting the ŷt = TrustWI(A, H, vt |Θ), (1)
reflection and propagation of uncertainty. These choices reduce
robustness under noise or distribution shift. where ŷt is the prediction distribution for target node vt , and Θ
 Motivated by these limitations, this work introduce a multi- denotes the model parameters.
view framework with uncertainty-aware view fusion that ex- Weak Information Scenario: In real-world encrypted network,
plicitly models view-level confidence and enhances robustness graph-based intrusion detection often operates under degraded
in weak-information and out-of-distribution scenarios. observations due to infrastructure and protocol-level limitations.
 Packet loss during transmission disrupts flow continuity and
 results in incomplete or erroneous edge construction. Simul-
C. Uncertainty Learning taneously, NAT translation, VPN tunneling, and dynamic IP re-
 Conventional deep learning models, functioning as determin- assignment obscure host identities and fragment the underlying
istic mappings, inherently lack the capability to quantify predic- communication topology. Furthermore, port sharing and traftion uncertainty. This limitation is particularly critical in high- fic multiplexing introduce inconsistencies into flow semantics,
stakes domains where prediction reliability is essential [28]. while the scarcity of labeled traffic significantly limits the ability
The theoretical foundation for uncertainty quantification in deep to train reliable classifiers.
learning originates from Bayesian neural networks [29], which In practice, encrypted traffic suffers from various structural
model network parameters as probability distributions. Given and semantic degradation sources: (i) packet loss during transtheir computational complexity, more tractable approaches have mission leads to missing or broken session flows; (ii) NAT, VPNs,
emerged, including Monte Carlo dropout [30], deep ensem- and dynamic IP reassignment obscure true host identities and
bles [31], evidential learning [12], and probabilistic logic [32]. fragment communication graphs; (iii) port sharing and multi-
This work adapts evidential learning to EMTD, providing a plexing introduce inconsistent flow semantics; and (iv) limited
framework for quantifying view-specific uncertainties. This en- labeled data restricts supervised learning. Node features may
ables dynamic view fusion that adjusts to information sparsity be incomplete due to encryption or network topology changes.
levels, departing from existing deterministic approaches. These conditions and limited training samples create “weak
 information” scenarios that impede effective graph information
 extraction for EMTD. Formally, broken structures manifest as
 III. METHODOLOGY
 sparse adjacency matrix A, while incomplete node features
 This section presents our proposed TrustWI for EMTD under are represented by partial feature matrix H. Additionally, the
weak information scenarios. We first formalize the problem set- number of labeled samples is scarce (i.e., NL  |V|). Based on
ting (Section III-A), then detail our framework, which comprises these characteristics, we formalize the concept of an impaired
multi-view representation learning (Section III-B), uncertainty- graph:
aware view fusion (Section III-C). Definition 1. (Impaired Graph): Let the ideal attributed graph
 be G = (V, A , H  ), where A ∈ {0, 1}|V |×|V | and H  ∈
A. Task Definition R|V |×d . An impaired graph is the observed graph G̃ = (V, Ã, H̃)
 generated by
 Network traffic consists of packets transmitted between host
devices. While traffic analysis can be conducted at various gran- Ã = A  ΩA , ΩA ∈ {0, 1}|V |×|V | ,
ularities (packet, stream, channel, or flow), this study focuses on
flow-level analysis. A flow is defined as a sequence of packets H̃ = H   ΩH , ΩH ∈ {0, 1}|V |×d ,
6818 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 2. Illustration of our TrustWI. (a) Learning the long-range propagation view (View-L) and structural augmentation view (View-S), then generating View-P
based on them. (b) Learning the evidence uncertainty across three views. The Dirichlet distributions derived from these views are dynamically aggregated to
capture view-specific uncertainties, yielding a fused Dirichlet distribution (View-F). (c) The proposed evidential learning loss guides model optimization through
backpropagation.

where  denotes the element-wise product. ΩA and ΩH model
broken structures and incomplete features, respectively. In semisupervised EMTD, we are given a labeled node set V ⊂ V with
|V|  |V | and labels yV = {yi }i∈V .
 As illustrated in Fig. 2, TrustWI transforms an impaired
graph into a trustworthy classification. It generates three complementary views: a semantic view from long-range propagation (View-L), a repaired structural view via post-propagation
augmentation (View-S), and an interaction view modeling their Fig. 3. Conceptual information flow. Each view outputs a subjective opinion
synergy (View-P). Each view yields an evidential opinion with Mv = {bv , uv }, and the final opinion M = {b, u} is obtained via DS-based
 fusion (⊕).
quantified uncertainty, which are fused via an evidential-fusion
rule for a final, robust decision.
 and preventing over-smoothing. We employ a diffusion-based
 propagation mechanism [34] formulated as:
B. Multi-View Learning of Impaired Graph
 1) View-L Based on Long-Range Propagation: Graph Neu- H(t+1) = (1 − α)ÃH(t) + αH(0) , (2)
ral Networks (GNNs) facilitate complex relationship modeling
by propagating information between neighboring nodes through where H(t) is the representation after the t-th propagation step
graph structure. Traditional GNN-based EMTD approaches (H(0) = H at initialization), α ∈ (0, 1] is the restart probability,
typically employ shallow architectures with 2∼3 layers [33] and Ã is the row-normalized adjacency matrix derived from A.
to mitigate over-smoothing [10], a phenomenon where exces- The first term aggregates information from immediate neighsive neighborhood aggregation leads to indistinguishable node bors, and the second preserves discriminative features while
representations. While this design choice proves effective for stabilizing long-range flow.
complete graphs, it becomes inadequate in weak information The second term serves multiple crucial purposes. Through
scenarios, as nodes cannot accumulate sufficient information for periodic injection of original node features during propagation,
representation updates due to broken structures and incomplete this term preserves node-specific characteristics while acting
features. as an anchor point to stabilize long-range information flow.
 To address this challenge, we design a GNN module with This design enables deeper propagation iterations by preventing
long-range propagation mechanisms to enable sufficient infor- over-smoothing as nodes balance between accumulating distant
mation exchange across nodes, providing a long-range view information and maintaining their discriminative features. Com-
(View-L). It compensates for information loss and captures com- bining these terms facilitates effective information propagation
plex malicious patterns in encrypted traffic by diffusing features across longer graph distances while preserving node distincover more than three hops, so that each node aggregates context tiveness, particularly in weak information scenarios where local
from distant graph regions. Deep propagation can blur node structures are compromised.
identities, so we re-inject the original feature matrix H(0) at Through T propagation iterations, we obtain the final feature
every step via a restart term weighted by α, anchoring each node matrix H (i.e., H(T ) ) that encodes a comprehensive long-range
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6819

view of the impaired graph G. By employing a larger propaga- we concatenate the feature matrix from View-L (i.e., H) with
tion depth (T =12∼20), our method enables nodes to aggregate the resultant feature matrix of this diffused View-S. This design
information beyond immediate neighborhoods, thus addressing effectively captures the complex interactions between views
missing edges in impaired graphs. The resulting enhanced node while minimizing trainable parameters and avoiding problemrepresentations capture both local structures and global graph atic recursive dependencies.
context, providing a more complete characterization of node
behaviors despite structural impairments. C. Uncertainty-Aware View Fusion
 2) View-S Based on Post-Propagation Structural Augmen-
 After generating multiple views, the final step is to fuse them
tation: In encrypted traffic detection, node connectivity plays
 for a robust prediction. This fusion process is non-trivial in weak
a vital role, as behavioral patterns during connection estabinformation scenarios, where there are two key challenges: 1)
lishment and data transmission are key indicators of malicious
 individual views may contain unreliable or biased knowledge,
activities. However, weak information scenarios pose signifimaking simplistic fusion strategies prone to suboptimal results;
cant challenges due to missing connections. Moreover, isolated
 and 2) conventional classification models often rely on Softmax,
nodes in the impaired graph cannot exchange information with
 which is known to produce overconfident predictions that can
others, severely hindering effective information propagation.
 compromise the fusion process.
While traditional approaches attempt to address this through
 To address these, we propose an uncertainty-aware view
edge-completion techniques based on initial node similarities,
 fusion strategy that adaptively integrates multi-view inforthese methods show substantial limitations when handling weak
 mation. This design enhances prediction robustness by: 1)
information with incomplete node features, often generating
 dynamically prioritizing more reliable views based on their
false connections while missing genuine relationships. This not
 sample-specific uncertainty; 2) providing a quantifiable unonly fails to recover the actual network structure but may also
 certainty score for each prediction as an interpretable reliaintroduce noise that compromises detection accuracy.
 bility indicator; and 3) facilitating practical decision-making
 To address this challenge, we propose a post-propagation
 by enabling targeted manual scrutiny when model confistructural augmentation that constructs an augmented graph
 dence is low. This ensures more reliable EMTD in real-world
from the updated node semantics H learned in View-L. Leverdeployments.
aging these enriched representations instead of the incomplete
 1) Uncertainty Quantification: We introduce an evidenceinitial features reduces both the chance of missing critical edges
 based framework for uncertainty measurement that goes beyond
and the risk of adding spurious ones. Intuitively, we connect
 predicting a single probability vector p = [p1 , . . . , pK ]. Followtwo nodes when their View-L embeddings are mutually similar
 ing subjective logic [35], we map class-wise belief masses and
enough to suggest a genuine relationship that the original graph
 overall uncertainty to the parameters of a Dirichlet distribution
may have missed. This view (View-S) therefore offers more
 α, enabling explicit per-class evidence together with associated
reliable structural recovery with minimal noise. The augmented
 confidence levels. Specifically, we model p as a Dirichlet distriadjacency matrix Â is defined as
 bution, the conjugate prior of the multinomial:
   
 1 s(Hi , Hj ) ≥ min τ (Hi , c), τ (Hj , c) p := Dirichlet(α) , (4)
 Âij = , (3)    
 Aij otherwise Distribution Evidential P rior

where A is the original adjacency matrix. The function where α = [α1 , α2 , . . . , αK ] represents the evidential prior pas(Hi , Hj ) computes the cosine similarity between nodes vi and rameter, with αk = ek + 1 for k ∈ {1, . . . , K} and ek denoting
vj . For node vi , τ (Hi , c) is its cosine similarity with its c-th most the accumulated evidence for class k. Based on this formulation,
similar node in H, and τ (Hj , c) is defined analogously for vj . the probability density function of the distribution p is defined
The threshold c is chosen as c = max(|Ni |, |Nj |), where |Ni | as:
 
and |Nj | are the neighborhood sizes of vi and vj in the original 1 K
 pαk −1 for p ∈ SK ,
graph. Dir(p | α) = B(α) k=1 k (5)
 0 otherwise,
 This formulation enables more accurate and contextually
aware edge additions to the graph structure. By integrating where SK denotes the (K-1) dimensional unit simplex of
this structural augmentation, View-S enriches the graph with all p = [p1 , . . . , pK ] that satisfy K
 k=1 pk = 1 and ∀k, 0 ≤ pk
additional meaningful connections, enhancing encrypted traffic ≤ 1. B(α) represents the multinomial Beta function.
detection through more complete structural information. Intuitively, each Dirichlet parameter αk = ek + 1 can be seen
 3) View-P Based on View Interaction: View-S is derived as ek units of evidence poured into the k-th class bucket, and
from View-L through structural augmentation, yet this unidi- the total evidence S controls how much probability mass is
rectional information flow overlooks the potential impact of left for uncertainty. This parameterization enables the model
augmented edges in View-S on the propagation dynamics in to capture both the belief mass bk ≥ 0 for each class and the
View-L. To address this limitation, we introduce a lightweight overall uncertainty mass u ≥ 0. Given a Dirichlet distribution,
pseudo-view (View-P) through a computationally efficient two- they are computed as
step process. First, we apply a single iteration of diffusion-based αk − 1 ek K
information propagation (Eq. (2) in View-L) to View-S. Then, bk = = , u= , (6)
 S S S
6820 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 K K K cases. This formulation enables a principled balance between
 s. t. u + bk = 1, S= αk = (ek + 1), (7) confident predictions and uncertainty quantification, yielding
 k=1 k=1 k=1 more reliable results.
where K is the number of classes and S is the total evidence. 2) Uncertainty-Aware View Fusion: After quantifying un-
 Learning to Form Opinions: We now elucidate our dual- certainty for each view, we adopt the reduced Dempster-Shafer
component training paradigm for opinion formation learning. (DS) combination rule [11] to fuse the distinct views. This fusion
This approach integrates two key mechanisms: (i) evidence mechanism is designed to be both robust and efficient; it dyamplification to strengthen observed patterns and (ii) evidence namically weights each view according to its uncertainty level,
attenuation (uncertainty elevation) in response to prediction er- separates belief from uncertainty explicitly to handle inter-view
rors. The first component functions as a data-fitting mechanism conflicts, and maintains lower computational complexity than
for the evidential model, while the second introduces a prior conventional fusion approaches [36].
that suppresses spurious evidence and maintains appropriate For each view, we derive its evidential representation M(·) =
 (·) (·)
uncertainty levels. {{bk }K k=1 , u } through the uncertainty quantification method
 i) Maximizing the Model Fit: For a given sample xi , let detailed in Section III-C1. The fusion of View-L M(L) , View-S
f (xi |Θ) denote the output evidence vector, where Θ represents M(S) , and View-P M(P ) follows the combination rule to generthe network parameters. The corresponding Dirichlet distri- ate a fused view (View-F), which is formulated as:
bution is parameterized by αi = f (xi |Θ) + 1. After param- (F )
eter computation, the class probability estimate is obtained M(F ) = M(L) ⊕ M(S) ⊕ M(P ) = {{bk }K
 k=1 , u
 (F )
 }, (11)
from the Dirichlet distribution’s expected value, expressed as where the fusion of any two views (denoted by · and · ) is
pik = αik /Si , where Si = K k=1 αik represents the Dirichlet calculated as follows:
intensity. Let yi = [yi1 , . . . , yiK ] denote the ground truth label
 1 1
of xi . We measure the prediction-truth disparity using the cross- bk = (b b + bk u + bk u ), u = u u , (12)
entropy loss function: 1−C k k 1−C
  where C = K  
 K
 1  αik −1
 K i=j bi bj quantifies the view conflict by aggregat-
 Li (Θ) = −yik log(pik ) pik dpi ing products of belief masses assigned to distinct classes.
 B(αi ) The theoretical validity of this fusion approach is established
 k=1 k=1
 K in the supplementary material. The analysis formally justifies
 = yik (ψ(Si ) − ψ(αik )) , (8) our choice of the DS rule, showing it enhances accuracy by
 k=1 incorporating informative views while guaranteeing robustness,
 as even highly uncertain views do not significantly degrade perwhere ψ(·) denotes the Digamma function. formance. Furthermore, the analysis proves our method reduces
 ii) Minimizing Evidence on Errors: While minimizing the overall prediction uncertainty and prevents false confidence genaforementioned loss function optimizes model fit, this alone eration by ensuring that high input uncertainty is appropriately
proves insufficient for handling prediction uncertainties effec- propagated to the final output.
tively. To address this limitation, we introduce a mechanism Training: We implement a multi-task learning framework to
that penalizes incorrect predictions by reducing their associated optimize the formation of subjective opinions across all views.
evidence. Specifically, when the model misclassifies traffic, our The overall loss function is formulated as follows:
approach eliminates all evidence, as a Dirichlet distribution with
zero evidence corresponds to maximum uncertainty (u = 1). Lall (Θ) = L(L) (Θ) + L(S) (Θ) + L(P ) (Θ) + L(F ) (Θ), (13)
This is implemented through a Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence term in the loss function: where L(L) (Θ), L(S) (Θ), L(P ) (Θ), and L(F ) (Θ) denote the loss
 functions for View-L, View-S, View-P, and View-F, respectively,
 LR (Θ) = KL[Dir(p|α̃) Dir(p| 1, . . . , 1 )], (9) each calculated according to Eq. (10).
where α̃ denotes α with its ground truth label component Discussion: The overall information flow of our multi-view
replaced by 1. This term is a regularizer for our predictive framework is summarized in Fig. 3, and the procedure is detailed
distribution, penalizing deviations from maximum uncertainty. in Algorithm 1. Conceptually, our design differs from standard
 The loss function for each view L(Θ) combines two compo- Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models. Each view outputs its own
nents: the evidence maximization and the regularization: confidence evidence, rather than relying on a separate gating
 network. We fuse each view opinions via DS theory to obtain
 NL
 both predictions and uncertainty. The views are progressively
 L(Θ) = Li (Θ) + λe LR (Θ), (10) refined – View-L enhances semantics via long-range propagai=1
 tion, View-S repairs structure using the resulting embeddings,
where λe is the hyperparameter controlling the trade-off be- and View-P models their interactions. We adopt Evidential Deep
tween classification loss and KL divergence. Through this uni- Learning (EDL) since Dirichlet evidence is naturally compatified objective, the model pursues two complementary goals: ble with DS fusion, whereas MC Dropout or deep ensembles
maximizing predictive accuracy with sufficient evidence while require multiple forward passes and do not provide a principled
maintaining appropriate levels of uncertainty in ambiguous belief-fusion mechanism.
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6821

 TABLE I
 Algorithm 1: Training Algorithm of TrustWI. STATISTICS OF DATASETS. W/ EXTREME DENOTES THE EXTREMELY WEAK
 INFORMATION SCENARIO

 malicious instances across 70 features. Table I presents the
 statistics of the evaluated datasets.
 Testbeds: Our experiments are conducted on a computational
 platform with an Intel i5-14600KF 3.50 GHz CPU, an NVIDIA
 GeForce GTX 4060 Ti GPU, and 32 GB of system memory. We
 use the PyTorch Geometric (PyG) library to implement graphbased encoders for baselines.
 Baselines: We compare our TrustWI against three categories
 of baselines:
 (i) Conventional GNNs: GCN [33] is a foundational model for
 semi-supervised node classification using spectral graph convolutions. GAN [40] uses masked self-attention to weigh neighbor importance, improving upon standard graph convolutions.
 PPNP [34] decouples feature transformation from propagation,
 enabling deeper information propagation without the risk of
 over-smoothing.
 (ii) Traffic detection models: Kitsune [2] uses incremental online learning to learn the features of each package. ST-Graph [13]
 constructs a spatio-temporal graph to model both connection
 relationships (spatial) and their timing (temporal). MTSecurity [41] fuses byte-level sequence features from a Transformer
 with graph-based interaction features from a GNN to enhance
 malicious traffic representation. ContraMTD [14] captures both
 local behavior features (sequence and density of behaviors) and
 global interaction features (topological relationships in host interaction graphs) using proposed SEC and DE-GAT mechanisms
 to handle weak information.
 (iii) Weak information-based approaches: Pro-GNN [42] directly models the adjacency matrix with learnable parameters
 and learns it with GNN alternatively. The low-rank attribute
 eliminates the opposing edges, while regularization enhances
 sparsity and smoothness in the features during the learning
Fig. 4. Accuracy of methods w.r.t. different feature missing rates on three
evaluation datasets.
 process. MI-GNN [17] augments the original graph using complementary information (features, labels, and structure) to improve the graph representation and finally uses multi-task view
 IV. EVALUATION learning to learn three kinds of supplementary graph information, respectively. RAPIER [8] estimates data distribution using
A. Experimental Setup
 a deep generative model and re-labels training data based on
 Datasets: We evaluate our approach on three real-world the density distribution, thus correcting the label noise. Once
datasets: (i) TONIoT [37], an IoT traffic dataset containing corrected, it generates new training data through an improved
796,380 normal and 21,542,641 malicious instances with 10 GAN.
attack types across 39 features; (ii) DoHBrw [38], a DNS over Hyperparameter Tuning: For all methods, we find the best
HTTPS traffic dataset comprising 19,807 normal and 354,996 hyperparameters using grid search over a search space:
malicious instances across 28 features; (iii) CICIDS [39], a r Number of epochs: [100, 200, 400, 500];
network traffic dataset consisting of 931,873 normal and 18,028 r Learning rate: [1e-1, 1e-2, 1e-3];
6822 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE II
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF OUR TRUSTWI WITH BASELINES IN WEAK INFORMATION SCENARIO ACROSS THREE DATASETS. THE BEST AND RUNNER-UP
 RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD AND UNDERLINED, RESPECTIVELY.

 r Hidden unit of MLP: [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]; in nearly all cases, with only a marginal disadvantage in F1-
 r Number of attention heads of GAT: [4, 6, 8]; score compared to MI-GNN on DoHBrw. Notably, on TONIoT,
 r Number of layers/propagation iterations T : [3, 4, 6, 8, 12, which features more complex malicious traffic distributions,
 16, 20]; TrustWI significantly improves AUC from 91.34% to 93.72%.
 r Restart probability α: [0.01, 0.05, 0.1]. This enhancement highlights the model’s effectiveness in lever-
 Metrics: To evaluate the model’s performance, we employ aging multi-view information integration for robust detection
multiple metrics: accuracy (ACC), precision (PR), recall (RC), under weak information conditions.
F1-score (F1), and AUC. ST-Graph outperforms other traffic detection methods
 Implementation Details: Following standard protocol [43], through its spatiotemporal heterogeneous graph design and efwe simulate ‘weak information’ scenarios by randomly remov- fective integration of network communication patterns. PPNP
ing 50% of edges and masking 50% of node features with achieves strong results by decoupling propagation from prezeros. We perform stratified random sampling to ensure balanced diction, enabling comprehensive neighborhood information asrepresentation of normal and malicious flows. For ‘extremely similation via multi-step iterations. ContraMTD’s performance
weak information’ scenarios, less than 2% of labeled nodes deteriorates significantly under weak information scenarios, as
are selected while preserving the original class distribution. For its effectiveness heavily relies on contrastive learning to capnon-graph baselines (e.g., Kitsune and RAPIER), only feature ture consistency between local behavior and global interaction
incompleteness is simulated, while the graph structure is not features. Methods specifically designed for weak information
constructed. All datasets are split using a 3:1 ratio for training scenarios, including our TrustWI, demonstrate optimal detecand testing. tion capabilities. Among these approaches, TrustWI achieves
 We train our model for 1,000 epochs using the AdamW opti- superior performance through its novel multi-view information
mizer [44]. The learning rates are set to 0.001, 0.01, and 0.001 integration and adaptive view fusion, enabling robust detection
for TONIoT, DoHBrw, and CICIDS, respectively. In Eq. (2), even with incomplete network data.
the number of propagation steps T is set to 12 for TONIoT and As for the scenario where less than 2% training data is avail-
DoHBrw, and 20 for CICIDS, with restart probability α = 0.01. able, all models have experienced performance degradation, as
The regularization coefficient λe in Eq. (10) is initialized as expected (shown in Table III). However, our model remains the
0.01 and linearly increased by 0.01 per epoch until reaching a most effective, and in this case, the role of pseudo-view becomes
maximum value of 1. The variational network (f in Fig. 2) is more evident. With the decrease in sample size, pseudo-view
implemented using a two-layer MLP. To facilitate reproducibil- helps to make up for the lack of data, further enhances the
ity and foster future research, we make the source code of robustness of the model, and improves the overall detection
TrustWI publicly available.1 performance.
 2) Evaluation in Extremely Weak Information Scenario: To
B. Experimental Results further validate TrustWI’s robustness, we conduct a comparative analysis under conditions of extreme information spar-
 1) Evaluation on Benchmarks: Table II presents the detecsity. Specifically, we evaluate performance using a highly contion performance comparison between TrustWI and baselines
 strained subset of less than 2% of training samples. Results on
across three datasets under weak information scenarios. The
 three datasets are presented in Table III. The DoHBrw empiriresults demonstrate that TrustWI achieves the best performance
 cal results demonstrate that TrustWI significantly outperforms
 baselines by a large margin. Compared to RAPIER, the best-
 1 https://github.com/MHZhong1225/TrustWI performing baseline that only encounters feature incompleteness
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6823

 TABLE III
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF OUR TRUSTWI WITH BASELINES IN EXTREMELY WEAK INFORMATION SCENARIO ACROSS THREE DATASETS USING A SMALL
 PART OF TRAINING DATA. THE BEST AND RUNNER-UP RESULTS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD AND UNDERLINED, RESPECTIVELY.

 TABLE V
 ACC OF VARIOUS MODELS UNDER DIFFERENT LABEL NOISE RATIOS (OTHER
 DEGRADATIONS SET TO ZERO)

Fig. 5. Accuracy of methods w.r.t. different structure degradation rates on
three evaluation datasets.

 TABLE IV
 AUC UNDER DIFFERENT ANNOTATION RATIOS WITH 50% MISSING
 STRUCTURE AND FEATURES
 TABLE VI
 ROBUSTNESS TO TARGETED EDGE INJECTION ATTACKS (REI) ON TONIOT

as a non-graph method, our method substantially improves AUC
from 85.45% to 89.57%. This enhancement is significant as
TrustWI successfully handles incomplete features and graph b) Label Noise: We further examine robustness to incorstructures. The proposed multi-view learning and uncertainty- rect annotations by injecting label noise. Specifically, 10%, 30%,
aware view fusion in TrustWI enable robust detection even with and 50% of the training labels are randomly flipped, with all
highly limited training data. other degradations disabled to isolate this effect. As shown in
 3) Robustness Analysis: Table V, TrustWI consistently degrades more gracefully than
 a) Weak Information: To verify our method’s robustness baselines. For example, at 50% noise on TONIoT, TrustWI drops
in handling various aspects of missing information, we con- by only 12.6 points, whereas baselines drop by nearly 28
ducted comparative experiments on datasets with broken struc- points. This resilience is attributed to our uncertainty-aware futures and incomplete features. As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, we sion, which down-weights conflicting evidence from mislabeled
present accuracy values of all methods under different degrees nodes.
of information loss. Our model shows excellent performance in c) Adversarial Interference: Further, since graph structure
these scenarios, and even when the degree increases, it always at inference time may be vulnerable to adversarial interference,
obtains higher accuracy than baseline. we evaluate robustness on the TONIoT test set using random
 We further evaluate TrustWI under varying annotation ratios edge injection (REI), which injects fake edges between anoma-
(0.5%, 1%, and 5%) with stratified sampling. As shown in the lous and benign nodes. Results in Table VI show that all methods
Table IV, our TrustWI achieves the best AUC across all ratios, degrade as REI increases, while TrustWI remains relatively
supporting its robustness under severe label scarcity. stable, indicating higher resilience to attack induced structural
6824 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 6. Uncertainty distribution of our TrustWI. Fig. 9. Uncertainty (%) of different views in TrustWI.

 combination of maintaining accuracy while dramatically reducing uncertainty is the key synergy of our fusion approach.
 The mechanism enabling this synergy is further illustrated in a
 visualization of a representative subgraph (Fig. 9). The analysis
 shows that views more closely resembling the ideal topology
 consistently yield lower uncertainty. This confirms that our
Fig. 7. Uncertainty density of TrustWI under noise. uncertainty-guided mechanism successfully emphasizes more
 reliable views during fusion, converting complementary evidence into predictions that are both accurate and substantially
 more reliable.
 5) Ablation Study:
 a) Multi-View Learning: To validate the advantages of
 multi-view learning, Table VII (variants (a)–(c)) compares the
 AUC performance between single-view approaches (View-L
 et al.) and our multi-view method. The results show that our
 multi-view methodology significantly outperforms single-view
 approaches, which are inherently limited in weak information
Fig. 8. Contribution analysis of individual views. scenarios where individual views may lack reliability. This
 performance gap demonstrates the importance of multi-view
noise. We attribute this to our uncertainty aware evidential fusion in integrating complementary information from different
fusion, which reduces the influence of unreliable evidence when perspectives for more robust predictions.
the structure is perturbed. b) Evidential Fusion: We compare our evidential fusion
 4) Qualitative Analysis: with four alternative strategies: Simple Fusion (equal weights for
 a) Discriminative Power: We visualized the model’s final all views), Simple Fusion , Attention Fusion (attention-based inprediction distribution. As shown in Fig. 6, predictions for tegration), and Attention Fusion , where (·) indicates the modboth normal and malicious samples are highly concentrated at els without uncertainty learning. Results in Table VII (variants
the extremes of the probability space. This strong intra-cluster (d)–(g)) show the superiority of our evidential fusion method. In
cohesion and clear class separation provide qualitative evidence contrast to these variants, our approach leverages the summation
of TrustWI’s high discriminative power. operation on Dirichlet distribution for uncertainty-aware fusion,
 b) Data Noise: We validated the model’s uncertainty es- enabling adaptive view importance adjustment. Additionally,
timation by injecting Gaussian noise into the test data. Fig. 7 comparing variants (d) with (e) and (f) with (g) shows that
shows that the model’s predicted uncertainty increases in di- incorporating uncertainty learning via the regularization term
rect proportion to the noise intensity (σ). The results show of Eq. (9) improves performance even when uncertainty is not
that uncertainty increases proportionally with noise intensity, directly used for fusion guidance.
demonstrating that TrustWI effectively quantifies network noise c) Structural Augmentation: Pre-Propagation vs. Postthrough uncertainty measures. This capability has significant Propagation: We examine the impact of operation order by
practical value. For instance, when encountering substantial comparing structural augmentation before and after long-range
encrypted malicious traffic, the elevated uncertainty can trigger propagation. Table VII (variant (h)) demonstrates degraded pertimely interventions from network administrators. formance in the pre-propagation setup, indicating that premature
 c) View Contribution Analysis: To analyze the contribu- structural augmentation introduces incorrect edges due to unretion of each view, we visualized their final performance and un- liable initial node semantics. In contrast, our post-propagation
certainty on the DoHBrw dataset as box plots (Fig. 8). The anal- design prevents this. It first establishes reliable node embeddings
ysis reveals two key findings: 1) the fused View (V-F) achieves through long-range propagation, and only then performs struca median accuracy competitive with the best-performing tural augmentation. This sequence is critical for mitigating the
individual view (V-S), and 2) V-F exhibits markedly lower risk of semantic leakage, which we define as the propagation of
and more concentrated uncertainty than any single view. This errors that occurs when noisy or incomplete initial node features
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6825

 TABLE VII
 ABLATION STUDY OF TRUSTWI

 TABLE VIII
 AUC OF METHODS W.R.T. DIFFERENT GRAPH CONSTRUCTION METHOD ON
 TONIOT DATASET

 TABLE IX
 IMPACT OF NEIGHBOR THRESHOLD AND SIMILARITY METRIC ON
 AUGMENTATION QUALITY IN TONIOT DATASET

Fig. 10. Impact of the propagation iteration number T.

 information propagation. A moderate α achieves optimal per-
Fig. 11. Impact of the restart probability α. formance, demonstrating the importance of combining both
 long-range and local features.
 c) Graph Construction Method: To demonstrate the roare used to infer new graph connections, thereby corrupting the bustness of our framework and the critical importance of its
graph’s topology. components, we conducted an ablation study in Table VIII to as-
 6) Sensitivity Analysis: sess our framework’s robustness to different graph construction
 a) Long-Range Propagation: To validate TrustWI’s capa- methods. The results are twofold: first, with our full components
bility to capture long-range information, we conduct experi- active the AUC is at least 0.932 for every graph and varies by less
ments by varying the number of propagation steps in View-L. than half a percentage point. Second, removing either View-L or
As shown in Fig. 10, model performance across all datasets View-S causes a substantial performance drop of over 10% AUC
peaks at T =12∼20 steps, demonstrating effective long-range in all cases. This confirms that the primary driver of TrustWI’s
information utilization without over-smoothing. These results success is its advanced enhancement and fusion components,
confirm that long-range propagation is essential for addressing not the specific initial graph heuristic.
weak information scenarios. d) Neighbor Threshold and Similarity Metrics: We anab) Restart Probability: Fig. 11 shows model performance lyzed the sensitivity of our structural augmentation by evaluating
across different α values in Eq. (2). When α = 0, excluding the two key choices: the neighbor threshold c and the similarity metsecond term, performance deteriorates due to over-smoothing. ric, with results presented in Table IX. The analysis confirms our
Conversely, an excessive α reduces the benefits of long-range design choices. For the neighbor threshold, fixed values present
6826 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

a poor trade-off: a small c (e.g., c = 5) is too restrictive and omits [7] S. T. K. Jan et al., “Throwing darts in the dark? Detecting bots with limited
many true edges, yielding a low AUC of 91.2%, whereas a large data using neural data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
 2020, pp. 1190–1206.
c (e.g., c = 20) injects excessive structural noise (a 24.6% false [8] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? A robust framework
edge rate). Our adaptive method strikes the optimal balance, for detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” in Proc. Annu. Netw.
achieving the highest AUC (93.7%) while maintaining a low Distrib. System Secur. Symp., 2024, pp. 81–95.
 [9] X. Jiang, Z. Qin, J. Xu, and X. Ao, “Incomplete graph learning via attributefalse edge rate. Similarly, our chosen cosine similarity proves structure decoupled variational auto-encoder,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Web
superior, achieving a better balance of structural repair and final Search Data Mining, 2024, pp. 304–312.
classification performance than the alternatives. [10] D. Chen, Y. Lin, W. Li, P. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Sun, “Measuring
 and relieving the over-smoothing problem for graph neural networks
 7) Efficiency Analysis: Our framework is designed to be from the topological view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
highly scalable, maintaining a time complexity that is linear pp. 3438–445.
with respect to the size of the graph. The most intensive step [11] Z. Han, C. Zhang, H. Fu, and J. T. Zhou, “Trusted multi-view classification
 with dynamic evidential fusion,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
is the long-range propagation in View-L, which operates in vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 2551–2566, Feb. 2023.
O(dT · |E|). All other view generation and evidence-learning [12] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, “Evidential deep learning to
steps are linear in the number of nodes, resulting in a total time quantify classification uncertainty,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 2018, pp. 3183–3193.
complexity of O(dT · |E| + dK · |V|). Beyond complexity, we [13] Z. Fu et al., “Encrypted malware traffic detection via graph-based network
profile practical efficiency on our platform. The GPU inference analysis,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Res. Attacks Intrusions Defenses, 2022,
latency is 0.1479 s per test node with a peak GPU memory pp. 495–509.
 [14] X. Han et al., “ContraMTD: An unsupervised malicious network traffic
usage of 8.62 MB. The throughput is about 2866 nodes/s, and detection method based on contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. World Wide
the model has only 0.059 M parameters. Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1680–1689.
 [15] J. Yang, Z. Yue, and Y. Yuan, “Deep probabilistic graphical modeling for
 robust multivariate time series anomaly detection with missing data,” Rel.
 Eng. System Saf., vol. 238, 2023, Art no. 109410.
 V. CONCLUSION [16] M. Dzaferagic, N. Marchetti, and I. Macaluso, “Fault detection and classification in industrial IoT in case of missing sensor data,” IEEE Internet
 This work addresses the core challenge of EMTD under Things J., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 8892–8900, Jun. 2022.
weak information characterized by broken structures and in- [17] B. Qiang, Y. Zhou, H. Xu, J. Shi, J. Lin, and Y. Gao, “MI-GNN: Multicomplete features. We proposed TrustWI, a novel uncertainty- interaction GNN for various weak information learning on graphs,” in
 Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2024, pp. 1–9.
aware multi-view learning framework that achieves trustwor- [18] R. Wang, J. Yan, and X. Yang, “Unsupervised learning of graph matching
thy detection under these adverse conditions. Our framework with mixture of modes via discrepancy minimization,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
leverages long-range propagation to enrich node features and Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 10500–10518, Aug. 2023.
 [19] Z. Jiang, H. Rahmani, P. Angelov, S. Black, and B. M. Williams,
a post-propagation strategy for robust structural augmentation. “Graph-context attention networks for size-varied deep graph match-
By integrating these views through an uncertainty-aware fusion ing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022,
mechanism, yielding high accuracy and reliable predictions. pp. 2333–2342.
 [20] F. Wang, N. Xue, J.-G. Yu, and G.-S. Xia, “Zero-assignment constraint
Experiments confirm clear gains over prior work, especially for graph matching with outliers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
when information sparsity is severe. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 3030–3039.
 Future Work: Despite these advantages, several directions [21] Y. Lin, M. Yang, J. Yu, P. Hu, C. Zhang, and X. Peng, “Graph matching with
 bi-level noisy correspondence,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
remain for future exploration. First, it is important to further Vis., 2023, pp. 23305–23314.
strengthen TrustWI against strong targeted graph attacks and to [22] X. Yan, S. Hu, Y. Mao, Y. Ye, and H. Yu, “Deep multi-view learning
study defenses. Second, the pseudo-view design is lightweight methods: A review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 448, pp. 106–129, 2021.
 [23] G. Andrew, R. Arora, J. Bilmes, and K. Livescu, “Deep canonical correbut may overlook richer structural or temporal cues. We plan to lation analysis,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2013, pp. 1247–1255.
model cross-view dependencies more expressively, for example [24] K. Hassani and A. H. Khasahmadi, “Contrastive multi-view represenwith graph attention or co-training strategies. tation learning on graphs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020,
 pp. 4116–4126.
 [25] E. Pan and Z. Kang, “Multi-view contrastive graph clustering,” in Proc.
 REFERENCES Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 2148–2159.
 [26] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: Robust
 [1] M. Zhong, T. Zhong, Y. Wang, K. Chen, and F. Zhou, “Noise resistant malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and confidence
 encrypted malicious traffic detection through kernel-enhanced contrastive mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 6871–6885,
 view alignment,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 34, pp. 1511–1523, 2026. 2024.
 [2] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An en- [27] Y. Geng, Z. Han, C. Zhang, and Q. Hu, “Uncertainty-aware multisemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in Proc. view representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021,
 Annu. Netw. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15. pp. 7545–7553.
 [3] N. Xi et al., “GNNDroid: Graph-learning based malware detection for [28] W. Tai, T. Zhong, G. Trajcevski, and F. Zhou, “Redundancy undermines
 android apps with native code,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., the trustworthiness of self-interpretable GNNs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1460–1476, Mar./Apr. 2025. Learn., 2025, vol. 267, pp. 58169–58188.
 [4] Y. Liu, K. Ding, J. Wang, V. Lee, H. Liu, and S. Pan, “Learning strong [29] J. T. Springenberg, A. Klein, S. Falkner, and F. Hutter, “Bayesian optigraph neural networks with weak information,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD mization with robust Bayesian neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2023, pp. 1559–1571. Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 4141–4149.
 [5] M. Zhong, M. Lin, C. Zhang, and Z. Xu, “A survey on graph neural [30] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Repnetworks for intrusion detection systems: Methods, trends and challenges,” resenting model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 141, 2024, Art no. 103821. Learn., 2016, pp. 1050–1059.
 [6] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust [31] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable
 network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans. predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Proc. Adv.
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6405–6416.
ZHONG et al.: SHATTERING WEAK FACADES: TRUSTWORTHY DETECTION OF ENCRYPTED 6827

[32] B. Charpentier, D. Zügner, and S. Günnemann, “Posterior network: Uncer- [39] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 tainty estimation without OOD samples via density-based pseudo-counts,” a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in
 in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 1356–1367. Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[33] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph [40] P. Veličković, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio,
 convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2017, “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 pp. 1–14. 2018, pp. 1–12.
[34] J. Klicpera, A. Bojchevski, and S. Günnemann, “Combining neural net- [41] J. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Lei, W. Liang, Z. Ma, and S. Li, “MTSecurity:
 works with personalized pagerank for classification on graphs,” in Proc. Privacy-preserving malicious traffic classification using graph neural net-
 Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019, pp. 8–14. work and transformer,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3,
[35] A. Jøsang, Subjective Logic. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016. pp. 3583–3597, Jun. 2024.
[36] J. Lu, Z. Wu, Z. Chen, Z. Cai, and S. Wang, “Towards multi-view consistent [42] W. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Liu, X. Tang, S. Wang, and J. Tang, “Graph structure
 graph diffusion,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2024, pp. 186–195. learning for robust graph neural networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf.
[37] N. Moustafa, “A new distributed architecture for evaluating AI-based Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 66–74.
 security systems at the edge: Network TON_IoT datasets,” Sustain. Cities [43] J. Zhao et al., “ReTrial: Robust encrypted malicious traffic detection via
 Soc., vol. 72, 2021, Art no. 102994. discriminative relation incorporation and misleading relation correction,”
[38] M. MontazeriShatoori, L. Davidson, G. Kaur, and A. H. Lashkari, “Detec- IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 677–692, 2025.
 tion of DoH tunnels using time-series classification of encrypted traffic,” [44] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Fixing weight decay regularization in Adam,”
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Dependable Autonomic Secure Comput., 2020, 2017, arXiv:1711.05101 .
 pp. 63–70.