IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026 7547

 Silent-App-Aware Federated Machine Unlearning for
 Encrypted Network Traffic Classification
 Zeyi Li , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yuna Jiang , Member, IEEE, Tianshun Wang , Member, IEEE,
 Pan Wang , Member, IEEE, and Yimu Ji

 Abstract—In recent years, federated learning-based network I. INTRODUCTION
traffic classification has emerged as a promising Artificial Intel-
 S AN important tool for network management and seculigence (AI) approach for encrypted traffic identification, enabling
accurate classification while preserving data privacy. To meet the
rising demand for the right to be forgotten, Federated Machine
 A rity, Network Traffic Classification (NTC) has received
 significant attention from both academia and industry since
Unlearning (FMU) has been introduced as an AI-driven forgetting the late 1990 s. It has been widely applied in areas such as
paradigm. However, conventional FMU methods overlook silent QoS/QoE management, network resource optimization, conapplications removed due to guideline violations, resulting in re- gestion control, and intrusion detection [1]. With the rapid
duced classifier stability and limited aggregation scalability. To development of next-generation communication technologies
address these challenges, this paper proposes FedUnSilApp, short such as B5G/6G [2], [3], network technologies are evolving
for FMU for silent applications, a novel FMU framework that towards a highly autonomous direction of ‘zero touch’ [4], [5],
integrates a learning module, a forgetting module, and a scalable
aggregation strategy. In particular, the forgetting module prunes
 [6]. As one of the decision-making tools for network services and
neurons associated with silent applications in the classifier, mini- security management, NTC plays a crucial role [7]. However, the
mizing their residual influence. The scalable aggregation strategy rise of HTTPS encryption has rendered traditional Deep Packet
separately processes discriminative layers of clients requesting for- Inspection (DPI) [8] methods ineffective for capturing user
getting and those of other clients, thereby enhancing both stability behavior patterns [9]. In response, Deep Learning (DL)-based
and scalability of the global model. In addition, FedUnSilApp is NTC has emerged as a promising solution [10], [11], [12], as it
applied to the real-world scenario of encrypted network traffic can accurately identify user preferences without being restricted
classification, enabling compliance with deletion requests while by encryption, drawing increasing attention from researchers.
maintaining robust classification performance. The effectiveness of Traditional DL-based NTC methods usually collect traffic
FedUnSilApp is validated through experiments, which show that interaction data from multiple edge devices. This data is aggre-
FedUnSilApp outperforms state-of-the-art methods, improving accuracy by over 6% on the NJUPT dataset.
 gated to train a unified model in the cloud, which is subsequently
 deployed back to each edge device for inference [13]. How-
 Index Terms—Machine unlearning, federated learning, ever, as data privacy concerns continue to intensify, centralized
federated machine unlearning, network traffic classification, machine learning approaches that require access to all training
encrypted network traffic. data are becoming increasingly infeasible [14]. To address these
 issues, Federated Learning (FL) is envisioned as a promising
 approach with enhanced privacy [15], [16], [17], [18], [19].
 Received 18 December 2025; revised 27 January 2026; accepted 3 March
2026. Date of publication 10 March 2026; date of current version 24 March 2026. Specifically, FL allows model training without exposing user
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation data, effectively alleviating privacy leakage issues for particiof China under Grant 62401283, in part by the State Key Laboratory for Novel pants, and thus has become a focus of research in the field of
Software Technology at Nanjing University under Grant KFKT2025B69, in part NTC [20].
by the Suzhou High Performance Programmable Switching Chip Innovation
Consortium under Grant LHT202326, and in part by the Development of an
 In recent years, with the rapid development of AI technol-
Ultra-large-scale Ubiquitous Network Quality Monitoring System Based on ogy [21], the rights of the data subject1 have also garnered
Trusted Edge Intelligence under Grant SYG202311. Recommended for accep- increasing attention from society. The General Data Protection
tance by Dr. Yuan Wu. (Corresponding author: Pan Wang.) Regulation (GDPR) of the European Union [22] and the Cal-
 Zeyi Li is with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing Univer- ifornia Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) [23] have introduced
sity of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail:
2022040506@njupt.edu.cn). relevant provisions that grant participants in FL the ‘right to
 Yuna Jiang and Tianshun Wang are with the School of Communi- be forgotten’, meaning that participants have the right to request
cations and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Posts and companies to delete their personal data and contributions. Since
Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: yunajiang@njupt.edu.cn; traditional FL-based NTC cannot ensure that participants can
tswang@njupt.edu.cn).
 Pan Wang is with the School of Modern Posts, Nanjing University of Posts and
 withdraw their data contributions [24], [25], researchers have
Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: wangpan@njupt.edu.cn). begun to focus on Federated Machine Unlearning (FMU).
 Yimu Ji is with the School of Computer Science, Nanjing University of Currently, FMU methods can be categorized into three main
Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China, also with the Institute approaches. One common FMU approach is retraining or fineof High Performance Computing and Bigdata, Nanjing University of Posts tuning the model with remaining data [26], [27]. Another
and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China, and also with Jiangsu HPC
and Intelligent Processing Engineer Research Center, Nanjing 210003, China method uses gradient ascent to reduce the influence of forgotten
(e-mail: jiym@njupt.edu.cn).
 Data and Code: https://github.com/sailorlee97/FedUnSilApps
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2026.3672152 1 https://gdpr-info.eu/art-17-gdpr/

 2327-4697 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
7548 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 3) To tackle the scalability challenge, a scalable aggregation
 strategy is proposed, whereby the feature extractor is aggregated across all clients to retain global generalisation.
 Meanwhile, classifier layers are aggregated separately for
 clients that forget and those that do not, enabling fast
 recovery when silent applications become active again.
 4) Experiments on four datasets demonstrate substantial performance gains, with FedUnSilApp reaching 88.16% accuracy on NJUPT, outperforming state-of-the-art baselines (74.17%–81.7%) while maintaining efficiency.
 The paper is structured as follows: Section II reviews the
Fig. 1. Clientk0 issues a forgetting request facing two obstacles: (i) classifier evolution and progression of NTC methodologies. Section III
instability and (ii) inflexible aggregation operations. introduces the necessary preliminaries for the proposed method.
 Section IV provides a comprehensive description of the FedUnSilApp framework. Section V presents an overview of the
data [28], while a third approach involves pruning neurons experiments and evaluations, along with a discussion of the
closely linked to the data to be forgotten [29]. However, these results. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and outlines
methods overlook two important requirements in the field of directions for future work.
NTC: stability and scalability. Particularly, stability refers to
the ability to maintain the model’s original performance after
 II. RELATED WORKS
unlearning, and scalability refers to the framework’s ability to
quickly adapt to both application forgetting and application Encrypted traffic has rendered traditional NTC methods inre-activation. The corresponding challenges are as follows (see effective. In particular, with the advent of TLS 1.2 and TLS
Fig. 1): 1.3, these protocols establish security parameters and negotiate
 1) Classifier Instability under Silent Applications: Google cryptographic keys during the Handshake stage, and employ
 removes approximately 25,100 applications from the Play symmetric encryption to protect application data during the
 Store every quarter, and these applications naturally be- Record Layer stage. Consequently, traditional classification apcome silent applications in NTC scenarios [30]. When proaches based on port features, header features, and payload
 silent applications remain in the classifier space, models features have become largely obsolete. However, the emergence
 tend to misclassify traffic belonging to active classes into of AI has brought new perspectives and opportunities for NTC.
 silent ones, leading to degraded stability. As illustrated in Fig. 2, this section presents the three major
 2) Inflexible Aggregation in FL: Unlike classical FL aggre- evolutionary waves of AI-driven NTC: Machine Learning (ML)-
 gation where the entire model is uniformly averaged, reg- based, DL-based, and FL-based approaches.
 ulatory differences cause some clients to discard certain
 applications while others continue to classify them. When
 these applications are re-activated, the model is required A. Ml-Based Ntc
 to quickly regain its classification capability. Existing With the rise of ML, researchers began to move beyond
 FL-NTC methods lack scalable aggregation mechanisms, traditional port-based, header-based, and payload-based traffic
 making this adaptation slow and unstable. classification and instead learn discriminative patterns directly
 Therefore, a natural question is: could the framework achieve from statistical features of flows. Early work showed that superstability and scalability at the same time? To address the chal- vised ML algorithms can effectively classify application traffic
lenges outlined above, this paper proposes a scalable class dis- without relying on well-known ports or payload inspection,
criminative pruning-based FMU framework for NTC, called Fe- which are increasingly unreliable due to encryption and dynamic
dUnSilApp. The framework allows specific clients to request the port usage [31].
removal of contributions from certain data categories, thereby Subsequent studies applied ML methods to more challenging
achieving selective data forgetting. FedUnSilApp also processes encrypted traffic environments. The research [32] has shown
these requests by isolating and aggregating the discriminative that, despite traffic encryption, dynamic port changes, and invislayer parameters of clients that require forgetting separately ibility of payloads, classical supervised learning models can still
from those of other clients. This selective aggregation dynami- effectively perform classification tasks. The work [33] proposes
cally updates the global model, ensuring that it adapts to chang- a second-order Markov chain–based encrypted traffic classifier
ing data requirements without compromising performance. This enhanced with application attribute bigrams to improve discrimpaper systematically addresses these challenges and makes the ination among applications with similar TLS fingerprints. The
following contributions: research [34] applies multinomial Naïve Bayes to normalized
 1) We point out this problem related to the stability and packet-size frequency distributions for system-agnostic webscalability of FL-based NTC caused by silent applications, site fingerprinting, achieving very high identification accuracy.
 which has been overlooked by previous researchers. To The work [35] proposes a constrained clustering approach that
 address this, we propose a framework called FedUnSilApp leverages TCP/IP–inferred equivalence constraints to enhance
 for NTC, which effectively mitigates the impact of silent the accuracy and convergence of unsupervised Internet traffic
 applications. classification.
 2) To tackle the stability challenge, a forgetting mecha- ML-based NTC serves as a transitional paradigm between
 nism is developed that freezes the feature extractor and rule-based detection and AI-driven approaches. While it reduces
 prunes silent-app neurons in the classifier, ensuring stable reliance on manual protocol signatures and improves adaptabilpredictions when application categories disappear. ity to encrypted traffic, it still depends heavily on handcrafted
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7549

Fig. 2. Evolution of NTC methods from unencrypted to encrypted traffic, illustrating the transition from port/header/payload-based approaches to ML-, DL-,
and FL-based NTC under increasing encryption (TLS).

features, limiting scalability and representation capability. Con- methods can effectively identify sub-classes of popular applicasequently, ML-based methods are increasingly supplanted by tions such as Skype, WhatsApp, Facebook, and YouTube. For
DL approaches that offer more effective automatic feature learn- online and interpretable learning, the research [51] introduces
ing for large-scale and complex traffic data. a packet-level self-attention network enabling real-time classification and interpretability by visualizing attention weights.
 To improve scalability in large-scale multi-class settings, the
B. Dl-Based Ntc study [52] proposes a hierarchical recurrent neural network that
 After the initial exploration of ML–based approaches, DL– decomposes classification tasks into smaller subtasks using a
based methods for NTC have gradually emerged [36], [37]. tree-structured multi-classifier design, improving both accuracy
Particularly, when dealing with encrypted traffic, complex data and convergence speed.
structures, and highly temporal flow patterns, DL has demon- Beyond performance improvements, several works examine
strated its distinctive advantages in automatic feature extraction robustness and generalization. Sadeghzadeh et al. [53] introand robust representation learning [38], [39]. duce Adversarial Network Traffic (ANT), a Universal Adver-
 Among the representative studies, TRCLA [40] introduces sarial Perturbation (UAP)–based framework for evaluating the
a transfer-learning algorithm based on Cellular Learning Au- resilience of DL-based NTC models against crafted perturbatomata (CLA) that employs two novel decision criteria—merit tions. Collectively, these studies reflect the evolution of DLand attitude parameters—to alleviate negative transfer and im- based NTC from early CNN/RNN-driven architectures toward
prove classification accuracy in transductive settings. ABL- more advanced paradigms incorporating attention mechanisms,
TC [41] proposes an attention-based LSTM architecture with meta-learning strategies, hierarchical modeling, and adversarial
lightweight preprocessing to balance efficiency and accuracy, robustness, marking a significant milestone in the second wave
while Yao et al. [42] enhance recurrent neural networks with of AI-driven traffic classification and paving the way for the
attention-aided LSTM and Hierarchical Attention Network upcoming FL–based NTC era.
(HAN) modules to capture temporal dependencies and achieve
higher accuracy on the ISCX VPN–NonVPN dataset. To further
 C. Fl-Based Ntc
address data imbalance and generalization, Zheng et al. [43]
present the Flow-Based Relation Network (RBRN), an end-to- With the increasing emphasis on data privacy and secuend meta-learning framework that learns flow-level representa- rity, traditional centralized model training approaches in NTC
tions directly from raw data and introduces a hallucinator module have faced growing challenges such as data silos and privacy
to generate balanced training samples. leakage [54]. To address these issues, FL has emerged as a
 A parallel research line explores CNN-based end-to-end mod- promising paradigm that enables collaborative model training
eling. FlowPic [44] transforms raw flow data into image-like without requiring the exchange of raw data [55], [56], [57]. In an
representations and applies Convolutional Neural Networks FL-based framework, participating entities locally train models
(CNNs) for automatic classification, achieving up to 99.7 % ac- on their respective datasets and share only model parameters
curacy even on VPN and Tor traffic. Wang et al. [45] further pro- or gradients, thereby preserving user privacy while enabling
pose an end-to-end 1D-CNN model that unifies feature extrac- cross-domain collaboration [58], [59].
tion and classification, while deep packet [46] combines stacked This decentralized learning strategy not only mitigates privacy
autoencoders and CNNs into a single architecture, achieving risks but also leverages diverse and geographically distributed
state-of-the-art performance on VPN and non-VPN traffic. Dong traffic data to improve generalization and robustness. FL-based
et al. [47] present CETAnalytics, a neural network–based frame- NTC represents the third technological wave following deep
work that jointly analyzes payload content and statistical fea- learning, marking a new stage in the evolution of AI-driven
tures to attain both high precision and strong generalization. network intelligence and security research [60].
For encrypted protocols, Tong et al. [48] design a CNN-based Recent studies have explored various FL architectures and
QUIC traffic classifier that integrates feature extraction and optimization strategies for NTC. The study [61] proposes an
classification to reach a 99.24% F1-score on Google services. Automated Separate Guided Attention Federated Graph Neural
 In addition, the work [49] employs a multi-layer encoder– Network, which integrates a hybrid Vision Transformer with
decoder recurrent architecture to deeply mine sequential depen- bidirectional LSTM for multi-scale feature extraction and emdencies of encrypted flows and enhance feature representation ploys federated graph learning for distributed intrusion detecthrough a reconstruction mechanism, achieving 99.14% TPR tion. The model achieves over 99% accuracy across multiple
and outperforming prior models. Al-Obaidy et al. [50] focus cybersecurity datasets, demonstrating the efficiency of attentionon social-media encrypted traffic, demonstrating that ML-based enhanced federated architectures. Similarly, the research [62]
7550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

introduces a federated analytics framework to mitigate data called ViFLa to address the efficiency and adaptability required
heterogeneity and non-IID distributions. To further enhance in IoT traffic anomaly detection. ViFLa introduces the concept
model reliability, the work [63] proposes WCL, a client se- of virtual FL, where training data is grouped based on their likelection strategy that combines model weight divergence with lihood of needing to be unlearned. Additionally, scholars have
local training loss to achieve balanced aggregation and faster conducted extensive research on FMU [77]. The research [72]
convergence. Experiments on QUIC and ISCX datasets verify focuses on overcoming the limitations of existing FMU methods,
that WCL outperforms conventional approaches under both low which often require time-consuming re-training and lack the
and high heterogeneity. In the IoT domain, He et al. [64] intro- ability to handle diverse unlearning tasks. FedAU incorporates
duce FedeEDI, a federated edge device identification framework a lightweight auxiliary unlearning module that allows for quick
leveraging network traffic features for IoT security. Compared and targeted unlearning through a simple linear operation. This
with centralized learning, FedeEDI provides faster training, method supports unlearning at multiple levels—individual samdecentralized deployment, and stronger data protection. ples, specific classes, or entire clients—providing broad unlearn-
 Beyond classification, FL has also been extended to network ing capabilities. The research [29] focuses on the class-level
optimization tasks. Huang et al. [65] propose a QoS-aware fed- ‘forgetting’ problem in FL scenarios and proposes a method
erated caching framework in fog-enabled IoT networks, incor- that enables selective information removal for specific classes
porating a distributed cluster-based preference estimation algo- in a trained CNN classification model. This approach achieves
rithm to mitigate non-IID data effects and improve cache hit rate, the selective information removal without direct access to global
convergence, and learning stability. Similarly, Jiang et al. [66] training data and without requiring complete retraining. Utilizdesign FedSL-LSTM, a federated split learning framework ing TF-IDF-guided channel pruning techniques, this method acfor sequential data analysis in satellite–terrestrial integrated complishes an efficient and accurate ‘forgetting’ process. Expernetworks. By combining FL, split learning, and LSTM-based imental results demonstrate significant advantages in improving
modeling, FedSL-LSTM achieves competitive accuracy while forgetting speed and maintaining model accuracy. The study [73]
maintaining communication efficiency and privacy preservation. introduces a new FedRecovery algorithm that employs differ-
 Furthermore, other recent works have extended the use of ential privacy techniques to implement unlearning tasks in FL
FL for anomaly detection and privacy-sensitive traffic analysis. frameworks. It can eliminate the influence of client data without
Studies such as [67] address the challenge of detecting anomalies retraining the model. This method is especially suitable for
in multi-time series data across distributed network devices, complex models and dynamic FL environments. Although it
emphasizing the complexity of aggregating non-IID data while provides strong privacy protection and theoretical guarantees,
maintaining strict privacy guarantees. Likewise, Bakopoulou it may still face challenges such as performance impact from
et al. [20] highlight the challenges of training traffic classifiers noise and computational overhead in certain applications. The
on mobile packet data containing sensitive information such as authors in [28] proposed and evaluated two data deletion methpersonally identifiable information and advertising metadata, ods for deep neural networks, namely, Unlearning and Amnesiac
proposing privacy-preserving FL-based solutions. Unlearning, to meet the GDPR’s ‘right to be forgotten’ compli-
 In a related contribution, Zhang et al. [68] propose an adaptive ance requirements. These methods efficiently remove sensitive
label normalization mechanism that transforms noisy labels to data while preserving model performance, effectively defending
better align with clean data distributions, improving robustness against model inversion and membership inference attacks. Deand accuracy in FL settings. Finally, Pekar et al. [69] explore spite limitations in applicability, sample-level deletion, model
incremental federated training, where the model evolves con- complexity, and rapid response, they offer important references
tinuously over successive rounds by incorporating new data for the development of data privacy protection technologies. The
from participating clients. This incremental strategy enhances work [78] presents an efficient FMU algorithm called FFMU,
model adaptability and efficiency in dynamic environments, which combines nonlinear functional analysis and the Nemytskii
demonstrating the growing maturity of FL as a viable solution operator. This approach not only enhances FMU efficiency but
for privacy-preserving and continuously learning NTC systems. also preserves model performance during the data deletion process, meeting FL’s privacy protection requirements. The FFMU
 method avoids redundant training steps found in traditional
D. Federated Machine Unlearning FMU approaches and ensures efficient collaboration between
 With the increasing emphasis on the ‘right to be forgotten’ local and global models. However, sample-level ‘forgetting’ and
[74] within FL, FMU has emerged as a natural extension of applications in more complex models remain important topics
privacy-preserving collaborative learning [75]. While traditional for future research. The research [79] explores methods to re-
FL primarily focuses on preventing data leakage through de- move backdoor attacks in FL and proposes an effective federated
centralized training, it does not inherently provide mechanisms unlearning method. This approach eliminates the impact of idento remove previously learned information once a client or data tified attackers by subtracting their historical parameter updates
sample requests deletion. Addressing this limitation, FMU aims from the global model and utilizes knowledge distillation to
to enable selective, efficient, and verifiable removal of data restore model performance, ensuring that, once attackers are
contributions from global models—thereby advancing FL from identified, their backdoor contributions are thoroughly removed
passive privacy protection to active data controllability. In this while preserving model accuracy and efficiency. The study [80]
context, FMU is driving a new wave of innovation in FL offers a new solution for defending against backdoor attacks in
ecosystems, fostering a new research frontier that bridges data FL by removing historical updates from attackers and combining
privacy, model accountability, and compliance with global data knowledge distillation to effectively restore model performance,
regulations. avoiding reliance on clients. It has high computational efficiency
 This study [76] is the first to apply unlearning in network and low energy consumption, making it highly promising for
traffic data. It presents a novel machine unlearning framework real-world applications. However, the method still encounters
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7551

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON OF REPRESENTATIVE RESEARCH WORKS ACROSS ML-BASED, DL-BASED, AND FL-BASED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

some performance degradation and depends on the quality of the Building upon FL, FMU has recently emerged to support the
original global model, and its adaptability to unknown attacks ‘right to be forgotten’, allowing efficient removal of specific
may require further investigation. This paper [81] proposes an data or clients while preserving model utility. Motivated by
innovative unlearning method that combines Momentum Decay these advances, FedUnSilApp integrates encrypted traffic clas-
(MoDe) and memory-guided strategies to efficiently unlearn sification, privacy preservation, and unlearning into a unified
specific data in FL environments. Through a two-step decom- federated framework tailored to the challenges posed by silent
position including knowledge erasure and memory guidance, applications.
this method not only addresses performance degradation in unlearning but also significantly enhances execution efficiency, enabling rapid response to data removal requests. Compared with III. PRELIMINARIES
traditional retraining methods, this approach greatly improves A. Federated Learning
computational efficiency while preserving model performance,
making it especially suitable for handling complex unlearning FL is a distributed machine learning approach that allows
tasks. Additionally, this method can effectively counter data multiple clients (e.g., mobile devices, edge servers) to collabpoisoning attacks, further enhancing the security of FL. oratively train a global model while keeping their local data
 decentralized [82]. This method is especially useful for privacysensitive applications, as it enables clients to contribute to the
E. Comparative Summary model without sharing raw data. Instead, only model updates are
 communicated to a central server for aggregation [83].
 Table I systematically compares the evolutionary trajectory In a typical FL setup, we assume there are K clients, each
of NTC technologies, tracing their development from traditional with its own local dataset Dk , where k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K}. The
rule-based and ML-based methods to DL-based, FL-based, and objective of FL is to minimize a global loss function F (w) across
FMU-based paradigms. all clients. This objective can be formulated as:
 The rapid growth of encrypted traffic has rendered traditional
port-based identification and DPI increasingly ineffective. ML- K
based NTC methods introduce statistical learning to improve  nk
 F (w) = fk (w), (1)
encrypted traffic recognition but still rely heavily on handcrafted n
 k=1
features, limiting scalability and their ability to capture complex
feature correlations. With the emergence of DL, end-to-end where w represents the global model parameters, nk = |Dk | is
models achieve substantial performance gains by learning repre- 
sentations directly from raw traffic. However, their reliance on the number of data samples held by clientk , n = K k=1 nk is
centralised training raises serious concerns regarding privacy the total number of data samples across all clients, fk (w) is the
and data sovereignty. local objective function (i.e., loss function) of clientk , defined
 FL addresses these limitations by enabling privacy-preserving as:
collaborative training without sharing raw data. Recent FL- 1 
based NTC approaches demonstrate strong scalability and ro- fk (w) = (w; xi , yi ), (2)
bustness across heterogeneous and large-scale environments. nk
 (xi ,yi )∈Dk
7552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

where (w; xi , yi ) is the loss for a data sample (xi , yi ) in TABLE II
 LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
clientk ’s dataset, based on the model parameters w.
 One of the most common algorithms for FL is Federated
Averaging (FedAvg), which operates in iterative communication
rounds. In each round:
 1) The server sends the current global model parameters wt
 to a set of clients.
 2) Each selected clientk performs local training by minimizing fk (w) on its dataset Dk and computes updated model
 (t+1)
 parameters wk after multiple local epochs.
 3) The server aggregates the updated model parameters from
 all participating clients to obtain a new global model wt+1 .
 This aggregation can be expressed as:
 K
  nk (t+1)
 wt+1 = wk , (3)
 n
 k=1

 This weighted averaging ensures that clients with larger
datasets contribute more to the global model update. The FedAvg
algorithm enables the global model to gradually improve by
learning from decentralized data while maintaining data privacy.

B. Machine Unlearning
 Machine Unlearning refers to the process of selectively removing the influence of certain data points from a trained
machine learning model [84], [85]. This technique is particularly
useful in privacy-sensitive applications, where users may request
their data to be forgotten, or when erroneous data needs to be These features are computed at the edge and divided into packetremoved to improve model accuracy. The goal of unlearning level, flow-level, and statistical features. After feature scaling,
is to modify the model so that it no longer retains any knowl- F F is transformed into sF F , which serves as the model’s
edge derived from the specific data points in question, without fundamental input, represented as x.
requiring a full retraining from scratch. A list of abbreviations is presented in Table II to facilitate
 Suppose we have a machine learning model trained on a understanding of the notations adopted in what follows.
dataset D = {(xi , yi )}Ni=1 , where w represents the model parameters, xi are the input features, and yi are the target labels. IV. METHODOLOGY
The model is trained by minimizing a loss function L over the
dataset: A. Overview of FedUnSilApp
 N
 1  As illustrated in Fig. 3, FedUnSilApp introduces an FMU
 min L(w, D) = (w; xi , yi ), (4) framework specifically designed to mitigate the impact of silent
 w N i=1 applications. Each client maintains a local model consisting
where (w; xi , yi ) is the loss for a single data point (xi , yi ). of a feature extraction module P T and a classifier W , which
 In the context of machine unlearning, let Du ⊂ D represent are trained on locally collected and labeled traffic data. Under
the subset of data to be ‘forgotten’ by the model, and let normal conditions, clients follow the standard FL workflow:
Dr = D \ Du be the remaining data. The objective of machine local models are trained independently, and the corresponding
unlearning is to modify the model such that it closely approx- parameters are periodically uploaded to the server for aggregaimates a model trained only on Dr , i.e., the model that would tion, resulting in a global feature extractor and classifier.
have been obtained if Du had never been included in the training To support selective unlearning, FedUnSilApp augments the
data. conventional learning pipeline with an auxiliary forgetting module W α . When a client requests the removal of data associated
 with silent applications, a distillation-based forgetting process is
C. Problem Formulation
 triggered locally to suppress the classifier components correlated
 This paper focuses on addressing the impact of the silent with silent applications, producing the forgetting module W α .
application in the field of NTC. In order to provide a clear and This mechanism enables targeted unlearning without retraining
comprehensible explanation, the following definitions are given: the model from scratch or disrupting representations learned
 The packet set is formed by extracting TCP and UDP packets from active applications.
from application traffic. The packets are grouped into flows using At the server side, FedUnSilApp adopts a scalable and modquintuple features, recorded in a hash table with flow durations ular aggregation strategy. Feature extraction parameters P T
capped at 120 seconds. Session characteristics, including the from all clients are aggregated into a unified global represensource-destination IPs, are used to define flow direction. Flow tation, preserving shared traffic semantics. In contrast, classifier
features are extracted bi-directionally from forward and back- parameters are aggregated in a decoupled manner: parameters
ward flows Se, with F F representing flow statistical features. from regular clients (W l ) and those from clients performing
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7553

Fig. 3. Overview of the FedUnSilApp framework. During the learning stage, clients locally train models and share feature extractors for aggregation. When
forgetting is requested, the unlearning module prunes silent-app neurons and retrains on remaining data before scalable aggregation merges both P T and W on
the server.

unlearning (W α ) are treated separately. By jointly aggregating
P T , W l , and W α , the server constructs global models that
flexibly adapt to heterogeneous client states.
 In our FedUnSilApp, a horizontal FL scenario is applied. We
assume that a total of K clients conduct collaborative training
to build a federated model ω = (P T, W ) (P T is used to extract
latent network traffic features, W is the classifier), which can be
formulated as follows:
 nk
 K 
  (FP T,W (xk,i ), yk,i )
 min , (5)
 ω n1 + · · · + nK
 k=1 i=1

where  represents the loss function (e.g., cross-entropy loss).
Dk = {(xk,i , yk,i )}ni=1
 k
 is the dataset owned by clientk , with
size nk . When applying forgetting, client k0 requests to remove the influence of its data from the federated model, i.e.,
a client-level forgetting request, aiming to exclude client k0 ’s Fig. 4. The workflow of clientk . After model training on traffic data, a
contribution from the learned parameters. If multiple clients forgetting request triggers neuron pruning for silent applications on the client
 side, followed by feature extractor aggregation on the server to form the final
submit forgetting requests simultaneously, we denote the set of global model for inference.
requesting clients as Kforget .

B. Fedunsilapp
 applications, thereby mitigating its negative impact on model
 This paper focuses on how FMU addresses the issue of silent stability. During global aggregation, all clients upload their
applications. Accordingly, we emphasise the workflow for a feature extraction parameters P T , which are jointly aggregated
client requesting unlearning, as illustrated in Fig. 4. From the to form a shared representation. Meanwhile, the classifier paperspective of clientk , clientk initially collects labeled traffic rameters of clients requesting unlearning (W α ) are decoupled
data in its local environment and extracts flow-level features to from those of regular clients (W l ) and aggregated separately.
initialize and train its local model, as in conventional federated This modular aggregation strategy enables FedUnSilApp to
learning. When clientk encounters a requirement to remove adapt to heterogeneous unlearning demands while preserving
data associated with silent applications, it issues an unlearning stability and scalability under dynamic application behaviors.
request, upon which the local forgetting module is activated In the following, we will respectively introduce the details of
to selectively prune classifier neurons correlated with silent the modules and the training strategies.
7554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 n, B = A − S. The mapping g(x) is given by

 g(x) = x − |{s ∈ S|s < x}|, (7)

 where g(x) ∈ B gives the latest label index. |{s ∈ S|s < x}|
 represents the number of removed elements in the original
 sequence that are smaller than x. The resulting dataset is  Dkr0 =
 r
 {(xk0 ,i , yi )|yi ∈ B}. Specifically, g(x) defines a label remapping function that eliminates the class indices in the deletion set
 S and compresses the remaining labels into a continuous index
 space. This operation allows the classifier neurons associated
 with retained classes to be reassigned new indices, ensuring that
 valid class activations are preserved while outputs corresponding
 to forgotten classes are removed.
Fig. 5. Comparison of model structure before and after forgetting. The initial Retrieve the well-trained model parameters P T, W l . The
n-class classifier is pruned to (n − j) classes after forgetting, with the feature
extractor frozen and only the classifier layer updated.
 parameters of the frozen model layer P T do not update during
 training, and their weights remain constant. The equation for the
 ∂
 frozen parameter is ∂θ = 0, where  represents the loss function,
 and θ is the frozen parameter.
 1) Client NTC Learning Module: In each client’s learning Based on the remapped label space, we then define the optimodule, we use a neural network to perform the supervised NTC mization objective for the forgetting model. The model Wkα0 is
task. From the perspective of the global NTC model, its loss specifically trained, and its objective function is as follows:
function is defined as follows:
 K
   (FP T,W (xk,i ), yk,i )  (FP T,wkα (xk0 ,i ), yk0 ,i )
 P T, W = arg min , Wkα0 = arg min 0
 ,
 P T,W n1 + · · · + nK W |
 Dkr0 |
 k=1 (xk,i ,yk,i )∈Dk
 (xk0 ,i ,yk0 ,i )∈r
 Dk
 0
 (6)
 (8)
The model’s design is presented in Fig. 5. We connect multiple
 where Wkα0 represents Auxiliary forgetting model for client
convolutional layers before adding an application classifier layer
 k0 targeting its data. This model is optimized for a specific
that maps features to labels. For outputting predicted probabilities, we utilize a fully connected layer (FC) as the classifier layer dataset Dkr0 to fulfill the forgetting request from client k0 .
in this paper. The convolutional neural network serves as the (FP T,W (x), y) represents the cross-entropy loss.
foundation of our model, and it utilizes convolutional operations By minimizing the loss over the remaining classes, the model
to capture local features in a systematic manner. Moreover, the suppresses the influence of forgotten classes while preserving
convolutional layer can perform a dot product of each feature in discriminative knowledge for active applications.  Dkr0 is the
the input data with a convolutional kernel [86]. dataset designed for client k0 , used for auxiliary learning on
 2) Client NTC Forgetting Module: In the FL forgetting the forgetting model. The optimization objective is to minimize
mechanism, when a client k0 requests to delete its data, the
 the loss of  Dkr0 , where the loss is normalized by the average
system introduces a forgetting module Wα for retraining on the
 size. The final optimized model parameters are P T, Wkα0 . The
remaining data, ensuring that the model no longer relies on the
 parameters of the front half of the neural network are frozen. The
forgotten data. This approach ensures the transparency of the ∂
 unfreezing mechanism is controlled by: θ ← θ − ηω ∂θ , where
model and the privacy rights of users. Suppose the client k0
 ω ∈ [0, 1] controls the degree of parameter unfreezing, and η
wants to forget all the data of a certain class. Let Dk0 be the
 is the learning rate. When ω = 1, it is fully unfrozen; When
original dataset of the client, Dku0 be the data of the client that
 ω = 0, the parameter is completely frozen. Finally, the labels
needs to be forgotten, Dku0 = {(xuk0 ,i , yi ), yi ∈ C}. Dkr0 be the are remapped to the original domain using the inverse mapping
data that remains for the client, i.e., Dkr0 = Dk0 − Dku0 , Dkr0 = function ŷ = g −1 (FP T,Wkα (xk0 ,i )) and ŷ ∈ A. During the un-
{(xrk0 ,i , yi ), yi ∈
 / C}. 0
 learning stage, P T is frozen and only the classifier parameters
 To ensure a consistent output space after class-level forget- are updated using the retained dataset.
ting, we first redefine the label space by removing the indices 3) Scalable Aggregation Module: Assuming there are K
corresponding to the forgotten classes. Design a dataset  Dkr0 clients, we classify the clients into two sets: the non-forgetting
for client k0 , which is generated by modifying the labels of client set K non-forget and the forgetting client set Kforget , with
Dkr0 . This involves creating a mapping relationship between |K non-forget | + |Kforget | = K. Each client model k consists of
the initial dataset and the relabeled dataset. The mapping is two parts of parameters: feature layer parameters P Tk and FC
expressed as g : A → B. The given equation represents a labeled layer parameters Wk . Our goal is to aggregate the feature layer
mapping function, where A is the definition domain and B is the parameters from all clients, separately aggregate the FC layer paaccompanying domain. For each element x in A, there is a unique rameters from non-forgetting clients and forgetting clients, and
corresponding element y in B, determined by the function g. A combine these aggregation results to form two global models.
given mapping indicates the correspondence between elements, Aggregation of feature layers from all clients: The feature
where A = [0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , n], S represents the set of deleted parameters from all clients are aggregated to obtain a global
class labels, S = {s1 , s2 , . . . , sj }, 0 ≤ s1 < s2 < · · · < sj ≤ average of feature parameters Favg . The specific formula is as
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7555

follows: Algorithm 1: Unlearning Silent Apps in FL(Learning Mod-
 K
  ule, Unlearning Module and Scalable Aggregation Module).
 1
 Favg = P Tk , (9) 1: Input: Communication rounds T , Client number K,
 K
 k=1 Dataset Dk , Forgetting clients Kf orget ;
In this step, we iterate over each client k = 1, . . . , K, and 2: Initialize: Network traffic features extractor P T ,
perform a summation for each client’s feature layer parameter learning model W l , forgetting model W α ;
P Tk , then divide the aggregated result by the total number of 3: for client k in {1, 2, . . . , K} do
clients K to obtain the average value. This operation ensures 4: Clients perform:
that the aggregated feature parameter Favg is the average of the 5: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
feature parameters from all clients, regardless of whether they 6: Set P Tk = P T , Wkl = W l
are forgetting clients or non-forgetting clients. 7: Calculate the loss: ˆ = (Dk ; P Tk , Wkl )
 Aggregation of FC layers from non-forgetting clients: Only 8: Wkl ← Wkl − η∇Wkl ˆ
the FC parameters from the non-forgetting clients are aggregated 9: P Tk ← P Tk − η∇P Tk ˆ
to obtain the average FC parameter Wfc, non-forget . The specific 10: end for
formula is as follows: 11: if k ∈ Kf orget then
 1  12: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
 Wfc, non-forget = Wk , (10)
 |K non-forget | 13: Set Dkr = Dk − Dku = {x | x ∈ Dk ∧ x ∈ / Dku }
 k∈K non-forget
 14: Set D = g(D )
 r r
 k k
In this step, we iterate over each client k from the non-forgetting 15: Set Wkα = W α
client set K non-forget , perform a summation for each FC parameter 16: Freeze P Tk
Wk , then divide the aggregated result by the total number of 17: Calculate the loss: ˆ = (D r ; W α )
 k k
non-forgetting clients |K non-forget | to obtain the average value. α α αˆ
 18: Wk ← Wk − η∇Wk 
This operation ensures that Wfc, non-forget is the average of the
 19: end for
FC parameters from all non-forgetting clients, and that the FC
 20: end if
layers of forgetting clients are not involved in the aggregation.
 21: end for
 Aggregation of FC layers from forgetting clients: Only the FC
 22: Upload Wkα , Wkl , and P Tk to the server
parameters from the forgetting clients are aggregated to obtain
 23: Server aggregates:
the average FC parameter Wfc, forget . The specific formula is as 1
 K
 24: P T = K k=1 P Tk
follows:
 1
  l
 1  25: Wfc, non-forget = |K non-forget | k∈K non-forget Wk
 Wfc, forget = Wk , (11) 1
  α
 |Kforget | 26: Wfc, forget = |Kforget | k∈Kforget Wk
 k∈Kforget
 27: return P T, Wfc, non-forget , Wfc, forget
In this step, we iterate over each client k from the forgetting
client set Kforget , perform a summation for each FC parameter
Wk , then divide the aggregated result by the total number of of each communication round, all clients participate in the learnforgetting clients |Kforget | to obtain the average value. This ing process. Each client locally trains its model using private
ensures that Wfc, forget is the average of the FC parameters from traffic data to update both the feature extractor and classifier
all forgetting clients, and the FC layers of non-forgetting clients parameters. After local optimization, the updated local models
are not involved in the aggregation. P Tk and Wkl are uploaded to the server.
 Finally, we combine the previously calculated average feature When silent applications are detected, only clients requiring
parameter Favg with different FC layer aggregation results to forgetting enter the unlearning module. These clients remove
form two global models. Model w non-forget is composed of the the data samples corresponding to silent applications and perfeature parameter Favg obtained from all clients and the FC layer form neuron pruning on the classifier while freezing the feature
aggregation result Wfc, non-forget from non-forgetting clients, i.e., extractor to preserve previously learned general representations.
 w non-forget = (Favg , Wfc, non-forget ), (12) The forgetting model Wkα is then fine-tuned on the remaining
 data, ensuring that the contribution of silent applications is
Model wforget is composed of the feature parameter Favg obtained erased from the decision layer while minimizing performance
from all clients and the FC layer aggregation result Wfc, forget degradation on active applications.
from forgetting clients, i.e., Next, the scalable aggregation module updates the global
 wforget = (Favg , Wfc, forget ), (13) model by aggregating uploaded parameters. Unlike classical
 FL aggregation, FedUnSilApp aggregates the feature extraction
w non-forget and wforget serve different purposes, depending on layers from all clients to maintain global generalization, while
whether the information from forgetting clients is included. This the discriminative layers are aggregated separately for forgetting
scalable dual-path aggregation mechanism enables the global clients and non-forgetting clients. Finally, the server distributes
model to adapt to dynamic application states and supports model the updated global feature extractor and discriminative heads
expansion when silent applications become active again. to all clients, forming the next round of communication. This
 4) Training and Unlearning Procedure: Algorithm 1 sum- process continues until convergence.
marizes the overall workflow of FedUnSilApp, consisting of 5) Theoretical Analysis: In the entire forgetting process, we
three modules: the learning module, the unlearning (forgetting) need to meet two requirements: The first requirement is that the
module, and the scalable aggregation module. At the beginning forgetting operation should not affect the model’s accuracy on
7556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

the retained data. Specifically, the logit vector of model W α on
the retained data should be consistent with the original model
W , i.e.,
 g −1 (i)
 argmaxi FPi T,W l (x) = arg max
 −1
 FP T,W α (x̂),
 g (i)

 r ,
 x ∈ Dr , x̂ ∈ D (14)
where FP T,W (x) represents the logit vector of the well-trained
model W for input x, i.e., [o0 , o1 , . . . , on ]. FPi T,W (x) represents
the i-th logit value. FP T,W α (x) represents the logit vector of
the well-trained model W α for input x̂, i.e., [o0 , o1 , . . . , on−j ].
FPi T,W α (x) represents the i-th logit value. Here, j represents
the number of categories of silent applications. As shown in
Fig. 5, we calculate the loss between the active applications in
the previous model and the new model. The loss is calculated as
follows:
 eo k
 pk = n−j , (15)
 ot
 t=0 e Fig. 6. The design process of the experiment.
where ok denotes the k − th logit in FP T,W α (x̂) (restricted to
the remaining n − j classes).
  
 eo k labelled EXP1, EXP2, and EXP3, each of which aims at a distinct
 log pk = log n−j , (16)
 ot aspect of the proposed method. Specifically, EXP1 focuses on
 t=0 e
 classification accuracy and robustness; EXP2 evaluates the effi-
 BS n−j
 1  ciency and training time; and EXP3 investigates the contribution
 =− yik log pik , (17) of individual components through ablation studies.
 BS i=1 1) EXP1: Performance Comparison. Our focus is on comk=0

Here, pik is the predicted probability of class k for sample i, and paring the performance of FedUnSilApp with that of
yik denotes the (possibly soft) target label distribution. BS is representative State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) FMU methods,
the number of samples trained in a batch. including FedRecovery, FedAU and Amnesiac. The objec-
 The second requirement is that the model after forgetting tive is to demonstrate the effectiveness of FedUnSilApp in
should exhibit incorrect classification behavior on the forgotten classification tasks under unlearning scenarios. In addition
data Du , as described by [Chen et al. 87]. Specifically, the logit to evaluating overall accuracy, we assess the stability of the
output of model W α should differ from the original label of the proposed method across different application categories.
forgotten data Du , i.e., To examine scalability further, we evaluate the capability
 of FedUnSilApp to rapidly restore accurate recognition afg −1 (i)
 arg max FP T,W α (x) = y, x ∈ Du . (18) ter unlearning by simulating scenarios in which previously
 silent applications are reactivated. This analysis enables
where y is the true label. In other words, this requirement ensures us to verify whether the model can efficiently adapt to
that the model after forgetting should not retain information dynamic transitions in the application state without comabout the forgotten data Du . In the next section, we will validate promising classification performance.
our approach through experiments. 2) EXP2: Efficiency and Training Time Analysis. EXP2 evaluates the efficiency of different State-Of-The-Art (SOTA)
 V. EVALUATIONS methods by measuring their unlearning-related training
 time. For FedUnSilApp, we reported the per-client train-
A. Experiment Goal ing time and unlearning time separately, as practical feder-
 Fig. 6 illustrates the comprehensive experimental workflow ated deployments require unlearning updates to be propdesigned to validate the effectiveness of FedUnSilApp. This agated and applied to clients promptly. The aim of this
workflow comprises a data preparation phase and three primary experiment is to assess whether FedUnSilApp can achieve
experimental stages. Evaluations were conducted across four rapid adaptation while maintaining high performance,
datasets: NJUPT, MIRAGE, CIC-IoT 2022 and USTC-TFC making it suitable for large-scale real-world deployments.
2016. Each dataset was preprocessed and partitioned into train- 3) EXP3: Ablation Studies. We conducted an ablation study
ing and testing sets. All experiments were conducted from the to isolate and quantify the contribution of the unlearnperspective of a client initiating learn-to-request operations. To ing mechanism within FedUnSilApp. In the first stage,
simulate real-world deployment scenarios, we assumed that two multiple clients trained local models independently using
specific applications were missing from each dataset. Conse- their respective datasets. These locally trained models
quently, the test sets were deliberately designed to exclude these were then combined to create a global model. We then
applications, ensuring that the model evaluations would reflect evaluated the performance of this global model and each
situations in which certain applications were unavailable or inac- client model using a predefined test set to determine the
tive. The experimental evaluation comprises three experiments baseline behaviour. The aim was to verify that the global
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7557

 TABLE III of our FMU framework under heterogeneous encrypted traffic
 THE NUMBER OF CATEGORIES IN THE DATASET IS PRESENTED scenarios.
 r MIRAGE: This dataset primarily features applications from
 categories such as social networking, travel, weather, and
 basic utilities, including prominent platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, AccuWeather, and Tripadvisor.
 The prevalence of these frequently used daily-life applications indicates that MIRAGE focuses on capturing
 typical user behavior patterns during routine activities.
 The sample size per application in MIRAGE is relatively
 uniform, mostly ranging between 1,000 and 5,000. In our
 experiments, we employed the SMOTE data augmentation technique to expand each major application class
 to 11,000 samples for subsequent training and testing
 phases.
 r NJUPT: This dataset contains a higher proportion of modern entertainment and media consumption platforms, such
 as QQ Music, Bilibili, Weibo, TikTok, iQIYI, Huya, and
 Tencent Video, with a predominant focus on video, music,
 and gaming applications. Notably, NJUPT includes a substantial volume of traffic samples related to background
 processes (e.g., the Background category contains 62,228
 model’s classification was accurate. In the second stage, samples), highlighting the dataset’s emphasis on capturing
 we simulated a realistic ‘forgetting’ scenario in which patterns of background operations alongside active user inclient2 requested the deletion of data relating to the silent teractions. The sample size distribution in NJUPT exhibits
 application. By comparing the model with and without the marked disparities, with certain categories (e.g., Backforgetting module, we tested the model’s accuracy directly ground, VR, and TFT) significantly outnumbering others.
 and used the confusion matrix to observe changes in its This characteristic makes NJUPT particularly suitable for
 performance specifically. Thus, we verified the effective- analyzing application usage intensity and user preferences
 ness of the FedUnSilApp framework. under imbalanced data conditions.
 Finally, all experimental outcomes are evaluated using a r CIC IoT Dataset 2022: This publicly available dataset, deunified set of performance metrics, including training time, veloped and released by the Canadian Institute for Cyberseaccuracy, recall, F1-score, and precision. This multifaceted eval- curity, is specifically tailored for IoT security research. Coluation framework ensures a thorough assessment of FedUnSi- lected within a controlled laboratory environment, it conlApp’s performance and advantages across various dimensions. tains authentic network traffic generated by various modern
 smart home devices, including smart lights, smart plugs,
 surveillance cameras, doorbells, and voice assistants. The
B. Datasets dataset provides rich network traffic metadata alongside
 In this experiment, we selected four datasets: MIRAGE, raw packet capture files, with all data meticulously labeled
NJUPT, CIC IoT Dataset 2022, and USTC-TFC 2016. The to indicate whether the traffic is benign or belongs to a
MIRAGE dataset [88] is specifically designed for mobile traffic specific attack category.
analysis and contains real-world data associated with mobile r USTC-TFC 2016: This dataset, curated by the University
applications. It encompasses multiple domains, including social of Science and Technology of China (USTC), is widely
media, video, music, gaming, and news. Each traffic packet used in encrypted traffic classification and intrusion detecwithin the dataset is annotated with comprehensive information tion research. It contains real-world traffic traces collected
such as timestamps, source and destination addresses, proto- from a diverse range of mainstream applications, covering
cols, and packet lengths. Complementing this public dataset, categories such as chat, email, streaming media, and file
the private NJUPT dataset used in this study was collected transfer.
within a campus network environment and comprises traffic
from 19 popular applications. As detailed in Table III, these
applications cover diverse categories, including video stream- C. Experimental Settings
ing, music, gaming, and social media platforms. The NJUPT Our experimental code runs on our server. In this paper,
dataset includes 91 distinct features per sample. To evaluate the Python3 is the main programming language. The baseline engeneralization capability of our approach across heterogeneous vironment specifications of our server include CPU, Graphics
network environments, we additionally incorporated the CIC Card, Python, CUDA, System, and PyTorch information; Spe-
IoT Dataset 2022 [89] and USTC-TFC 2016 [90]. For these cific parameters are shown in Table IV.
two datasets, we selected the top ten categories with the largest Since this experiment focuses on the impact of accuracy
number of instances to train and validate our method. All traffic and consumption from the perspective of silent applications,
samples across the four datasets are uniformly labeled according we do not consider other hardware indicators. We evaluated
to application type, providing clear ground truth for supervised the selected classifiers using four key performance metrics—
learning. By integrating these diverse datasets into our exper- Precision, Accuracy, Recall, and F1 Score—to offer a thorough
iments, we aim to validate the effectiveness and robustness perspective on their effectiveness in classification tasks.
7558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 EXPERIMENTAL EQUIPMENT CLASSIFICATION RESULTS ON THE MIRAGE DATASET

D. Baseline Methods
 Amnesiac [28] addresses the machine unlearning problem under the GDPR ‘Right to be Forgotten’ requirement. It focuses on TABLE VI
removing the influence of specific training data from deep neural CLASSIFICATION RESULTS ON THE NJUPT DATASET
networks to mitigate model inversion and membership inference
attacks. By introducing unlearning and amnesiac unlearning
strategy, it enables model owners to erase sensitive information
while preserving model utility, ensuring compliance with data
deletion requests.
 FedRecovery [73] is designed to achieve efficient FMU without relying on retraining. It removes a client’s influence by
subtracting weighted gradient residuals from the global model,
and incorporates differential privacy with Gaussian noise to
ensure that the unlearned model remains difficult to distinguish
from a retrained one. The method operates without convexity
assumptions and effectively supports neural network training
scenarios.
 FedAU [72] proposes a lightweight federated unlearning
framework that introduces an auxiliary unlearning module into
the training pipeline. It performs data removal through a simple linear operation, avoiding expensive post-processing steps
and supporting multi-client and multi-granularity unlearning,
including sample-level, class-level, and client-level removal.
Experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 show effective unlearning with minimal accuracy degradation.

E. EXP1: Performance Comparison
 1) Analysis of Scalability and Stability: To assess the stability of FedUnSilApp, we analyze the per-class classification
performance of active applications on the NJUPT and MI-
 Fig. 7. Scalability performance of the proposed model across four datasets.
RAGE datasets after applying the proposed unlearning procedure to remove the influence of silent applications. As shown
in Table VI, the overall accuracy on active classes reaches
0.8878, indicating that the proposed model maintains relatively at satisfactory levels, a small number of misclassifications and
consistent performance in different applications without sig- missed detections are still observed, suggesting residual internificant class-level performance degradation. Notably, Bilibili class similarity in traffic patterns. To validate the scalability of
and Peacekeeper achieve particularly strong results in terms our model, we further performed new experiments by assuming
of precision and recall, demonstrating a robust discriminative that the silent applications in the original datasets become accapability. In contrast, the model exhibits comparatively weaker tive. Based on this scenario, we evaluate the performance of
performance on the Background and TikTok categories, with a FedUnSilApp and observe its scalability under the silent-tolower recall observed for TikTok. This can be attributed to the active transition. Fig. 7 presents the scalability evaluation when
fact that TikTok traffic contains a large volume of short-form silent applications transition to active states. The model retains
video media flows whose traffic patterns are highly dynamic and stable Precision, Recall, F1 and Accuracy across all datasets,
less distinctive, increasing the likelihood of missed detections. demonstrating that it can scale effectively without significant
For the MIRAGE dataset, Table V shows that the Joelapenna performance degradation under application-state changes. As
category achieves consistently high precision and recall, in- shown in Fig. 8, the model maintains consistent Precision, Recall
dicating accurate and comprehensive recognition of samples and F1 across different traffic sources, including QQ Music and
within this class. Similarly, the Motain category demonstrates Garena in NJUPT, Dropbox and Duolingo in MIRAGE, Camera
near-ideal classification performance. For the Iconology and amcrest and Camera arloqcam in CIC-IoT 2022, and BitTorrent
Pinterest categories, although both precision and recall remain and Gmail in USTC-TFC 2016.
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7559

 TABLE IX
 PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT FMU METHODS ACROSS
 DATASETS

Fig. 8. Scalability performance of the proposed model across four datasets.

 TABLE VII
 SCALABILITY EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED MODEL DURING THE
 TRANSITION FROM SILENT TO ACTIVE APPLICATIONS ACROSS MULTIPLE
 DATASETS

 2022 dataset, for the previously deactivated Camera arloqcam
 application, the model achieves a precision of 0.9699, a recall of
 0.9990, and an F1-score of 0.9842 after re-activation, indicating
 that FedUnSilApp can rapidly restore high-quality recognition
 when such applications return to the system. In contrast, for the
 TABLE VIII
 Camera amcrest application, the recall remains relatively high
FINE-GRAINED SCALABILITY EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED MODEL UNDER (0.9569), but the precision is lower (0.6940), leading to a reduced
 THE SILENT-TO-ACTIVE TRANSITION SCENARIO F1-score. This is likely because Amcrest camera traffic exhibits
 strong intra-class diversity, where background operations (e.g.,
 keep-alive, cloud synchronization, and event-triggered transmissions) coexist with media streaming flows. The resulting
 variability weakens the discriminability of the class and encourages the classifier to produce more positive predictions for
 Amcrest-like patterns, which manifests as a higher false-positive
 rate and thus lower precision. Overall, these results indicate that
 FedUnSilApp can efficiently adapt to localized activation without noticeable performance degradation, demonstrating strong
 scalability when applications shift from silent to active status.
 2) Overall Accuracy Comparison With SOTA Methods: As
 Table VII evaluates the overall performance of FedUnSilApp shown in Table IX, different methods exhibit substantial difin detecting scenarios where silent applications are rapidly re- ferences in classification accuracy across datasets. In the field
activated as active applications across four datasets. Specifically, of FMU, a common paradigm is to restore model utility by
the reported results correspond to the aggregated performance retraining or fine-tuning the model using the remaining data.
over ten applications. As shown in Table VII, the proposed model FedRecovery follows this retraining-based approach and dimaintains stable performance under application state transitions, rectly fine-tunes the model on retained data. While this strategy
achieving F1 scores of 0.8802 and 0.8493 on NJUPT and enables fast adaptation, it results in relatively limited classi-
MIRAGE, respectively, while reaching 0.9334 and 0.9731 on fication performance. Specifically, FedRecovery achieves only
CIC-IoT 2022 and USTC-TFC 2016. Notably, the consistently about 76% accuracy on NJUPT, approximately 63% on CIC-IoT
high performance on CIC-IoT 2022 and USTC-TFC 2016 (with 2022, and 57% on MIRAGE, which is significantly lower than
F1 ≥ 0.93 and Accuracy ≥ 0.93) indicates that FedUnSilApp FedAU and FedUnSilApp. Amnesiac, which adopts gradient
exhibits strong scalability and robustness when applications un- ascent for unlearning, shows even weaker performance on cerdergo rapid state transitions from silent to active. This suggests tain datasets. On MIRAGE, its accuracy drops below 50%, the
that the proposed unlearning mechanism does not compromise lowest among all evaluated methods, indicating that aggressive
the model’s ability to adapt to evolving application behaviors. gradient removal leads to severe degradation of discriminative
 Table VIII further provides a fine-grained scalability analysis capability. On USTC-TFC 2016, Amnesiac achieves moderate
at the application level by examining the re-activation accuracy performance, but still falls short of the utility level required for
of individual applications. For each dataset, two silent applica- high-fidelity encrypted traffic classification.
tions are re-activated to simulate local state transition scenarios. FedAU improves upon Amnesiac by enabling broader un-
On the MIRAGE, NJUPT, and USTC-TFC 2016 datasets, both learning capabilities and achieving higher accuracy across
re-activated applications achieve stable and consistent accuracy, datasets. It attains approximately 82% accuracy on NJUPT,
demonstrating reliable recovery performance. On the CIC-IoT around 70% on MIRAGE, and nearly 88% on CIC-IoT 2022,
7560 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE X
 TRAINING TIME COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT FMU METHODS ACROSS
 DATASETS

 Fig. 9. The training time of each client. (Client No.2 is the client that initiated
 the forgetting request, and the red part in the bar chart represents the model’s
ranking second only to FedUnSilApp on CIC-IoT. However, forgetting time).
FedAU does not explicitly address the misclassification of retained data as silent applications, which limits its robustness
under application state transitions.
 In contrast, FedUnSilApp consistently delivers the best over- during the initial federated learning stage. When unlearning is
all performance across datasets. On the NJUPT dataset, it triggered, the P T is frozen, and only the F C is updated by
achieves the highest accuracy of approximately 88%, accompa- pruning and fine-tuning neurons associated with silent applicanied by strong precision and recall values of 0.8605 and 0.8566, tions. Consequently, regular FL clients continue participating
respectively. On MIRAGE, FedUnSilApp reaches an accuracy in global aggregation without interruption, while unlearning
of around 86%, significantly outperforming all competing meth- clients perform localized updates independently. This design
ods. On CIC-IoT 2022, it attains the highest accuracy of 91%, significantly reduces retraining overhead and improves overall
demonstrating superior robustness under diverse application system efficiency and parallelism.
behaviors. On USTC-TFC 2016, FedUnSilApp and FedAU Although FedAU slightly outperforms other methods in terms
both achieve near-perfect performance, whereas FedRecovery of raw accuracy on USTC-TFC 2016, FedUnSilApp achieves
and Amnesiac exhibit noticeable degradation, highlighting the nearly identical detection performance while dramatically reeffectiveness of FedUnSilApp in preserving model utility. ducing training cost (44.10 s vs. 245.05 s).
 In addition, we measured the time (in seconds) required for
F. EXP2: Efficiency and Training Time Analysis each client (numbered 0–9) on the NJUPT dataset to complete
 model training and, where applicable, the unlearning operation,
 As shown in Table X, the evaluated methods exhibit clear as shown in Fig. 9. From the “Train Time (s)” row, we observe
trade-offs between training cost and model utility. FedRecovery that all clients require between 102.10 and 102.80 seconds for
achieves the shortest training time across all datasets, requiring initial training—an average of approximately 102.26 seconds
only 33–34 seconds, as it directly fine-tunes the model using the with a standard deviation of only 0.22 seconds—indicating
remaining data without additional unlearning constraints. How- that the workload is evenly distributed. It is worth noting that
ever, this efficiency comes at the cost of substantially reduced FedUnSilApp achieves efficient unlearning due to its decoupled
accuracy. architecture. The P T contains the majority of the parameters
 Amnesiac incurs significantly longer training times due to its and is trained only once during the initial learning stage. When
gradient ascent-based unlearning process, which first removes a client initiates an unlearning request, FedUnSilApp freezes the
learned representations and then aggregates updated models. P T and updates only the lightweight classifier layer by pruning
This design introduces additional overhead, particularly for neurons associated with silent applications. As a result, only a
clients that did not initiate unlearning requests. As a result, small portion of the model is retrained. For example, client2
Amnesiac’s training time approaches 3.5 minutes, while its completed unlearning in 13.76 seconds—merely 11.85% of its
accuracy remains relatively low. FedAU reduces unlearning full training time—demonstrating that our approach maintains
time compared to Amnesiac but still requires a complex train- accuracy while significantly reducing computation overhead
ing process, including an initialization phase, multiple training during unlearning.
rounds, and collaborative training of an auxiliary unlearning
module by unlearning clients. These factors collectively lead to
 G. EXP3: Ablation Studies
the longest training time among all methods, reaching nearly
4.5 minutes on NJUPT and approximately 275 seconds on As described in Experiment Goal, we assume that two classes
MIRAGE. FedUnSilApp achieves a favorable balance between of data have been removed from the dataset, and we evaluate our
efficiency and performance. On NJUPT, it completes training model on a test set that excludes those classes. This allows us to
in about 116 seconds while delivering the highest accuracy. analyze the impact on model performance when the ‘forgetting
On MIRAGE, its training time is approximately 68 seconds, module’ is enabled versus when it is not.
which is nearly four times shorter than that of Amnesiac and Firstly, we first verify the effectiveness of layer P T after
FedAU. On CIC-IoT 2022, FedUnSilApp again significantly aggregation, which can make the classifier more accurate. As
reduces training time (116 seconds) compared to FedAU, while shown in Fig. 10(a), the classification accuracy of each client
achieving higher accuracy. on the MIRAGE dataset varies significantly. The client with
 This efficiency advantage stems from FedUnSilApp’s scal- the lowest accuracy is client0 , with an accuracy of 0.72, while
able aggregation design, which separates the model into a P T client2 and client7 achieve the highest client accuracies, at 0.81
and a lightweight classifier head (F C). The P T , containing the and 0.82, respectively. Overall, most clients have an accuracy
majority of model parameters, is trained and aggregated only ranging between 0.76 and 0.82, showing a certain degree of
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7561

Fig. 10. Client and global model accuracy during federated learning on different datasets.

Fig. 11. Comparison of confusion matrices before and after applying the unlearning strategy on the MIRAGE and NJUPT datasets. The left two confusion
matrices correspond to the conventional model evaluated on the two datasets without unlearning, whereas the right two matrices report the results obtained after
applying the proposed unlearning strategy.

stability. Furthermore, the global model obtained through FL of the client model ranged from 0.66 (client2 ) to 0.82 (client4 ),
aggregation achieves the highest accuracy at 0.86, which is reflecting significant differences in data distribution and training.
notably higher than the accuracy of any individual client. The Some clients, such as client3 and client4 , perform close to
results of this experiment show that the global model outper- the global model, suggesting high data quality or well-trained,
forms all client models with an accuracy of 0.89, indicating that while the lower accuracy of client2 and client5 (0.66 and 0.67,
the aggregate knowledge of each client through FL can improve respectively) indicates possible bias, noise, or poorly trained
the overall performance. As shown in Fig. 10(b), the accuracy data. Overall, the high performance of the global model validates
7562 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

the effectiveness of the FL framework, which can improve a significant research direction. Finally, evaluating the frameprediction accuracy by aggregating multiple sources of data work’s performance in real-world FL scenarios, where clients
without accessing local data. are heterogeneous and network conditions vary, is crucial for
 Furthermore, we verify the effectiveness of the weight matrix validating its robustness and efficiency in practical applications.
W α after performing neurons unlearning operation. As shown
in Fig. 11, confusion matrices on the left show the classifi-
 REFERENCES
cation results of the original model, which has no unlearning
mechanism. Confusion matrices on the right show the results [1] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A
after a subset of neurons associated with silent applications was Big Data-enabled hierarchical framework for traffic classification,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2608–2619, Oct.–Dec. 2020.
deleted, which improved the overall classification accuracy. On [2] J. Lee, F. Solat, T. Y. Kim, and H. V. Poor, “Federated learning-empowered
the NJUPT dataset, the original model misclassifies a substantial mobile network management for 5G and beyond networks: From access
amount of active application traffic as silent application classes. to core,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 2176–2212, 3rd
Specifically, it misclassifies 95 background-flow samples, 25 Quart., 2024.
Peacekeeper samples and 35 TikTok samples as QQmusic sam- [3] J. He, S. Guo, M. Li, and Y. Zhu, “AceFL: Federated learning accelerating
 in 6 G-enabled mobile edge computing networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci.
ples. Additionally, 110 Peacekeeper samples and 31 TikTok Eng., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1364–1375, May/Jun. 2023.
samples are misclassified as Garena. These errors suggest that [4] C. Benzaid and T. Taleb, “AI-driven zero touch network and service
the model learns redundant or entangled features shared between management in 5G and beyond: Challenges and research directions,” IEEE
background traffic and certain active applications. Introducing Netw., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 186–194, Mar./Apr. 2020.
 [5] M. Liyanage et al., “A survey on zero touch network and service manneuron-level unlearning weakens such redundant feature repre- agement (ZSM) for 5G and beyond networks,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
sentations, effectively suppressing these erroneous predictions. vol. 203, 2022, Art. no. 103362.
Consequently, classification accuracy increases from 87.37% [6] M. El Rajab, L. Yang, and A. Shami, “Zero-touch networks: Towards
to 88.78%, corresponding to an absolute improvement of ap- next-generation network automation,” Comput. Netw., vol. 243, 2024,
proximately 1.4 percentage points. A similar phenomenon is Art. no. 110294.
 [7] G. Hu, X. Xiao, M. Shen, B. Zhang, X. Yan, and Y. Liu, “TCGNN: Packetobserved on the MIRAGE dataset when the unlearning strategy grained network traffic classification via graph neural networks,” Eng.
is disabled: a large number of active application samples are Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 123, 2023, Art. no. 106531.
misclassified as silent applications. Notably, 38 Scott.ly samples [8] R. Antonello et al., “Deep packet inspection tools and techniques in
and 29 Pinterest samples were incorrectly predicted as Drop- commodity platforms: Challenges and trends,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl.,
 vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1863–1878, 2012.
box, and 32 Groupon samples and 32 Scott.ly samples were [9] R. Gudla, S. Vollala, K. Srinivasa, and R. Amin, “A novel approach for
misclassified as Duolingo. After enabling the neural unlearning classification of tor and non-tor traffic using efficient feature selection
mechanism, however, these misclassifications are substantially methods,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 249, 2024, Art. no. 123544.
reduced. Consequently, classification accuracy improves from [10] S. Dong, “Multi class SVM algorithm with active learning for network
84.56% to 85.66%, an absolute gain of approximately 1.10 traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 176, 2021, Art. no. 114885.
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
percentage points. S0957417421003262
 Fig. 11 clearly demonstrates that without activating the client- [11] J. Dai, X. Xu, H. Gao, and F. Xiao, “CMFTC: Cross modality fusion
side unlearning module, active application traffic can be er- efficient multitask encrypt traffic classification in IIoT environment,” IEEE
roneously misclassified as silent or background classes. Such Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3989–4009, Nov./Dec. 2023.
 [12] H. Lu, Y. Dong, Z. Wu, H.-L. Wei, and G. Lu, “New class detection in
misclassification can fragment the decision boundaries learned network traffic classification using confidence information embedded casby the classifier, ultimately degrading downstream network cade structure,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1692–1706,
functions, including traffic management and resource allocation. May/Jun. 2025.
In contrast, the proposed neuron-level unlearning strategy ef- [13] Z. Li, P. Wang, and Z. Wang, “FlowGANAnomaly: Flow-based anomaly
fectively mitigates this issue by disentangling silent application network intrusion detection with adversarial learning,” Chin. J. Electron.,
 vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2024.
features from active traffic representations. [14] Y.-J. Liu et al., “A survey of integrating generative artificial intelligence
 and 6G mobile services: Architectures, solutions, technologies and outlooks,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 1334–1356,
 Jun. 2025.
 VI. CONCLUSION [15] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
 “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
 In this paper, we presented FedUnSilApp, a novel frame- data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., vol. 54, 2017, pp. 1273–
work for FMU specifically designed to address the challenges 1282.
posed by silent applications in NTC. Our approach combines [16] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
the learning module, the unlearning module, and a scalable Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., vol. 10, no. 2,
aggregation mechanism to ensure the stability and scalability pp. 1–19, 2019.
 [17] W. Y. B. Lim et al., “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
of the model in dynamic data environments. FedUnSilApp ef- A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 3,
fectively eliminates redundant or outdated information in the pp. 2031–2063, 3rd Quart., 2020.
model through a selective neuron pruning mechanism guided [18] Y.-J. Liu et al., “Trusted clustering based federated learning in edge
by specific category features, while maintaining its performance. networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 9726–9742,
 Oct. 2025.
Such NTC require the ability to forget data on demand without [19] Y. Liu, J. J. Q. Yu, J. Kang, D. Niyato, and S. Zhang, “Privacy-preserving
compromising model stability. Through scalable aggregation, traffic flow prediction: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Internet
the framework enables quick recovery when previously silent Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7751–7763, Aug. 2020.
applications become active again and need to be recognized. [20] E. Bakopoulou, B. Tillman, and A. Markopoulou, “FedPacket: A federated
 Although FedUnSilApp addresses several key challenges in learning approach to mobile packet classification,” IEEE Trans. Mobile
 Comput., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 3609–3628, Oct. 2022.
FL, there are still areas for future exploration. As FL increasingly [21] Z. Zhu et al., “MFABA: A more faithful and accelerated boundary-based
integrates complex models, optimizing the scalability of FedUn- attribution method for deep neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
SilApp and its compatibility with these architectures remains Intell., 2024, vol. 38, no. 15, pp. 17228–17236.
LI et al.: SILENT-APP-AWARE FEDERATED MACHINE UNLEARNING FOR ENCRYPTED NETWORK TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 7563

[22] A. Mantelero, “The EU proposal for a general data protection regulation [44] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classificaand the roots of the ‘right to be forgotten,” Comput. Law Secur. Rev., tion is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2019-IEEE
 vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 229–235, 2013. Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, 2019, pp. 680–687.
[23] E. L. Harding, J. J. Vanto, R. Clark, L. H. Ji, and S. C. Ainsworth, [45] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
 “Understanding the scope and impact of the california consumer encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neuprivacy act of 2018,” J. Data Protection Privacy, vol. 2, no. 3, ral networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform., 2017,
 pp. 234–253, 2019. pp. 43–48.
[24] Z. Wang, Z. Li, M. Fu, Y. Ye, and P. Wang, “Network traffic classification [46] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari, R. Siavoshani S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
 based on federated semi-supervised learning,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 149, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
 2024, Art. no. 103091. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
 com/science/article/pii/S1383762124000286 2020.
[25] W. Zixuan, M. Cheng, X. Yuhua, L. Zeyi, S. Zhixin, and W. Pan, [47] C. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, and B. Jiang, “CETAnalytics: Com-
 “Trusted encrypted traffic intrusion detection method based on federated prehensive effective traffic information analytics for encrypted traffic
 learning and autoencoder,” China Commun., vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 211–235, classification,” Comput. Netw., vol. 176, 2020, Art. no. 107258.
 2024. [48] V. Tong, H. A. Tran, S. Souihi, and A. Mellouk, “A novel quic traffic
[26] Y. Liu, L. Xu, X. Yuan, C. Wang, and B. Li, “The right to be forgotten classifier based on convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Glob.
 in federated learning: An efficient realization with rapid retraining,” in Commun. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–6.
 Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2022-IEEE Conf. Computer Commun., 2022, [49] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
 pp. 1749–1758. network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
[27] N. Su and B. Li, “Asynchronous federated unlearning,” in Proc. IEEE 2019-IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
 INFOCOM 2023-IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 1–10. [50] F. Al-Obaidy, S. Momtahen, M. F. Hossain, and F. Mohammadi, “En-
[28] L. Graves, V. Nagisetty, and V. Ganesh, “Amnesiac machine learning,” in crypted traffic classification based ML for identifying different social
 Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, vol. 35, no. 13, pp. 11516–11524. media applications,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng., 2019,
[29] J. Wang, S. Guo, X. Xie, and H. Qi, “Federated unlearning via class- pp. 1–5.
 discriminative pruning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 622–632. [51] G. Xie, Q. Li, and Y. Jiang, “Self-attentive deep learning method for online
[30] Z. Li et al., “Multi-ARCL: Multimodal adaptive relay-based distributed traffic classification and its interpretability,” Comput. Netw., vol. 196, 2021,
 continual learning for encrypted traffic classification,” J. Parallel Distrib. Art. no. 108267.
 Comput., vol. 201, 2025, Art. no. 105083. [Online]. Available: https:// [52] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
 www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731525000504 network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. with Appl., vol. 167,
[31] S. Fathi-Kazerooni and R. Rojas-Cessa, “Countering machine-learning 2021, Art. no. 114363.
 classification of applications by equalizing network traffic statis- [53] A. M. Sadeghzadeh, S. Shiravi, and R. Jalili, “Adversarial network traftics,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 3392–3403, fic: Towards evaluating the robustness of deep-learning-based network
 Oct.–Dec. 2021. traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2,
[32] K. Trang and A. H. Nguyen, “A comparative study of machine learning- pp. 1962–1976, Jun. 2021.
 based approach for network traffic classification.,” Knowl. Eng. Data Sci., [54] S. Agrawal et al., “Federated learning for intrusion detection system:
 vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 128–137, 2021. Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Comput. Commun., vol. 195,
[33] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted pp. 346–361, 2022.
 traffic with second-order Markov chains and application attribute bi- [55] Y.-J. Liu, S. Qin, Y. Sun, and G. Feng, “Resource consumption for
 grams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1830–1843, supporting federated learning in wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
 Aug. 2017. Commun., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 9974–9989, Nov. 2022.
[34] D. Herrmann, R. Wendolsky, and H. Federrath, “Website fingerprinting: [56] A. Ariffin, F. Afifi, F. Zaki, H. Hanif, and N. B. Anuar, “Federated learning
 Attacking popular privacy enhancing technologies with the multinomial in network traffic classification: Taxonomy of implementation, application,
 naıve-bayes classifier,” in Proc. ACM Workshop Cloud Comput. Secur., and impact on sixth-generation wireless networks,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.,
 2009, pp. 31–42. vol. 158, 2025, Art. no. 111471.
[35] Y. Wang, Y. Xiang, J. Zhang, W. Zhou, G. Wei, and L. T. [57] X. He, H. Huang, C. Wang, F. Hu, T. Cai, and Z. Zheng, “A
 Yang, “Internet traffic classification using constrained clustering,” fairness-guaranteed framework for semi-asynchronous federated learn-
 IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 2932–2943, ing,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 4462–4479,
 Nov. 2014. Nov./Dec. 2025.
[36] Z. Wang et al., “DFE: Deep flow embedding for robust network traffic [58] O. Alnajar and A. Barnawi, “Tactile internet of federated things: Toward
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1597–1612, fine-grained design of FL-based architecture to meet TIoT demands,”
 May/Jun. 2025. Comput. Netw., vol. 231, 2023, Art. no. 109712.
[37] V. G. d. S. Ruffo, L. F. Carvalho, J. Lloret, and M.L. P. Jr, [59] Y.-J. Liu et al., “Ensemble distillation based adaptive quantization for
 “f-AnoGAN for unsupervised attack detection in SDN environ- supporting federated learning in wireless networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
 ment,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3271–3285, Commun., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 4013–4027, Jun. 2023.
 Jul./Aug. 2025. [60] N. Wang, X. Li, Z. Guan, and S. Yuan, “FedStream: A federated learning
[38] W. Dong, J. Yu, X. Lin, G. Gou, and G. Xiong, “Deep learning and pre- framework on heterogeneous streaming data for next-generation traffic
 training technology for encrypted traffic classification: A comprehensive analysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2485–2496,
 review,” Neurocomputing, vol. 617, 2025, Art. no. 128444. May/Jun. 2024.
[39] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen, [61] S. Ghosh, “Network traffic analysis based on cybersecurity intrusion
 “Convergence of edge computing and deep learning: A comprehensive detection through an effective automated separate guided attention fedsurvey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 869–904, 2nd Quart., erated graph neural network,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 169, 2025,
 2020. Art. no. 112603.
[40] S. A. H. Minoofam, A. Bastanfard, and M. R. Keyvanpour, “TRCLA: [62] Y. Guo and D. Wang, “FEAT: A federated approach for privacy-preserving
 A transfer learning approach to reduce negative transfer for cellular network traffic classification in heterogeneous environments,” IEEE Interlearning automata,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 34, no. 5, net Things J., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1274–1285, Jan. 2023.
 pp. 2480–2489, May 2023. [63] Y. Guo, K. Huang, and J. Chen, “WCL: Client selection in federated
[41] W. Wei, H. Gu, W. Deng, Z. Xiao, and X. Ren, “ABL-TC: A lightweight learning with a combination of model weight divergence and client training
 design for network traffic classification empowered by deep learning,” loss for internet traffic classification,” Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput.,
 Neurocomputing, vol. 489, pp. 333–344, 2022. vol. 2021, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 3381998.
[42] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identification [64] Z. He et al., “Edge device identification based on federated learning and
 of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short term network traffic feature engineering,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
 memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, Feb. 2022. vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1898–1909, Dec. 2022.
[43] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A flow-based [65] X. Huang, Z. Chen, Q. Chen, and J. Zhang, “Federated learning based
 relation network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. Web Conf. QoS-aware caching decisions in fog-enabled Internet of Things networks,”
 2020, pp. 13–22. Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 580–589, 2023.
7564 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[66] W. Jiang, H. Han, Y. Zhang, and J. Mu, “Federated split learning for Zeyi Li (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received
 sequential data in satellite–terrestrial integrated networks,” Inf. Fusion, the B.S. degree in mathematics from the Suzhou
 vol. 103, 2024, Art. no. 102141. University of Technology, Soochow, China, in 2019,
[67] M. J. Idrissi et al., “Fed-ANIDS: Federated learning for anomaly-based and the M.S. degree in computer science in 2022
 network intrusion detection systems,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 234, 2023, from the Nanjing University of Posts and Telecom-
 Art. no. 121000. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ munications, Nanjing, China, where he is currently
 science/article/pii/S0957417423015026 working toward the Ph.D. degree in cyberspace secu-
[68] S. Shi, Y. Guo, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Han, “Distributionally robust rity. His research interests include network security,
 federated learning for network traffic classification with noisy labels,” communication network security, anomaly detection
 IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 6212–6226, May 2024. and analysis, deep packet inspection, and graph neural
[69] A. Pekar, L. A. Makara, and G. Biczok, “Incremental federated learning for networks.
 traffic flow classification in heterogeneous data scenarios,” Neural Comput.
 Appl., vol. 36, no. 32, pp. 20401–20424, 2024.
[70] A. Bremler-Barr, Y. Harchol, D. Hay, and Y. Koral, “Deep packet inspec- Yuna Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 tion as a service,” in Proc. 10th ACM Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Experiments degree from the Huazhong University of Science
 Technol., 2014, pp. 271–282. and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2023. She
[71] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “Distiller: En- was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the School
 crypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,” of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 183, no. 184, 2021, Art. no. 102985. Technological University, Singapore. She is cur-
 [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ rently an Associate Professor with the School
 S1084804521000126 of Communications and Information Engineering,
[72] H. Gu et al., “Unlearning during learning: An efficient federated machine Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommuniunlearning method,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, cations, Nanjing, China. Her research interests
 pp. 1439–1444, doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2024/446. include immersive communication and wireless
[73] L. Zhang, T. Zhu, H. Zhang, P. Xiong, and W. Zhou, “FedRecov- resource allocation.
 ery: Differentially private machine unlearning for federated learning
 frameworks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 4732–4746,
 2023.
[74] T. T. Nguyen et al., “A survey of machine unlearning,” ACM Trans. Intell. Tianshun Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc.
 Syst. Technol., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1–46, 2025. degree in communication engineering from Jilin Uni-
[75] Z. Pan et al., “Feature-based machine unlearning for vertical federated versity, Changchun, China, in 2020, and the Ph.D.
 learning in IoT networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. vol. 24, no. 6, degree in computer science from the University of
 pp. 5031–5044, Jun. 2025. Macau, Macau, China, in 2023. He is currently an As-
[76] J. Fan, K. Wu, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, and S. Huang, “Fast model update for iot sistant Professor with the School of Communication
 traffic anomaly detection with machine unlearning,” IEEE Internet Things and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of
 J., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 8590–8602, May 2023. Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China. His
[77] Z. Liu et al., “A survey on federated unlearning: Challenges, methods, and research interests include mobile edge computing,
 future directions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1–38, 2024. federated learning, and multimodal learning.
[78] T. Che et al., “Fast federated machine unlearning with nonlinear functional
 theory,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 4241–4268.
[79] L. Wu, S. Guo, J. Wang, Z. Hong, J. Zhang, and Y. Ding, “Federated Pan Wang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
 unlearning: Guarantee the right of clients to forget,” IEEE Netw., vol. 36, in communication engineering and the Ph.D. degree
 no. 5, pp. 129–135, Sep./Oct. 2022. in electrical and computer engineering from the Nan-
[80] C. Wu, S. Zhu, P. Mitra, and W. Wang, “Unlearning backdoor attacks in jing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
 federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2024, Nanjing, China, in 2001 and 2013, respectively. From
 pp. 1–9. 2017 to 2018, he was a Visiting Scholar with the
[81] Y. Zhao, P. Wang, H. Qi, J. Huang, Z. Wei, and Q. Zhang, “Federated Department of Electrical and Computer Engineerunlearning with momentum degradation,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, ing, University of Dayton, Dayton, OH, USA. He
 no. 5, pp. 8860–8870, Mar. 2024. is currently a Professor with the School of Modern
[82] H. A. Tran, H. T. T. Binh, and A. Mellouk, “Federated learning for network Posts, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunitraffic classification: A knowledge consolidation approach,” IEEE Trans. cations. His research interests include cyber security
 Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 13, pp. 797–814, 2026. and communication network security, network measurements, quality of service,
[83] X. Yin, Y. Zhu, and J. Hu, “A comprehensive survey of privacy-preserving deep packet inspection, software-defined networking, Big Data analytics and
 federated learning: A taxonomy, review, and future directions,” ACM applications.
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–36, 2021.
[84] J. Xu, Z. Wu, C. Wang, and X. Jia, “Machine unlearning: Solutions and
 challenges,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 8, no. 3,
 pp. 2150–2168, Jun. 2024. Yimu Ji was born in 1978. He received the Ph.D.
[85] S. Liu et al., “Rethinking machine unlearning for large language models,” degree from the Nanjing University of Posts and
 Nature Mach. Intell., vol. 7, pp. 181–194, 2025. Telecommunications (NJUPT), Nanjing, China, in
[86] Z. Li, Z. Zhang, M. Fu, and P. Wang, “A novel network flow feature scaling 2007. From September 2012 to December 2012, he
 method based on cloud-edge collaboration,” in Proc. IEEE 22nd Int. Conf. was sent to the University of Virginia for a UVA
 Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 1947–1953. study visit, and from June 2016 to December 2016,
[87] W. Wang, S. Jian, Y. Tan, Q. Wu, and C. Huang, “Representation learning- he was sent to Purdue University for a study visit by
 based network intrusion detection system by capturing explicit and implicit the Jiangsu Provincial Government. He is currently
 feature interactions,” Comput. Secur., vol. 112, 2022, Art. no. 102537. a Professor with the School of Computer Science,
[88] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “Mirage: NJUPT. He presided more than and participated in
 Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in Proc. 4th Int. many national, provincial and ministerial projects,
 Conf. Comput., Commun. Secur., 2019, pp. 1–8. obtained 7 provincial and municipal science and technology progress awards,
[89] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, and published and employed more than 20 SCI papers, and obtained 4 authorized
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional invention patents and 3 software copyrights. His research interests include
 iot profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. and security and applications in cloud computing, BigData, IoT, and AI. From 2009
 Trust, 2022, pp. 1–11. to 2011, he was a temporary Deputy Director of the Administrative Committee
[90] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end encrypted of Wujin National High tech Zone in Jiangsu Province (assisting in the work
 traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural networks,” of scientific and technological talents, and won the title of preferred communist
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform., 2017, pp. 43–48. party member during this period).