2430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 SOFA: Service-Oriented Fine-Grained Attack
 Traffic Detection With Meta Learning
 Peng Fang , Feiyang Huang, Ziming Zhao , Member, IEEE, Fan Zhang , Member, IEEE, and Wenrui Ma

 Abstract—Enterprise networks face an ever-growing threat achieved certain effectiveness, existing methods still have
from various unknown cyberattacks originating from the Inter- some limitations in practice [9]. We summarize the two
net. Anomaly-based Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) challenges as follows.
have become essential for safeguarding corporate networks, but
existing technologies have some limitations in practice. (i) The
 (i) The interweaving of traffic from different service types
interweaving of traffic from different service types increases the increases the difficulty of identification. In existing traffic
difficulty of identification. (ii) The scarcity of labeled malicious classification studies, previous schemes fed all benign trafsamples hinders the detection of both known and emerging fic types (e.g., SSH, Web, FTP) into the model en bloc
threats. To tackle these issues, we propose a service-oriented [10], [11], [12]. However, benign traffic comprises various
approach to model benign traffic and leverage meta-learning applications with distinct behavioral patterns. This leads to
to construct a robust metric space for precise sample comparison. Based on this, we develop SOFA, a two-stage traffic misclassifications where a malicious session (a session refers
detection framework. In the first stage, SOFA identifies distinct to a bidirectional flow, uniquely identified by a 5-tuple <
service types within the network and trains independent one- srcip, srcport, dstip, dstport, protocol >) may be closer to an
class models for each, ensuring service-specific attack traffic is unrelated benign session than to other malicious ones [13].
detected with high precision. The second stage employs a ResNet- For better understanding, we trained a one-class learner [14]
based Siamese network to overcome the limitations posed by with benign traffic on a specific port (e.g., TCP port 21, 22
scarce malicious samples, enhancing detection of both known
and emerging attacks. We evaluate SOFA on four widely used and 80) and tested it on various malicious traffic. The results
network tracing datasets, demonstrating that it achieves state-of- in Fig. 1 uncover notable misclassification instances. For
the-art performance and significantly outperforms a diverse set example, DDoS attacks are hard to distinguish from normal
of existing methods in fine-grained attack detection. These results SSH traffic (Fig. 1a). Botnet activity on port 8080 overlaps
highlight the potential of SOFA for improving network security with benign web traffic on port 80 (Fig. 1b) and FTP services
in a highly dynamic and unbalanced threat environment.
 on port 21 (Fig. 1c). However, these misclassification instances
 Index Terms—Fine-grained attack detection, unknown attack occur on traffic of different types of services. Therefore, if we
detection, Siamese network, service-oriented scheme. use service type to perform a preliminary screening on traffic,
 a one-class learner will not struggle with these unnecessary
 I. I NTRODUCTION misclassifications.
 Some studies analyze benign traffic by category (e.g.,

E NTERPRISE networks are increasingly targeted by
 sophisticated cyberattacks, including both known and
unknown threats [1], [2]. Protecting these networks requires
 videos, emails) [14] or similarity (e.g., K-means clustering)
 [15]. However, these methods fail to resolve the fundamental issue of interweaving traffic from different applications.
advanced and scalable mechanisms to detect and mitigate such Moreover, their approach of forcing each session through
threats. Among existing approaches, Network Intrusion Detec- multiple classifiers significantly reduces detection efficiency.
tion Systems (NIDS) have undergone significant advancements As shown in Fig. 2, four classifiers in an enterprise network
[3], evolving from signature-based [4], [5] to anomaly-based require each session to undergo four sequential detections.
detection methods [6], [7], [8], driven by the rise of encryption Under our experimental environment, a single model takes
technologies and the growing prevalence of unknown threats. 0.5 ms per session, while four models accumulate to 2.1 ms,
Although the anomaly-based intrusion detection scheme has introducing latency that degrades user experience, especially
 with numerous classifiers. Thus, a system that can route each
 Received 13 January 2025; revised 2 August 2025; accepted 1 December
2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor S. Lin. session to the appropriate learner efficiently is critical. This not
Date of publication 26 December 2025; date of current version 12 January only improves detection speed but also enables fine-grained
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science identification of benign traffic by service type.
Foundation of China under Grant 62227805 and Grant 62572437 and in part
by the Key Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province under (ii) The scarcity of labeled malicious samples hinders
Grant 2023C01039. (Corresponding authors: Ziming Zhao; Fan Zhang.) the detection of both known and emerging threats. In an
 Peng Fang, Feiyang Huang, Ziming Zhao, and Fan Zhang are with the enterprise network environment, large volumes of normal
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310027, China (e-mail: fangpeng@zju.edu.cn; feiyanghuang@zju.edu.cn; business traffic (e.g., web browsing, file transfers, and emails)
zhaoziming@zju.edu.cn; fanzhang@zju.edu.cn). coexists with relatively small amounts of malicious attack
 Wenrui Ma is with the School of Computer Science and Technol- traffic (e.g., DDoS, SqlInjection, and Botnet). This imbalance
ogy, Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou 310018, China (e-mail:
mawenrui@zjgsu.edu.cn).
 makes it challenging for detection models to effectively learn
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3648394 the characteristics of malicious traffic during training [16],
 2998-4157 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2431

Fig. 1. Misclassification during training on single benign class and testing on different attack classes with dataset CICIDS2017. (a) Training with benign ssh
traffic. (b) Training with benign web traffic. (c) Training with benign ftp traffic.

 design and meta-learning for fine-grained traffic detection
 in few-shot scenarios.
 • To overcome the limitations of coarse-grained modeling,
 we propose a one-class learner construction method for
 service triples, and develop a method to determine service
 triples through a pruning and reconstruction strategy of
 the session relationship graph, which does not depend on
 the characteristics of any protocol.
Fig. 2. Comparison of detection efficiency of one-class learners. Sessions • To enhance the accuracy of fine-grained detection in
with the same color come from the same service. few-shot scenarios, we propose applying Resnet to
 the Siamese network to construct a multi-classification
often resulting in high false positive (FP) rates for a small learner. To mitigate the impact of noise on few-shot learnnumber of attack samples. Although oversampling and data ing, we introduce a feature enhancement method, which
augmentation schemes [17], [18] have been introduced to effectively improves the model’s detection accuracy.
balance datasets across different categories, these methods • We implemented the prototype of SOFA and conducted
typically rely on duplicating or synthesizing existing data, extensive experiments using various real-world malicious
offering limited improvements in data diversity. Especially for traffic to verify its superior accuracy and efficiency comunknown classes, previous solutions require large amounts of pared to SOTA.
labeled malicious samples to achieve high detection accuracy The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
[8], [19]. However, in real-world scenarios, emerging attacks reviews related works. Section III presents the problem formusuch as zero-day exploits are rare and lack sufficient labeled lation. Section IV introduces the high-level design of SOFA.
samples for effective training. This scarcity of labeled attack In Section V, we describe the detailed designs. In Section VI,
samples limits the ability of conventional NIDS to adapt to we experimentally evaluate the performances. Section VII
emerging threats. provides an in-depth discussion of SOFA and points out its
 To address these challenges, we propose the novel Service- limitations. Section VIII concludes this paper.
Oriented Fine-Grained Attack traffic detection (SOFA) framework, which redefines unknown attack detection as a two-stage
 II. R ELATED W ORK
task. In the first stage, a one-class anomaly detector identifies
attacks using only benign traffic. To resolve traffic interweav- This section mainly summarizes the NIDS technologies
ing issues, SOFA adopts service-oriented one-class modeling involved in this paper in terms of unknown attack detection
based on service triplets.1 It first identifies all service triplets in and few-shot detection, as shown in Table I. The column of
the enterprise network and trains independent one-class mod- Few-Shot Learning indicates whether the model supports the
els for each, enabling accurate detection of attacks targeting few-shot learning paradigm; Limited Labeled Samples signifies
specific services by learning their normal traffic patterns. The whether the model achieves practical performance when there
second stage uses a multi-classifier to classify isolated attacks are ≤ 15 labeled samples per class; Unknown Detection
and recognize emerging ones. Leveraging meta-learning with indicates model’s ability to identify unknown attacks; Robust
limited labeled samples, it utilizes a ResNet-based Siamese Detection represents the performance stability under traffic
network, which is adept at capturing subtle distinctions in obfuscation or noise injection; Computational Efficiency refers
known attacks, to detect both familiar and new variants. to whether the inference speed of the model ≤ 2ms.
 In summary, the contributions of this paper are four-fold: NIDS with Unknown Attack Detection. Unknown
 • We carefully examine the problems of current anomaly- attack detection mainly includes unsupervised learning, semibased NIDS in practice and summarize them as two key supervised learning methods. (i) Unsupervised methods. Many
 challenges. To facilitate addressing the above issues, we unsupervised learning methods have been proposed to identify
 propose SOFA, a framework based on service-oriented outliers in network traffic, mainly using clustering methods
 [20], [21], graph association methods [14], [22] and encoder-
 1 A service triplet <ip, port, protocol> uniquely identifies a server-side decoder learning methods [23]. These methods are unable to
process (server-side socket). identify malicious behavior in a fine-grained manner, and the
2432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF D ETECTION M ODELS

sparsity of benign traffic increases the difficulty of model [30] constructed a FS-IDS framework based on a Prototype
training and fitting, resulting in a high false alarm rate. network, encoding traffic into grayscale images and combining
(ii) Semi-supervised methods. Semi-supervised methods (e.g., it with autoencoder feature fusion. Du et al. [28] introduced
Cls-Anomaly [15], FARE [19], FOSS [8]) combine unsuper- BFS-NID, which combines visual Transformer self-supervised
vised feature learning with limited labeled data. Although pretraining and branch classifier learning modules to optimize
some methods have utilized the labels of few samples to prototype representations. Similarly, Chai et al. [29] proposed
improve detection accuracy, they lack a mechanism to extract DPNSA, which enhances feature extraction using dynamic
meta-knowledge from limited labeled data, making it difficult convolution and dual-sample activation functions. While these
to support few-shot generalization. methods address detection and incremental model updates with
 NIDS with Few-Shot Learning. Currently, meta-learning few samples, they still need large training datasets for support
and its related algorithms have been applied to network sets and struggle to detect unknown categories like 0-day
intrusion detection and data analysis [34]. Most meta-learning- attacks. Different from the above method, Siamese networks
based intrusion detection methods are derived from traditional learn the similarity between sample pairs, avoiding heavy
meta-learning approaches initially proposed in the field of reliance on large labeled training datasets for task-set building
computer vision, which can be primarily divided into two [46]. Chen et al. [36] developed a three-stage detection method
categories: optimization-driven methods and model-driven that combines clustering and metric learning to achieve finemethods. Representative optimization-driven methods include grained detection of unknown behaviors. Yu et al. [37] applied
Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) [29], [39], while TextCNN and one-hot encoding to construct metric models
typical model-driven methods cover Rethinking Few-Shot using Siamese networks for packet-level feature extraction.
(RFS) [40], Prototypical networks [41], Matching networks However, this method still suffers from the problem of false
[42], Relation networks [43], and Siamese networks [44]. positives caused by sparse benign traffic.
 Optimization-driven. methods focus on parameter opti- To address these limitations, we propose a two-stage fewmization to enable the model to quickly adapt to new few-shot shot learning method. First, a service-oriented self-supervised
tasks. Lu et al. [25] proposed a few-shot IoT intrusion model filters benign traffic, avoiding interference from its
detection model that combines CNNs for feature extraction sparsity in few-shot classification. Second, a Siamese network
and MAML for rapid parameter optimization. In order to is employed to identify known and unknown attacks. Experenhance the incremental learning capability of the model, imental results show that our ResNet-based model achieves
Davide et al. [27] combined RFS optimization with dynamic high detection accuracy with only a small number of attack
thresholds for incremental attack detection. Different from samples.
the optimization-driven methods, Model-driven methods rely
on designing specific network structures or metric learning III. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
mechanisms to measure the similarity between samples in the
feature space, thereby completing few-shot classification with- A. Threat Model and Assumptions
out heavy parameter adjustment. Huang et al. [31] improved Adversary Model. This research focuses on external attacks
the Matching networks by adding a gating mechanism to targeting enterprise networks, excluding insider theft. We aim
classify test samples as either known or unknown categories. at sophisticated attackers using emerging tactics, including
Other works such as [32] and [45] have demonstrated the novel methods and variants of existing ones such as zeroeffectiveness of Matching networks in classifying IoT attack day exploits, and address scenarios with scarce or no attack
traffic. Xu et al. [34] proposed an end-to-end meta-learning samples. Given the prevalence of encrypted networks (e.g.,
framework that uses a feature extraction network F-Net and a SSL/TLS, SSH), we focus on encrypted traffic analysis.
comparison network C-Net to learn prior knowledge. Zheng Instead of examining transmission content, we characterize
et al. [33] proposed RBRN, a flow-based Relation network traffic behavior via packet field distributions and patterns,
for encrypted traffic classification. Liang et al. [35] intro- enabling effective detection of encrypted malicious traffic.
duced OICS-VFSL, which optimizes intra- and inter-class Assumptions. We assume there is no prior knowledge when
structures for microservice intrusion detection. Yang et al. suffering unprecedented attacks in practice. Meanwhile, we
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2433

assume that we already know the range of internal IP addresses can accurately classify attack samples into known classes
within the enterprise, such as 192.168.0.0/16, which means while distinguishing them from unknown attack classes, even
we know whether the IP address comes from internal or with limited labeled data.
external sources. We do not assume that other Internet entities
will carry out additional cooperation, such as the IP blocklist IV. SOFA F RAMEWORK OVERVIEW
provided by the security provider. We assume that we have
 In this section, we depict a high-level workflow of SOFA,
obtained normal traffic from some enterprise services and
 highlighting the essential components of each constituent
a small portion of labeled malicious behavior samples. In
 element, as shown in Fig. 3. SOFA is a two-stage framework
addition, when the server business changes, we assume that the
 for service-oriented attack detection. In Stage 1, traffic is
victim can provide some legitimate traffic samples for model
 segregated by service triplets (<ip, port, protocol>), and
adaptation.
 independent one-class models are trained to learn the benign
 traffic patterns for each triplet respectively. This isolates
B. Design Goals and Problem Definition attack traffic while avoiding cross-service interference. In
 The design goals of SOFA are as follows: First, it should Stage 2, a meta-learning model classifies attacks using limited
be able to discover all open and externally accessible service labeled samples. A Siamese network with feature enhancement
triplets within the enterprise via traffic. Second, it can achieve constructs a discriminative metric space to compare attack
universal detection to check if each service is under attack behaviors. Known attacks are classified by similarity to labeled
through encrypted or non-encrypted traffic, preventing attacks samples, while unknown attacks are identified by deviation
from evading detection via traffic encryption [47]. Third, it can from existing clusters. The output delivers fine-grained threat
accurately identify known attack types using a small number identification with minimal latency.
of labeled samples [34]. Finally, it can identify emerging attack
behaviors like zero-day attacks that have not been disclosed V. D ESIGN D ETAILS OF SOFA
[8]. These capabilities are supported by SOFA’s two-stage
design, and we precisely define the problems in the two stages A. Service Aggregation
below. In this section, we devised a service triplet identification
 Service Aggregation and Anomaly Detection. Let S be approach predicated on a connectivity graph and prunned
the internal services. It can be represented as: the coupled nodes through the computation of an adjacency
 matrix.
 S = {si = (hi , pi , ti ) | hi ∈ H, pi ∈ P, ti ∈ T } (1) Service Graph Construction. When an enterprise provides
Among them, i = {1, · · · , v}, where v denotes the number external services, the normal traffic of the service is continuof service triplets. H represents all IP addresses within the ous. In order to reduce the complexity of graph construction,
enterprise. P represents the business port of the open service the traffic within 24 hours can be randomly sampled [48].
(excluding random port), e.g., 21, 80, 443. T represents the The sampled data can be reorganized into sessions. In order
transmission protocol used by the service. According to the to eliminate the false connection behaviors in benign traffic,
connection relationship of network sessions, we can construct we use two conditions to filter the sampled sessions: the
an adjacency matrix M , where the rows and columns represent number of frames in the session is greater than 3 and the
the communication triplets. Thus, in the traffic screening stage, session is a bidirectional flow. The session index can be
the goal is to design an algorithm F that can map the adja- formalized as a connection relationship in the graph, with
cency matrix M to a set of service triples S, i.e., F(M ) = S. two vertices represented as < srcip, srcport, protocol > and
After finding the S, we use the internal benign traffic to con- < dstip, dstport, protocol >. The edge represents the session
struct a series of one-class classifiers V = {V1 , V2 , · · · , Vv } from the source triplet to the destination triplet. The undirected
for each si ∈ S, so that the classifier can satisfy: graph constructed in this way will show obvious aggregation
 ( characteristics.
 1, if xi ∈ Attack Pruning and Reconstruction. Service triplets are deter-
 Vi (xi ) = (2)
 0, otherwise mined by setting an appropriate degree threshold. In SOFA,
 we empirically set the degree threshold to 2. However, in
where xi represents the feature vector of a session directed to actual networks, not all triplets with a degree greater than 1 are
the service triplet si . service triplets. This is because some clients may use the same
 Identification of Known and Unknown Attacks. Let random port to communicate in different sessions, resulting
K = {K1 , K2 , · · · , Km } be the set of labeled malicious in the degree of the client triplets exceeding 1. In order to
attack classes, where m represents the number of known attack solve the problem of random port coupling, we implement
categories during training. Each class contains no more than edge pruning and edge adding operations. Fig. 4 illustrates
l labeled samples for model training. This few-shot learning the edge deletion and addition process.
task is to design a model M, such that: Fig. 4a describes the communication relationship under
 (
 Kj , if ai ∈ K normal communication conditions. The green dots represent
 M(ai ) = (3) client triples and the yellow dots represent server triples.
 U, if ai ∈
 /K
 Multiple client triples may access the same server triplet.
where ai denotes the test attack sample. U denotes the Fig. 4b illustrates the situation where the client uses the same
unknown attack class. The objective is to ensure that the model random port to access different service triples. Coupled client
2434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 3. The overview of SOFA. It consists of four parts: Service aggregation, one-class model training, fewshot-learning and fine-grained detection.

 within a triplet ni .
 X
 d(ni , ni ) = d(ni , nj ), i 6= j (4)
 j

 As can be seen from the left matrix in Fig. 5, when
 the preset threshold 2 is exceeded, they are all considered
 as service triplets. Consequently, n1 , n3 , n5 , n6 and n8 in
Fig. 4. The process of graph pruning and reconstruction. the matrix are all considered as candidate sets of service
 triplets. However, in practice, n1 and n3 both have coupled
 ports because they use the same random port in different
 sessions. To eliminate this coupling phenomenon, we define
 the following conditions for coupling ports:
 (i) The total degree of the current node is greater than
 threshold, d(ni , ni ) ≥ 2.
 (ii) The current node has the smallest degree among all
 neighboring nodes with communication relationships,
 d(ni , ni ) = minj {d(nj , nj ) | d(ni , nj ) 6= 0}.
 Based on the above conditions, the coupling nodes n1 and
 n3 can be determined. According to the coupling neighbor
Fig. 5. The process of pruning and rebuilding edges for coupling nodes. ni
represents a triplet. The values in the adjacency matrix represent the degrees relationship, the neighbor of node ni can be expressed as
of the vertices. Ni = {nj | d(ni , nj ) 6= 0, i 6= j}. Randomly select a
 neighbor node nk = randomj {nj | nj ∈ Ni } and retain the
 edge e(ni , nk ) with this neighbor. The edges between other
triples can easily be misunderstood as service triples. We need neighbors can be deleted, and a new node can be constructed
to cut off the coupled edges and randomly generate ports by randomizing a port while deleting the edges, with edges
between 49152 and 65535 on the coupled nodes to re-establish added between the new node and the old neighbor. In the
the edges.2 We implement the whole process by establishing figure, n1 is a coupled node. Randomly select the neighbor
an adjacency matrix. Fig. 5 depicts the process of employing n8 as the reserved node, preserve the neighbor relationship
an adjacency matrix to search for service triplets. Herein, ni e(n1 , n8 ), delete the edges with other neighbors e(n1 , n5 ),
represents the triplet, which serves as a vertex in the graph and then generate a new node n11 by adding edges between
and encompasses both the client triplet and the server triplet. n11 and n5 . Repeat the process for n3 , the entire adjacency
Nodes n5 , n6 and n8 denote the actual service triplets, while matrix will be transformed into the matrix on the right side of
other nodes represent client triplets. d(ni , nj ), where i 6= j, the figure. At this point, it can be ascertained that n5 , n6 and
indicates whether a communication relationship exists between n8 are the service triplets we need to search for. The above
triplet ni and triplet nj . The diagonal elements d(ni , ni ) of the method may lead to discrimination errors under the following
adjacency matrix signify the number of connected neighbors two extreme circumstances: a client uses the same random
 port to access multiple inactive3 services; an inactive service
 2 The ports in the range [49152, 65535] are defined as dynamic random 3 In this paper, inactive services refer to those that receive limited user
ports by RFC6335. requests within the sampling period.
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2435

is accessed only once within the sampling period. These two
situations can be alleviated by model updating, as discussed
in Section VII-C.
 Extract Triplets. Graph pruning and reconstruction are
followed by identifying service triplets: if diagonal elements
in the adjacency matrix exceed the preset minimum degree
threshold, they are determined as service triplets. This method
is also applicable to services that use random but controllable
ports (e.g., FTP passive mode). In large enterprises with
hundreds of services, two optimization strategies improve Fig. 6. VAE model based on attention.
efficiency and reduce resource consumption: (i) Parallel training and deployment. Training samples for different services
 features to a hidden space:
are isolated, enabling parallel training across machines. After
training, the VAE model for each service is deployed to h1 = ReLU(W1 x + b1 ) (5)
its corresponding terminal server. For terminals with multiple services, a session routing system using hash mapping An attention mechanism is applied to the hidden representation
links sessions to models for efficient parallel detection. High- h1 :
concurrency services use multiple identical model instances
across servers, with dynamic session distribution via a ser- attn weights = Sigmoid(Wattn h1 + battn ) (6)
vice registration center and load balancing to ensure stable h01 = h1 attn weights (7)
loads. (ii) Model sharing and service clustering. Many service
triplets in large enterprises handle identical business. For The output of the encoder is then passed through the second
such cases, a single VAE model is sufficient for training layer to produce the mean and log variance of the latent space:
purposes. During deployment, multiple triplets can either share
this model at an aggregation center (a dedicated detection µ, log(σ 2 ) = W2 h01 + b2 (8)
server) or utilize copied models on their respective terminals,
thereby reducing server memory consumption. Aggregation (ii) Latent space. The latent space is parameterized by the
can be based on traffic characteristic similarity (e.g., [15], mean µ and the log variance log(σ 2 ). The reparameterization
[49]), identical protocols and ports, or manual configuration by trick is used to sample from the latent space:
administrators. z=µ+σ ,  ∼ N (0, I) (9)

 (iii) Decoder network. The decoder reconstructs the input
B. One-Class Model Training from the latent space:
 Feature Extraction. In this section, we
aggregate all sessions indexed by the 5-tuple h3 = ReLU(W3 z + b3 ) (10)
< srcip, srcport, dstip, dstport, protocol > into the x0 = Sigmoid(W4 h3 + b4 ) (11)
corresponding service triplet buckets. We mainly focus
on two transport protocols, namely TCP and UDP. When (iv) Loss function. The VAE is trained using a loss function
using the UDP transport protocol, some TCP feature items that combines the reconstruction loss, the Kullback-Leibler
in the table will be filled with 0, such as TCP flag features divergence (KLD), and a sparsity penalty:
SYN, ACK, etc. These features characterize the traffic in
 L = LMSE + LKLD + λLsparsity (12)
terms of temporal, volumetric, and header-field distributions
 Xdim
 input
[8]. Specifically, the feature vector roughly consists of three 2
parts: (i) the protocol number; (ii) the count of a series of LMSE = (x0i − xi ) (13)
 i=1
flags from layers 1-4 in three cases (forward, backward,
 Xdim
 latent
and bidirectional), totaling 33/15 (TCP/UDP) dimensions; 1
 exp(log(σi2 )) + µ2i − 1 − log(σi2 )
 
(iii) the 72/36-dimensional statistics of each session in three LKLD = −
 2 i=1
directional situations (i.e., maximum, minimum, mean, and (14)
standard deviation). Generally, all features are of either int or
 Xdim
 latent
float types.
 Lsparsity = |µi | (15)
 Model Architecture. In the training of a one-class model
 i=1
for anomaly detection, we adopt a Variational AutoEncoder
(VAE) architecture based on an attention mechanism. VAE is Anomalies Detection. In this section, we develop some
a probabilistic generative model that learns to compress and outlier identification schemes such as the preset method and
reconstruct input data. The overall architecture of the attention- extreme value theory method.
based VAE model is presented in Fig. 6, which is formally (i) Preset method. We establish a threshold based on the
defined as follows. αth percentile of reconstruction errors for each model. The
 (i) Encoder network. The encoder is composed of two αth percentile, denoted as Qα , is calculated from the set of
fully connected (dense) layers. The first layer maps the input reconstruction errors {ei }, where ei represents the error for
2436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

the i-th training data point. The process is formally defined as
follows:
  
 i
  1X 
 Qα = min ei ∈ {e1 , e2 , . . . , en } | I{ej ≤ei } ≥ α
  nj=1
 
 (16) Fig. 7. The process of feature enhancement. Stack and combine the two
Here, n is the total number of training data points, and I{ej ≤ei } sessions before and after each session into a three channel color image.
is the indicator function which equals 1 if ej ≤ ei and 0
otherwise. Then, anomalies are identified as data points whose the two-variable optimization to a single-variable equation. By
reconstruction error exceeds the predefined threshold T . finding the roots of the equation u(x)v(x) = 1, where
 n Np Np
 1X 1 X 1 1 X
 recon error = (xi − x̂i )2 > T = Qα (17) u(x) = , v(x) = 1 + log (1 + xPi )
 n i=1 Np i=1 1 + xPi Np i=1
where n is the number of features in the data, xi and x̂i are the (21)
i-th features of the input and reconstructed data, respectively. we can retrieve γ̂ and σ̂. Finally, the estimated values γ̂ and σ̂
The choice of α in Equation (16) is affected by the specific can be substituted into Equation (19) to calculate the threshold.
network traffic distribution. When the dataset contains signifi- The advantage of presetting thresholds is that they are
cant noise, a relatively small threshold is recommended, such easy to implement and suitable for environments with relaas α = 0.9. Conversely, for noise-free datasets with distinct tively stable traffic patterns. Many models have verified their
boundaries between different categories, a larger threshold effectiveness [53], [54], [55], [56]. However, their limitation
should be adopted, such as α ∈ [0.95, 0.99]. is that they require manual setting of threshold ratios and
 (ii) Extreme Value Theory [50]. In this section, we employ lack flexibility, especially when facing dynamically changing
the Extreme Value Theory (EVT) to devise a more robust traffic characteristics. The advantage of the EVT method lies
method for identifying outliers, a technique that has also been in its theoretically supported automatic threshold derivation
widely applied in [14] and [51]. The fundamental concept in capability, which is particularly suitable for traffic detection
EVT is the Extreme Value Distributions (EVD). in dynamic network environments. The EVT method is more
 For a random variable X with cumulative distribution suitable for scenarios with complex traffic patterns and sigfunction F (x) = P(X ≤ x), the tail of the distribution is nificant concept drift, and can dynamically adapt thresholds
denoted as F̄ (x) = 1 − F (x) = P(X > x). The EVD has the based on sample distribution.
form:
  1
  C. Few-Shot Learning
 Gγ : x 7→ exp −(1 + γx)− γ , γ ∈ R, 1 + γx > 0 (18)
 Feature Enhancement. The features used in this section
where γ ∈ R denotes the extreme value index, and 1+γx > 0. are different from those used in the earlier training of the VAE
The extreme value index γ determines the shape of the tail and model. Due to the limited sample size, more attention needs
is related to the original distribution of the data. to be paid to the features of byte granularity within small
 The Peaks-Over-Threshold (POT) approach is a key compo- samples. Initially, it is necessary to restructure the session
nent of EVT theory. Based on the Pickands-Balkema-de Haan based on the 5-tuple index. Specifically, we set the number of
theorem (also called second theorem in EVT) [52], the excess packets in each session to M1 = 16 and the number of bytes to
over a threshold t, denoted as X − t, follows a Generalized N1 = 256 in each packet. To elaborate, we parse each pcap file
Pareto Distribution (GPD) with parameters γ and σ. This and extract the first 256 bytes of each packet, starting from the
allows us to estimate the distribution of extreme values and Ethernet header. Random anonymization has been applied to
calculate the threshold zq such that P(X > zq ) < q. The MAC addresses, IP addresses, and port numbers [57]. In fact,
threshold zq can be computed as this feature extraction method remains effective for encrypted
  −γ̂ ! traffic. The byte feature matrix contains key information from
 σ̂ qn IP headers, TCP handshake phases, and certificate exchange
 zq ≃ t + −1 (19)
 γ̂ Np stages (e.g., those in SSH, HTTPS, and RDP protocols),
 enabling it to effectively capture the differences between
where q is the risk parameter, n is the total number of various malicious behaviors [10], [29], [34].
observations, and Np is the number of peaks (observations In N -way K-shot small sample learning scenarios, the
greater than t). To estimate the parameters γ̂ and σ̂ of the value of K is usually relatively small, such as 5, 10, or
GPD, we use the maximum likelihood estimation method. The 15. When dealing with a limited sample size, the presence
likelihood function is given by of noise within the samples can have a severely detrimental
   Np effect on the model. This may lead the model to erroneously
 1 X  γ  learn the characteristics of the noise, thereby resulting in
 log L(γ, σ) = −Np log σ − 1 + log 1 + Pi
 γ i=1 σ inaccurate subsequent recognition. For instance, in widely
 (20) utilized public datasets like CICIDS2017 [58] and Botnet2014
where Pi = Xi − t for Xi > t. To solve this optimization [59], noise occurrences are frequently observed. To mitigate
problem, we can use the Grimshaw’s trick, which reduces the impact of noise on small sample training sets, we employed
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2437

Fig. 8. Siamese network architecture based on ResNet18. The upper right area shows the model training process using sample pairs. The area below shows
the design details of the Siamese network.

feature enhancement techniques to eliminate the influence of ResNet18 as the base model of our Siamese network for the
such noise. The process of feature enhancement is shown in following reasons: (i) Parameter efficiency. Smaller models
Fig. 7. The whole process converts the original 2-dimensional like ResNet18 are less prone to overfitting due to their reduced
grayscale image into a 3-dimensional color image. capacity, which is crucial when the amount of training data is
 For each sample Xi with label yi , we first find other samples limited. (ii) Computational efficiency. With fewer parameters,
from the same service triplet and with the same client IP. If ResNet18 requires less computational power and training time
there are multiple samples, we shuffle the sample order and compared to larger models, making it suitable under conchoose the current node Xi , the previous node Xi−1 , and the strained time and resource availability. (iii) Feature extraction.
next node Xi+1 to jointly form the new feature matrix Xi0 : ResNet18’s residual architecture is adept at learning hierar-
   chical features, which is essential for capturing the nuances
 Xi−1
 within small datasets. The architecture is detailed in Fig. 8.
 Xi0 =  Xi  (22)
 The architecture is designed to learn a metric space where
 Xi+1
 the distance between feature representations corresponds to the
where Xi , Xi−1 , Xi+1 ∈ R1×16×256 . If a session is unique similarity between input samples. The network accepts input
within its service triplet, we replicate the session three times dimensions of 2 × 3 × 16 × 256 for each pair of images. Each
to maintain the three-channel structure. branch of the Siamese network consists of the ResNet18 base
 This results in a new dataset where each sample is rep- model, which includes a series of convolutional layers, batch
resented by three channels of network sessions. It enriches normalization, and ReLU activations. The feature maps are
the feature space and enables the model to learn from the progressively reduced in spatial dimensions while increasing
temporal context of network activity, thereby mitigating the in depth. The output of both branches is a 128-dimensional
impact of noise on small sample training sets. We discuss the vector.
effectiveness of feature enhancement in Section VI-G. The contrastive loss function is employed to train the
 Sample Pairing. In the process of training Siamese net- Siamese network, aiming to minimize the distance between
work to perform network intrusion detection tasks, a key similar pairs and maximize the distance between dissimilar
step is to construct a dataset containing sample pairs. These pairs. The contrastive loss is defined as:
pairs are designed to reflect the similarity or dissimilarity
 L=
between samples, which is fundamental for the network to
 N
learn distinguishing features. This process involves the gen- 1 X
eration of pairs from the dataset X and their corresponding [yi · d(ai , bi )2 + (1 − yi ) · max(0, m − d(ai , bi ))2 ]
 N i=1
labels y, with the aim of enhancing the model’s ability to
 (23)
discern between intra-class and inter-class variations. For a
given class Xi , the intra-class pairs can be expressed as where yi is an indicator function used to indicate whether the
 i
Intra = {(Xj , Xk ) | Xj , Xk ∈ Xi , j 6= k}. The number of sample pair (ai , bi ) is similar or dissimilar. m is the margin
such pairs is given by the binomial coefficient n2i , where
 
 which can help distinguish similar and dissimilar samples
ni is the number of samples. Each pair is assigned 1 to and affects the loss calculation for negative pairs to separate
indicate that they belong to the same class. For two distinct them better in the feature space. d(ai , bi ) is the Euclidean
classes Xi and Xj , the inter-class pairs can be presented as distance between the feature vectors. The loss function is
 ij
Inter = {(Xi1 , Xj1 ) | Xi1 ∈ Xi , Xj1 ∈ Xj }. Each pair is backpropagated through the network to compute the gradients,
labeled as 0 to indicate that they belong to different classes. which are then used by the optimizer to update the weights of
 Siamese Network Architecture. In the realm of deep the network, thereby learning the metric space.
learning, particularly within the confines of small sample This method enables the Siamese network to mine subtle
sizes, the choice of model architecture plays a pivotal role features of the sample space and accurately measure the
in the efficiency and effectiveness of learning. We choose similarity of input pairs.
2438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

D. Fine-Grained Attack Detection function then calculates an adapted threshold τc for each class
 Known Attacks Identification. This section presents a c by incorporating the z-score at the desired confidence level:
  
fine-grained attack detection method based on the Siamese d −1 β
network. It utilizes the feature extraction ability of the τc = µc + z · σc , z = Φ 1− (27)
 2
ResNet-based Siamese network to compute the average feature
representation of each category after training. During infer- where β is the significance level, 0 < β < 1. Φ−1 is the
ence, the feature representation of the test sample is compared inverse of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) [60] of
with the pre-computed category averages via a distance metric the standard normal distribution. The cumulative distribution
to classify it into the proper class. function Φ(x) of the standard normal distribution is:
 Z x
 To enable fine-grained classification, we compute a mean 1 t2

feature vector µc for each class c in the training dataset. These Φ(x) = √ e− 2 dt (28)
 2π −∞
mean vectors serve as reference benchmarks in the feature
space. Given a class c having training samples Sc = {xi | There is no simple analytical expression for Φ−1 . Here we
yi = c}, the mean feature vector is defined as: use Newton-Raphson iteration method [61] to approximate the
 solution. Let y = 1− β2 . The Newton-Raphson iteration method
 1 X is used to solve for the x-value (i.e., z-value) such that Φ(x) =
 µc = f (xi ) (24)
 |Sc | y. The iteration formula is:
 xi ∈Sc
 Φ(xn ) − y
where f (xi ) is the 128-dimensional feature vector extracted xn+1 = xn − (29)
by the Siamese network. |Sc | is the number of samples in class ϕ(xn )
c. During inference, a test sample xtest is assigned to the class x2
 where ϕ(x) = √12π e− 2 is the probability density function of
c∗ with the smallest distance between its feature representation the standardpnormal distribution. The initialization x0 can be
f (xtest ) and the precomputed class means {µc }C c=1 : set as x0 = −2 ln(y). Substituting the approximate solution
 c∗ = arg min d(f (xtest ), µc ) (25) x∗ into the Equation (27), we can obtain the local threshold
 c τc for each category.
 (ii) Global lower bound. Furthermore, an empirically
here d(·, ·) denotes the Euclidean distance. This process
 determined global threshold τc0 is selected to prevent the
ensures that each test sample is classified based on its proxphenomenon of lower thresholds caused by overfitting. We
imity to the reference class means in the feature space.
 will discuss the selection of τc0 in depth in Section VII-B.
 Unknown Attacks Detection. In the context of unknown
 The final threshold for each class is determined by following
attack detection, the goal is to correctly identify known
 equation:
categories while accurately distinguishing unknown attacks
 τc = max(τc , τc0 ) (30)
that are not seen during training. However, the following
challenges arise: (i) Small sample size. The training dataset
contains very few samples, leading to unreliable estimation of VI. E VALUATION
decision boundaries. (ii) Concept drift. The data distribution In this section, we implement the prototype of SOFA
in the test set may differ from the training set, especially and comprehensively evaluate its effectiveness in terms of
in the case of unknown attacks. The EVT theory mentioned supervised evaluation, binary classification anomaly detecabove has lost its advantage under small sample conditions. tion, multi-classification of attacks under few-shot settings,
To address these challenges, we propose a global + local unknown attack detection with various proportions, and ablaadaptive threshold adjustment method. The local threshold tion study.
is set to adapt to the distribution of training samples of the
current category. The global threshold is obtained based on the A. Experiment Setup
distribution of the minimum and maximum threshold intervals
 Testbed. The implementation of our experiments was exeof each category to prevent overfitting.
 cuted on a server running CentOS Linux 7. Our program was
 (i) Local adaptive threshold. The local adaptive threshold
 carried out on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. Python
is set based on the distribution of distances between training
 3.7.12 was selected as the programming language, and the
samples and their corresponding class centers. For each class c,
 PyTorch framework was utilized to enhance the functionality
we need to calculate the mean distance µdc = E[d(f (xi ), µc )]
 and efficiency of our experimental procedures.
and standard deviation σc = σ[d(f (xi ), µc )] to capture the
 Datasets. A series of public datasets are used for evaluation.
distribution characteristics of the distances within the class.
 (i) CICIDS2017 [58] datasets uses a proposed B-Profile
 To mitigate the influence of outliers, we defined lower and
 system to generate the normal traffic, meanwhile, a series of
upper bound as:
 intrusion behaviors are involved, including BruteForce, DDoS,
 lc = µdc − α · σc , uc = µdc + α · σc (26) etc. (ii) USTC-TFC [62] dataset involves network traffic from
 two parts, i.e., 10 types of malware and 10 categories of benign
Distances that satisfy d < lc or d > uc are considered as applications. (iii) CICDOS2017 [63] dataset carries 24 hours
noise samples and are excluded. Using the filtered distances, of network traffic simulated on a testbed of applicationthe mean and standard deviation are recalculated to establish a layer DoS attacks intermixed with attack-free traces. This
more refined measure of central tendency and dispersion. The dataset presents 8 DoS/DDoS application-layer attacks.
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2439

 TABLE II
 R EC AND F1 S CORE OF M ODELS ON CICIDS2017 W ITH F EW S AMPLES

 Metrics. We mainly use Accuracy (ACC), Precision (Pre),
 Recall (Rec), and F1 score because they are the most widely
 used in the literature [12], [49], [69] and [70].

 B. Supervised Evaluation
 To evaluate SOFA’s comprehensive performance, we conducted supervised assessments on two datasets, assuming
 sufficient benign samples but limited attack samples (≤ 15
 per malicious category). To mitigate class imbalance impacts
Fig. 9. Average Rec and F1 score with standard deviation on Botnet2014
 on baseline models, we repeated sampling for classes with
under few samples. fewer samples to minimize overfitting. Results are in Table II
 and Fig. 9, using Recall and F1 to focus on category-wise
 recognition under imbalance. For CICIDS2017 [58], 8 classes
 were selected for comparison with SOTA methods; others
(iv) Botnet2014 [59] dataset was constructed by merging data were excluded due to insufficient samples (e.g., Infiltration) or
traces. In this dataset, botnet and benign data were replayed via mismatched SOTA prerequisites (e.g., Portscan for ET-BERT
TCPReplay and captured by TCPdump as one unified dataset, [12]). Similarly, 14 categories were chosen from Botnet2014
with the overlay method used for this synthesis. It contains 14 [59].
different types of botnets. Due to the presence of substantial As can be seen from Table II, our method performs high
noise in the collection and labeling process of the dataset, we accuracy in all categories of detection, and the Rec and F1 are
referred to reference [64], [65], [66] to perform denoising on close to 100% in most malicious behavior detection, which
the dataset. is significantly better than other methods. The performance
 Baselines. We use 17 models (including supervised, unsu- table includes the standard deviation (in smaller red font)
pervised and few-shot models) as baselines, covering SOTA and the mean. SOFA incorrectly classified a limited number
methods in the traffic analysis landscape. The models are of Botnet attack samples as SqlInjection, thus resulting in
ET-BERT [12], Kitsune [49], FOSS [8], Trident [14], some discrepancies between these two categories. In Fig. 9,
HyperVision [22], FARE [19], FlowPic [67], Whisper [6], we plotted a comparison chart based on the average Rec
I2 RNN [10], TrafficScope [68], few-shot learning method and F1 of each category and the corresponding standard
FC-Net [34], FS-IDS [30], CNN-MAML [25], RFS [27], deviation (std). The purple area represents our method. The
RBRN [33], PBCNN [37] and KNN-Siamese [38]. Tailored closer the covered area is to the entire circle, the better the
to the unique characteristics of diverse models and the specific method performs. It can be seen that our method has achieved
conditions of the datasets at hand, we meticulously designed high Rec and F1 values in almost all categories. Overall,
and executed a comprehensive series of comparative experi- the classification performance of SOFA for known classes is
ments across four distinct datasets. competitive compared to supervised SOTA methods.
 Parameter Settings. The hyperparameter min degree used
to determine the service triplets during graph construction is
set to 2. The hyperparameters used in VAE training are as fol- C. Comparison With Few-Shot Learning Models
lows: lr=1e − 3, batch size=64, input dim=106, epochs=100, We comprehensively compared our method with few-shot
hidden dim=128, latent dim=16, t and q used in Equation (19) learning models in terms of detection accuracy and computaare set to 0.95 and 5e − 2. The hyperparameters used in the tional efficiency, conducting multi-classification experiments
Siamese network training phase are as follows: epochs=30, on the CICIDS2017 [58] and Botnet2014 [59] datasets. With
batch size=10, lr=1e − 4, β = 0.95 used in Equation (27) and sufficient benign training samples but limited attack samples
α in Equation (26) is set to 3. The τc0 in Equation (30) used (5, 10, 15 per category), results are shown in Fig. 10 and
during the evaluation was set to 0.1. Fig. 11, using hyperparameters as in original papers. Notable
2440 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE III
 B INARY C LASSIFICATION A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS

Fig. 10. Test accuracy scores of different FSL models.

 benign traffic in a more fine-grained manner. We build a
Fig. 11. Time overhead of different FSL models. binary classification model based on the benign traffic in
 each triplet. The experimental comparison results of binary
baselines encompass KNN-Siamese [38], which applies KNN classification are shown in Table III. The performance table
to benign traffic, and RBRN [33], which employs data aug- includes the standard deviation (in smaller red font) and
mentation for attack traffic. Episode-based methods [27], [29] the mean. Two attack-related datasets (CICIDS2017 [58] and
sample benign traffic as usual and reuse malicious sam- Botnet2014 [59]) are used for evaluation, and only using their
ples. As shown in Fig. 10a, SOFA achieves 0.9940 ACC in benign traffic to train the baselines and SOFA. The results in
8-way 15-shot scenarios and 0.9577 in 8-way 5-shot cases. In the table show that our method has the best recognition effect
contrast, RFS [27] reaches 0.9348 in 8-way 15-shot but drops on both datasets. The autoencoder used in Trident [14] has
12.55% with 5 samples. SOFA outperforms others by 16.44% deeper layers. However, the recognition effect is far inferior
on average on CICIDS2017 [58] and 14.99% on Botnet2014 to SOFA, which further illustrates the effectiveness of building
[59], owing to its two-stage design. Other methods struggle a model based on service triples.
with sparse benign traffic (easily confused with attacks). KNN-
Siamese [38], despite using KNN for boundary samples, fails
 E. Multi-Classification of Attacks Under Few-Shot Settings
to capture benign traffic distribution due to sparsity.
 We further compared time costs on the CICIDS2017 [58] In the previous supervised and binary classification detecdataset. As shown in Fig. 11, under the 8-way 10-shot setup tion comparison experiments, the main reason why the SOFA
(excluding code-dependent feature extraction), our method’s method performed well is the two-stage processing logic.
training time, which combines VAE training for 31 service In the first stage, benign traffic is excluded through binary
triplets (18,718 samples) and the Siamese network, averages classification. In the second stage, known attack categories
669 seconds (669s) across 10 runs. This exceeds RFS [27] are identified through multi-classification. Benign traffic cat-
(457s) and PBCNN [37] (537s) but is far more efficient than egories are diverse and are likely to be similar to attack in
CNN-MAML [25] (3,049s) and KNN-Siamese [38] (2,916s). some dimensions, resulting in an increase in the recognition
For inference on 73,365 samples, our method leads with 4,192 error rate of SOTA. In order to more deeply demonstrate the
samples/s, outperforming FS-IDS [30] (3,012 samples/s). superiority of our Siamese network, we exclude benign traffic
Module breakdown (Fig. 11b) shows VAE training (162s) is in this section and only use different types of attack traffic
unaffected by N-way K-shot settings, while VAE testing filters for multi-classification experimental comparison. The entire
73,365 samples in 1.6s. Pair construction takes about 20s; experiment was conducted on four data sets. Each method was
FSL training varies by shot (155s for 8-way 5-shot, 521s for compared in multi-classification detection when the training
8-way 10-shot, 1,043s for 8-way 15-shot), and FSL testing sample size was 5, 10, and 15 for each class, respectively.
takes about 16s for 34,334 samples. FSL training is the most The comparative experimental results are shown in Fig. 13.
time-consuming, a common trait of Siamese architectures. The figures are drawn based on the average and standard
Despite partitioning data into multiple service models, VAE deviation of multiple experiments of the overall test ACC of
training remains efficient, with each model achieving high all categories.
accuracy in 100 epochs. As can be seen from Fig. 13, SOFA is the best on all
 four datasets. On the CICIDS2017 [58] dataset, the malicious
 behavior features vary greatly, and SOFA can achieve 99.99%
D. Binary Classification Anomaly Detection ACC. Other methods have also achieved good recognition
 Then, we evaluate the binary classification anomaly detec- results, such as ET-BERT [12]. SOFA performs better when
tion methods. Since these methods only distinguish between the types of malicious attack behaviors exhibit high similarity.
“benign” and “attack”, we only use the one-class model mod- For example, on the Botnet2014 [59] dataset, the average
ule in Section V-B for the binary classification experiments. recognition accuracy is improved by 10.9% compared to
The biggest advantage of our method is that it can group the second-best model, and on the other two datasets, it
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2441

Fig. 12. Comparative analysis of test accuracy on four datasets when using 10 samples per class as the training set.

 each setting, and the categories used for meta-training were
 randomly re-selected each time to ensure sufficient robustness.
 The comparative experimental results are shown in Fig. 14.
 As can be seen from the figure, SOFA has the best ACC for
 unknown category recognition under any ratio condition. We
 marked the average ACC above the bar. As can be seen from
 subfigure (a), SOFA’s test ACC is not affected by the ratio
 at all on the CICIDS2017 [58] dataset, which actually shows
 that each attack behavior on the CICIDS2017 [58] dataset has
 obvious features. On other datasets, as the ratio of known and
 unknown categories increases, the test ACC decreases slightly.
 This is determined by the similarity of attack category samples.
 When similar attack types appear in unknown categories, it is
 easy to cause an increase in the recognition error rate. The
Fig. 13. Comparison of test ACC. The red dashed line —represents the mean ACC is highly related to the threshold set for each category.
accuracy of the optimal model, and the blue dashed line –––represents the We will discuss in depth how to set the threshold to enhance
suboptimal one. the ACC in Section VII-B.

is improved by 7.9% and 9.58% respectively. It is worth
noting that our method is more effective when the sample G. Ablation Study
size is smaller. To further explore the recognition accuracy of
different models on each category of the dataset, we drew box Threshold Ablation. In Section V-B, we proposed two
plots using the test ACC scores from the recognition results on anomaly detection methods based on the VAE one-class
the four datasets, where each box represents the interquartile model. In Equation (16), the preset threshold method requires
range (IQR) between the 25th and 75th percentiles, the line the quantile α to be set in advance. In Equation (19), the
inside denotes the median (50th percentile). Fig. 12 shows EVT theory requires the initial threshold t and risk parameter
the recognition accuracy of different models on each category q to be set in advance. In this section, we conduct an ablation
when 10 samples are extracted from each class for training. study on the sensitivity of these parameters respectively. The
It can be clearly seen from the figure that although the experimental results are shown in Fig. 15 and 16. In Fig. 15,
recognition performance of SOFA has slightly decreased in the horizontal axis represents the preset t value t ∈ [0.90, 0.99]
some categories, the overall recognition effect is still the best. (here t represents α in Equation (16)), and the vertical axis
 represents the average ACC of all categories. The red line with
 standard deviation in the figure represents the impact of EVT
F. Unknown Detection With Various Proportions on test ACC under different t values. The green line represents
 In this section, we evaluate the capability of SOFA by vary- the preset threshold method. From the results on the two
ing Nk :Nu (representing the number of known and unknown datasets, we can see that the EVT method has good robustness
attack classes). For CICIDS2017 [58] dataset, we set Nk :Nu = to t. As t becomes smaller, the ACC decreases slightly. On the
{7:0, 6:1, 5:2, 4:3, 3:4, 2:5, 1:6}. We set Nk :Nu = {13:0, 11:2, CICIDS2017 [58] dataset, when t changes from 0.99 to 0.90,
9:4, 7:6, 5:8, 3:10} for Botnet2014 [59] dataset. For dataset the ACC decreases by about 0.0294; on the Botnet2014 [59]
USTC-TFC [62], we set the known and unknown ratios Nk :Nu dataset, the ACC decreases by about 0.0163. Compared with
to {10:0, 8:2, 6:4, 4:6, 2:8}, while for the CICDOS2017 the preset threshold method (green line), EVT is less sensitive
[63] dataset, we set them as {8:0, 7:1, 6:2, 4:4, 2:6}. The to t. In order to test the sensitivity of the EVT method to the
experiment sets the number of samples in each category two parameters t and q, we conducted accuracy tests under
used for meta-training to 15. When experimenting on each different t (t ∈ [0.90, 0.99]) and q (q ∈ [0.01, 0.09]), as shown
dataset, the categories used for meta-training were randomly in Fig. 16. When t is fixed (for example, t = 0.95), different q
selected. For example, when Nk : Nu = 6 : 1, We randomly has little effect on the ACC, and the maximum ACC decreases
selected 6 categories out of 7 with 15 samples per category by 0.0021. In general, the EVT method has certain robustness
for meta-training and used the remaining data from all 7 to the two parameters t and q, and is more stable than the
categories for testing. 10 experiments were conducted under preset threshold method.
2442 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 14. Evaluation at varying Nk :Nu ratios. Shown is the test ACC after training on 15 samples of each category.

Fig. 15. Sensitivity of threshold t for EVT and preset method.

 Fig. 18. Evaluation results of Siamese network on CICDOS2017 dataset.

 increases with ACC dropping by only 4.89% when p rises
 from 0 to 0.25 compared to a 14.13% decrease in the General
 method. On the Botnet2014 [59] dataset, due to inherent noise
Fig. 16. Sensitivity of risk parameter q and threshold t.
 in dataset, SOFA achieves an average ACC of 9.52% higher
 than the General method without obfuscation and retains an
 identification ACC of 0.8636 at p = 0.25 versus 0.7497 for
 the General method. Overall, the feature enhancement method
 effectively suppresses obfuscation attacks with an average
 9.62% improvement in detection accuracy across both datasets.

Fig. 17. Ablation study on feature enhancement. VII. D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS
 A. Deep Insights Into Feature Space
 Feature Enhancement Ablation. In Section V-C, in order The Siamese network effectively learns a metric space,
to reduce the impact of noise on few-shot learning, we reducing intra-class sample distances while expanding interadopted a feature enhancement method, that is, mapping the class ones. Visualizations on the CICDOS2017 [63] dataset
features of the current sample and its neighbors (with the same illustrate this. Fig. 18a and Fig. 18b show model-fitted results
client IP and from the same service triplet) to itself. This using 15 and 30 training samples respectively via t-SNE,
approach was also used in the testing process. To illustrate with black dots representing training samples and colored
the effectiveness of this feature enhancement method, we dots denoting test samples. Small sample distribution critically
conducted an ablation experiment. On the CICIDS2017 [58] impacts accuracy. When the samples used for training are
and Botnet2014 [59] datasets, we used feature enhancement representative (e.g., Rudy attack), the accuracy is close to
technology and general methods to test the impact of the 100% with 15 samples. However, overly concentrated dis-
Siamese network on fine-grained malicious behavior detection. tributions limit decision boundaries, causing misclassification
We refer to the obfuscation evasion attack proposed in [6] for test samples with concept drift (e.g., Slowheaders in
and [22] and simulate attackers injecting benign traffic into Fig. 18a). Increasing samples to 30 improves recognition of
various categories of malicious attack traffic at different ratios previously poorly performing classes like Slowheaders and
p ∈ [0, 0.25]. Ten experiments with different obfuscation ratios Slowreads (see Fig. 18b), as more samples better cover the
were conducted on two datasets to test the noise suppression data distribution range.
capability of feature enhancement methods. Specifically, for
a malicious category ci with ni samples, we locate the B. Deep Insights in Unknown Attack Identification
service triplet targeted by attack traffic, randomly sample
ki = ni × pp = 0, 0.05, · · · , 0.25 benign samples from this This section highlights the effectiveness of the adaptive
triplet, and mix them into the malicious category before model thresholding method with a global lower bound (Equation
training and testing. As shown in Fig. 17, the horizontal axis (30)) and its limitations. The global lower bound τc0 must
represents the ratios of injected benign samples while the lie within each class’s threshold interval Ici = [τcmin
 i
 , τcmax
 i
 ],
 min
vertical axis shows the overall average ACC of the Siamese where τci = µci and the maximum threshold is calculated
network detection. On the CICIDS2017 [58] dataset, the SOFA as:
 1
method maintains remarkable stability as the obfuscation ratio τcmax = min d(µci , µcj ) (31)
 i
 2 j6=i
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2443

 Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that the real-time
 performance optimization in practical deployment [71], [72] is
 orthogonal to the core design of our SOFA framework, which
 allows for flexible integration with high-performance dataplane technologies (e.g., combining with Intel DPDK [6], [22],
 [68]) to enhance throughput and reduce latency in high-traffic
 scenarios. The service-oriented traffic segregation in its first
 stage inherently supports parallel processing, and the inference
Fig. 19. Relationship between threshold and test ACC. logic of the second-stage Siamese network can be converted
 into lightweight decision rules [73]. These deployment optimizations can be tailored to specific hardware environments to
 meet line-speed requirements while preserving the algorithm’s
 advantages in detection accuracy.

 D. Limitations and Future Work
 Our work has a few limitations. First, our method did
Fig. 20. Probability density distribution of distances from test samples to the not adopt a parallel strategy when training one-class models
center of known classes, where the green region denotes unknown classes and
the red one represents known classes.
 in the first stage. If the enterprise network is large enough
 and has many open services, model training and testing can
 be run on multiple machines in parallel. Second, although
We empirically set τc0 = 0.1, which balances accuracy for threshold-based anomaly detection is flexible in practice, it
both known and unknown categories on the CICDOS2017 is not accurate enough. In the case of insufficient sample size,
[63] dataset. As shown in Fig. 19, lower thresholds favor an adaptive threshold calculation method based on unlabeled
unknown category detection, while higher ones benefit known data can be considered [74].
categories, but 0.1 achieves optimal overall performance.
Experiments on two datasets further validate this. For
 VIII. C ONCLUSION
CICIDS2017 [58] (with DDoS as unknown), the threshold
calculated in Equation (30) achieves over 95% accuracy, as In this paper, we present SOFA, a novel two-stage framedistinct malicious features allow robust detection within [0.1, work designed to address the challenges of fine-grained
0.5]. For CICDOS2017 [63] (with Hulk and Slowloris as unknown attack detection under the constraints of class imbalunknown), overlapping features with Goldeneyes limit accu- ance and limited labeled attack samples. By introducing
racy to about 85%, even with optimized thresholds, indicating service triplet-based aggregation and combining one-class
the need for supplementary strategies (e.g., temporal patterns, learning with meta-learning principles, SOFA achieves presemi-supervised learning) in such cases. In summary, the com- cise detection of both known and unknown attacks. Key
bined local-global thresholding works well for small samples contributions include the identification of service triplets
but requires more samples to optimize thresholds for complex through graph-based aggregation, the design of Variational
datasets with overlapping attack features. AutoEncoders for service-specific anomaly detection, and the
 utilization of a ResNet-based Siamese network for fine-grained
 classification and unknown attack identification. Through
C. Model Deployment and Update extensive experiments on four widely-used network intru-
 Two issues need to be addressed when deploying and sion detection datasets, SOFA demonstrated state-of-the-art
using the model: (i) Handling unknown service triplets. SOFA performance, significantly outperforming a diverse set of baseincorporates a regular automatic update mechanism: the ser- lines across both binary and multi-class classification tasks.
vice aggregation module runs periodically to identify service Notably, the framework excelled in handling dynamic, highly
triplets requiring updates. For instance, when an enterprise imbalanced threat environments and showed effectiveness in
launches a new external service, a large volume of related detecting emerging and unknown attack behaviors.
traffic is generated. The module then verifies the service’s
legitimacy. If confirmed as a normal internal service triplet, R EFERENCES
its traffic is collected to train and update the VAE one-
 [1] B. Nour, M. Pourzandi, and M. Debbabi, “A survey on threat hunting
class model, leaving other models unchanged. Any external in enterprise networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol. 25, no. 4,
attempts to access the enterprise’s illegal service triplets are pp. 2299–2324, 4th Quart., 2023.
recorded as attacks. (ii) Updating existing service triplets. [2] Z. Zhao et al., “CMD: Co-analyzed IoT malware detection and forensics
SOFA employs a back-to-front reverse strategy: if continuous via network and hardware domains,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
 vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 5589–5603, May 2024.
unknown attack behaviors are detected in the Siamese network [3] Z. Zhao et al., “ERNN: Error-resilient RNN for encrypted trafphase, the system attributes this to potential errors in the VAE fic detection towards network-induced phenomena,” IEEE Trans.
detection phase. It conducts retrospective analysis on these Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 3, 2023, doi: 10.1109/
 TDSC.2023.3242134.
unknown traffic categories to identify which service triplet has [4] A. Saha, N. Ganguly, S. Chakraborty, and A. De, “Learning network
undergone business updates, then recollects traffic for model traffic dynamics using temporal point process,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
update training. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), Apr. 2019, pp. 1927–1935.
2444 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

[5] F. Xu, Y. Li, H. Wang, P. Zhang, and D. Jin, “Understanding [27] D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, P. Voria, M. De Ieso, and
 mobile traffic patterns of large scale cellular towers in urban A. Pescapè, “Few-shot class-incremental learning for network intrusion
 environment,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 1147–1161, detection systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 6736–6757,
 Apr. 2017. 2024.
[6] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic [28] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot classdetection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. incremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE
 Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446. Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024.
[7] H. Li, H. Hu, G. Gu, G.-J. Ahn, and F. Zhang, “VNIDS: Towards [29] Y. Chai, L. Du, J. Qiu, L. Yin, and Z. Tian, “Dynamic prototype network
 elastic security with safe and efficient virtualization of network intrusion based on sample adaptation for few-shot malware detection,” IEEE
 detection systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4754–4766, May 2023.
 Secur. (CCS), Oct. 2018, pp. 17–34. [30] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework
[8] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detec- for intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput. Secur.,
 tion against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate vol. 122, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 102899.
 traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, [31] S. Huang et al., “A gated few-shot learning model for anomaly
 Oct. 2024. detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2020,
[9] P. Jiang et al., “Building IN-THE-CLOUD network functions: Security pp. 505–509.
 and privacy challenges,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 12, pp. 1888–1919, [32] D. D. Monda, G. Bovenzi, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè, “IoT
 Dec. 2021. botnet-traffic classification using few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
[10] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recur- Conf. Big Data (BigData), Dec. 2023, pp. 3284–3293.
 rent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. [33] W. Zheng, C. Gou, L. Yan, and S. Mo, “Learning to classify: A flow-
 Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ based relation network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. Web
 TDSC.2023.3245411. Conf., Apr. 2020, pp. 13–22.
[11] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for [34] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Foren-
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. sics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.
[12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, and G. Gou, “ET-BERT: A contextualized data- [35] W. Liang, Y. Hu, X. Zhou, Y. Pan, and K. I. Wang, “Variational
 gram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic few-shot learning for microservice-oriented intrusion detection in disclassification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642. tributed industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 18, no. 8,
[13] X. Shu, D. Yao, and N. Ramakrishnan, “Unearthing stealthy program pp. 5087–5095, Aug. 2022.
 attacks buried in extremely long execution paths,” in Proc. 22nd ACM [36] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid
 SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Oct. 2015, pp. 401–413. of the unseen: A Siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic
[14] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer- discovery,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2020,
 sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic pp. 1–7.
 detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619. [37] L. Yu et al., “PBCNN: Packet bytes-based convolutional neural network
 for network intrusion detection,” Comput. Netw., vol. 194, Jul. 2021,
[15] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional
 Art. no. 108117.
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage
 [38] M. Pawlicki, R. Kozik, and M. Choraś, “Improving Siamese neural
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion
 networks with border extraction sampling for the use in real-time
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553,
 network intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.
 2021.
 (IJCNN), Jun. 2023, pp. 1–8.
[16] A. Thakkar and R. Lohiya, “Attack classification of imbalanced intru-
 [39] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-agnostic meta-learning for
 sion data for IoT network using ensemble-learning-based deep neural
 fast adaptation of deep networks,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn.,
 network,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 13, pp. 11888–11895,
 vol. 70, Aug. 2017, pp. 1126–1135.
 Jul. 2023.
 [40] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, D. Krishnan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and P. Isola,
[17] N. V. Chawla, K. W. Bowyer, L. O. Hall, and W. P. Kegelmeyer,
 “Rethinking few-shot image classification: A good embedding is all you
 “SMOTE: Synthetic minority over-sampling technique,” J. Artif. Intell.
 need?,” in Proc. ECCV, 2020, pp. 266–282.
 Res., vol. 16, pp. 321–357, Jun. 2002.
 [41] J. Wang and Y. Zhai, “Prototypical Siamese networks for few-shot
[18] A. Fernandez, S. Garcia, F. Herrera, and N. V. Chawla, “SMOTE for learning,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Electron. Inf. Emergency
 learning from imbalanced data: Progress and challenges, marking the Commun. (ICEIEC), Jul. 2020, pp. 178–181.
 15-year anniversary,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 61, pp. 863–905, Apr. [42] O. Vinyals, C. Blundell, T. Lillicrap, K. Kavukcuoglu, and D. Wierstra,
 2018. “Matching networks for one shot learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 29,
[19] J. Liang, W. Guo, T. Luo, V. Honavar, G. Wang, and X. Xing, “FARE: 2016, pp. 3637–3645.
 Enabling fine-grained attack categorization under low-quality labeled [43] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. S. Torr, and
 data,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 1–18. T. M. Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot
[20] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, W. Li, W. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Unknown attack traffic learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
 classification in SCADA network using heuristic clustering technique,” 2018, pp. 1199–1208.
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2625–2638, Sep. [44] L. Bertinetto, J. Valmadre, J. F. Henriques, A. Vedaldi, and P. H. S. Torr,
 2023. “Fully-convolutional Siamese networks for object tracking,” in Proc.
[21] G. Münz, S. Li, and G. Carle, “Traffic anomaly detection using k-means ECCV Workshops. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2016, pp. 850–865.
 clustering,” in Proc. GI/ITG Workshop MMBNet, 2007, vol. 7, no. 9, [45] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
 pp. 1–8. “Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learning,”
[22] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 83, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103762.
 in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. [46] H. Hindy, C. Tachtatzis, R. Atkinson, E. Bayne, and X. Bellekens,
 Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18. “Developing a Siamese network for intrusion detection systems,”
[23] M. Kim, W. Jang, J. Hur, and M. Yoon, “Relative frequency-rank in Proc. 1st Workshop Mach. Learn. Syst. (EuroMLSys), 2021,
 encoding for unsupervised network anomaly detection,” IEEE/ACM pp. 120–126.
 Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 3453–3467, Aug. 2024. [47] K. Thomas et al., “Data breaches, phishing, or malware?: Understanding
[24] M. T. R. Laskar et al., “Extending isolation forest for anomaly detection the risks of stolen credentials,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
 in big data via K-means,” ACM Trans. Cyber-Phys. Syst., vol. 5, no. 4, Commun. Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 1421–1434.
 pp. 1–26, Oct. 2021. [48] T. Jirsik and P. Velan, “Host behavior in computer network: One-year
[25] C. Lu, X. Wang, A. Yang, Y. Liu, and Z. Dong, “A few-shot- study,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 822–838,
 based model-agnostic meta-learning for intrusion detection in security Mar. 2021.
 of Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24, [49] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An
 pp. 21309–21321, Dec. 2023. ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in
[26] T. Wang, Q. Lv, B. Hu, and D. Sun, “A few-shot class-incremental Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
 learning approach for intrusion detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. [50] J. Beirlant, Y. Goegebeur, J. Segers, and J. L. Teugels, Statistics of
 Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), Jul. 2021, pp. 1–8. Extremes: Theory and Applications. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2006.
FANG et al.: SOFA: SERVICE-ORIENTED FINE-GRAINED ATTACK TRAFFIC DETECTION WITH META LEARNING 2445

[51] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detec- Peng Fang received the M.S. degree from the School
 tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD of Computer Science and Technology, University of
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075. Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China. He
[52] J. Pickands III, “Statistical inference using extreme order statistics,” Ann. is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Zhejiang
 Statist., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Jan. 1975. University, Hangzhou, China. His main research
[53] D. Meng and H. Chen, “MagNet: A two-pronged defense against interests include encrypted traffic analysis, threat
 adversarial examples,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. detection, and deep learning.
 Secur., Oct. 2017, pp. 135–147.
[54] W. Xu, D. Evans, and Y. Qi, “Feature squeezing: Detecting adversarial
 examples in deep neural networks,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.
 Symp., 2018, pp. 1–15.
[55] Y. Yang, R. Gao, Y. Li, Q. Lai, and Q. Xu, “What you see is not
 what the network infers: Detecting adversarial examples based on
 semantic contradiction,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2022,
 pp. 1–20.
[56] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, T. Li, Z. Song, F. Zhang, and R. Zhang, “Poster: Feiyang Huang received the B.S. degree from the
 Detecting adversarial examples hidden under watermark perturbation School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan
 via usable information theory,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. University, Chengdu, China. He is currently a Grad-
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023, pp. 3636–3638. uate Student with Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
[57] D. Arp et al., “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” China. His main research interests include encrypted
 in Proc. USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 3971–3988. traffic analysis and deep learning.
[58] Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. (2018).Intrusion Detection Evaluation Dataset (CICIDS2017). Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity.
 Accessed: Nov. 27, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/
 datasets/ids-2017.html
[59] E. Biglar Beigi, H. Hadian Jazi, N. Stakhanova, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Towards effective feature selection in machine learning-based botnet
 detection approaches,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., Oct.
 2014, pp. 247–255.
[60] E. W. Weisstein. Cumulative Distribution Function. Accessed: Ziming Zhao (Member, IEEE) is a ZJU 100 Young
 Jul. 12, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://mathworld.wolfram.com/ Professor with the School of Software Technology,
 CumulativeDistributionFunction.html Zhejiang University, China. He has published more
[61] T. J. Ypma, “Historical development of the Newton–Raphson method,” than 40 papers in international journals and con-
 SIAM Rev., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 531–551, Dec. 1995. ference proceedings, including IEEE J OURNAL ON
[62] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic S ELECTED A REAS IN C OMMUNICATIONS, Mobiclassification using convolutional neural network for representation Com, SIGCOMM, WWW, INFOCOM, KDD, CCS,
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam, RTSS, IJCAI, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S OFT-
 Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717. WARE E NGINEERING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
[63] H. H. Jazi, H. Gonzalez, N. Stakhanova, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Detecting M OBILE C OMPUTING, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 HTTP-based application layer DoS attacks on web servers in the C OMPUTER -A IDED D ESIGN OF I NTEGRATED C IR -
 presence of sampling,” Comput. Netw., vol. 121, pp. 25–36,Jul. 2017. CUITS AND S YSTEMS , IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING ,
[64] L. Liu, G. Engelen, T. Lynar, D. Essam, and W. Joosen, “Error IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS AND S ECURITY,
 prevalence in NIDS datasets: A case study on CIC-IDS-2017 and CSE- IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, COSE,
 CIC-IDS-2018,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur. (CNS), Oct. DATE, ESE, and AAAI. His research interests include machine learning,
 2022, pp. 254–262. traffic identification, network security, and mobile computing.
[65] G. Engelen, V. Rimmer, and W. Joosen, “Troubleshooting an intrusion
 detection dataset: The CICIDS2017 case study,” in Proc. IEEE Secur.
 Privacy Workshops (SPW), May 2021, pp. 7–12.
[66] A. Rosay, F. Carlier, E. Cheval, and P. Leroux, “From CIC-IDS2017
 to LYCOS-IDS2017: A corrected dataset for better performance,”
 in Proc. IEEE/WIC/ACM Int. Conf. Web Intell., Dec. 2021,
 pp. 570–575. Fan Zhang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
[67] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting degree from the Department of Computer Science
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., and Engineering, University of Connecticut, CT,
 2020, pp. 1–18. USA, in 2011. He is currently a Full Professor with
[68] Z. Zhao et al., “Towards context-aware traffic classification via time- the College of Computer Science and Technology,
 wavelet fusion network,” in Proc. 31st ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. His research
 Discovery Data Mining, Jul. 2025, pp. 2089–2100. interests include system security, hardware security,
[69] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions network security, cryptography, and computer archiin automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. tecture.
 Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3366–3383.
[70] R. Tang et al., “ZeroWall: Detecting zero-day web attacks through
 encoder–decoder recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 - IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 2479–2488.
[71] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, F. Zhang, and B. Chen, “RIDS: Towards
 advanced IDS via RNN model and programmable switches co-designed
 approaches,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. (INFOCOM), May
 2024, pp. 591–600. Wenrui Ma was born in 1985. She received the
[72] Z. Zhao et al., “Verify all traffic: Towards zero-trust in-network intrusion Ph.D. degree in computer science from Florida
 detection against multipath routing,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., International University in 2018. She is currently
 vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2155–2171, Jun. 2025. an Assistant Professor with the School of Com-
[73] Z. Zhao, Z. Liu, H. Chen, F. Zhang, Z. Song, and Z. Li, “Effective puter Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang
 DDoS mitigation via ML-driven in-network traffic shaping,” IEEE University. Her research interests include high
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 4271–4289, performance network architecture and network secu-
 Jul. 2024. rity.
[74] Y. Wang et al., “FreeMatch: Self-adaptive thresholding for semisupervised learning,” 2022, arXiv:2205.07246.