6524 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 Sparse Gaussian–Markov Modeling for Robust and
 Trustworthy Unknown Cyber Defense
 Chao Zha , Tian Liu, Chungang Lin , Bing Bai , and Ruyun Zhang

 Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) are Index Terms—Unknown attacks, out-of-distribution, intrusion
essential for enhancing network security by detecting and detection, GMRF, sparsification, real time.
responding to attacks promptly. NIDS based on artificial
intelligence (AI) offer better adaptability to unknown (out-ofdistribution (OOD)) attacks compared to traditional anomaly I. I NTRODUCTION
detection methods. However, many existing AI-based NIDS
directly adopt methods from other domains without adequately
considering OOD data, which often leads to severe overfitting in trained classifiers and insufficient model reliability and
 T HE rapid development of the Internet has led to an explosion of cyber attacks, resulting in significant information
 and financial losses in critical sectors such as national defense,
robustness. This issue largely arises because most approaches power grids, transportation and healthcare systems. In this
focus solely on the relationship between individual features and context, NIDS have become essential components to ensure
predictions while neglecting the interactions among features, the security of modern information infrastructures. Traditional
resulting in overfitting and overconfident predictions. Moreover,
the retention of certain weak parameters may cause the model IDS approaches, which are based mainly on predefined rules
to maintain artificially high confidence when confronted with and signatures, such as deep packet inspection [1], [2], [3],
OOD data. To address this, we propose a Gaussian Markov [4], [5], tend to be ineffective against previously unseen threats
Random Field that better captures traffic data distribution and [6], [7]. As a result, recent research efforts have increasingly
feature correlations. Furthermore, our GMRF-based classifica- shifted toward AI-driven paradigms for intrusion detection [8],
tion model uses sparsification with regularization L0 to remove [9], [10], [11].
weak parameters. L0 regularization counts the number of nonzero parameters and penalizes model complexity, thereby forcing
insignificant weights to become exactly zero and improving A. Existing AI-Based Work
generalization. This prevents high prediction probabilities for
unknown attacks and effectively distinguishes them from benign As AI technologies continue to achieve remarkable success
traffic. Finally, we evaluated our method in the CICIDS-2017 in various domains [12], [13], [14], their empowering role
and CSE-CICIDS-2018 datasets, achieving recall rates of 57% in intrusion detection has become increasingly prominent.
and 77% for unknown attacks while maintaining a recall of Compared to traditional methods, AI-based approaches offer a
more than 95% for known traffic. Our approach significantly
outperforms existing SOTA methods, and performance tests on
 distinct advantage in identifying unknown threats - those that
a low-specification machine show a low detection latency of lie beyond the distribution of in-distribution (ID) data [9], [15],
approximately 130 microseconds, making it suitable for real-time [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26],
applications. [27], [28], [29]. These emerging attack types often masquerade
 as normal traffic, evading detection by intrusion detection
 models, and thereby achieving malicious objectives. Existing
 Received 2 September 2025; revised 29 December 2025; accepted 23 Febru- research on detecting such unknown threats falls mainly into
ary 2026. Date of publication 27 February 2026; date of current version the following categories:
5 March 2026. This work is supported by the National Key Research 1) Unsupervised or Semi-Supervised Methods: In recent
and Development Program of China (No. 2022YFB2900102) and the
Key Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province (No. years, some researchers have explored reconstruction-based
2024SSYS0001). The associate editor coordinating the review of this article approaches to identify unknown threats [10], [15], [16], [17],
and approving it for publication was G. Han. (Corresponding author: Ruyun [18]. These methods can be broadly categorized into two types.
Zhang.)
 Chao Zha is with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy
 The first involves encoding ID data, often combined with
of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, also with the University of Chinese a classification head to optimize classification performance
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China, and also with the Research Cen- and extract semantic representations of ID samples. This is
ter for High Efficiency Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, followed by a reconstruction phase using a decoder. The
Zhejiang 311121, China (e-mail: zhachao21@mails.ucas.ac.cn).
 Tian Liu is with the Institute of Agricultural Equipment, Zhejiang Academy second type trains directly an encoder-decoder framework to
of Agricultural Sciences, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310021, China (e-mail: reconstruct ID data. In both cases, the detection of unknown
liutian@zaas.ac.cn). threats is based on the reconstruction error: since out-of-
 Chungang Lin is with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China, and also with the Uni- distribution (OOD) samples are not involved in training, they
versity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: typically exhibit higher reconstruction errors compared to ID
linchungang22s@ict.ac.cn). samples.
 Bing Bai and Ruyun Zhang are with the Research Center for High Effi- Although this approach has achieved notable success in
ciency Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 311121,
China (e-mail: baibing@zhejianglab.org; zcor2021@gmail.com). other domains, its direct application to the security domain
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2026.3668824 remains limited due to domain-specific challenges. First, the
 2332-7731 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6525

data used for training in this context often consists of highly tests show an average of about 130 microseconds, highlighting
sparse network flow features. This sparsity significantly under- its real-time capability.
mines the effectiveness of cosine similarity (as we demonstrate In summary, our contributions to this article are as
in Appendix A), which is commonly used as both an optimiza- follows:
tion objective and a detection metric. Second, due to the high • We propose a novel approach using a pre-trained GMRF
similarity between benign and malicious flows, and the lack model for fine-grained classification of known data,
of genuine negative (malicious) samples during reconstruction which captures feature interactions to reduce overfitting
training, the reconstruction-based mechanism often struggles and enhance robustness, improving detection of unseen
to distinguish unknown threats effectively. attacks.
 2) Supervised Methods: This category of methods uses • We introduce a L0 regularized parameter sparsification
traditional machine learning (ML) algorithms, such as deci- method built on a pre-trained GMRF model. Reduces
sion trees, random forests, and support vector machines, as reliance on weakly correlated features while preserving
well as deep learning models, including multilayer percep- accuracy, further enhancing robustness in distinguishing
trons (MLPs), auto-encoders, stacked encoders, graph neural unknown attacks through the prediction distribution.
networks, and transformers, to build intrusion classification • We evaluated our approach in the CICIDS-2017 and CSEmodels using ID data [5], [20], [22], [24], [25], [30], [31], CICIDS-2018 datasets, achieving recall rates of 57%
[32], [33], [34]. In addition, strategies such as contrastive and 77% for unknown attacks and more than 95% for
learning and transfer learning have also been applied to NIDS known traffic, surpassing several SOTA methods. On
research [21], [35], [36]. Despite their success in classifying low-spec hardware, the detection latency is around 130
known threats, these methods face two major limitations when microseconds, confirming real-time applicability.
encountering unknown threats.
 Firstly, existing machine learning applications in NIDS The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Secoften adopt standard algorithms directly without incorpo- tion II introduces the background of GMRF. Section III
rating the specific context of cybersecurity. That is, they presents the detailed designs of our method. In Section IV
typically overlook the joint effects among features, the seman- and Section V, we describe the implementation of GMRF
tic relationships between attributes, and their associations and sparsification, respectively. In Section VI, we experimenwith different types of attacks. This can lead to a high tally evaluate the performance. Section VII reviews related
risk of overfitting during training. Secondly, since models work. Section VIII discusses our proposed method and further
are trained solely on ID data, they tend to learn superfi- explores some potential future work directions. Finally, we
cial patterns of known traffic. Meanwhile, unknown threats conclude this paper in Section IX.
are often designed to closely mimic benign traffic [15],
[26], [37]. Although they fall outside the training distribu- II. BACKGROUND
tion (i.e., they are OOD), they can still evade detection by
these classifiers, further exacerbating the overfitting issue and In this section, we detail the theoretical foundations of the
undermining the model’s ability to generalize to novel attack Gaussian Markov Random Field [38], [39] to better address
types. the two challenges we face:
 • We should consider the effect of feature interactions on
B. Our Work intrusion detection predictions.
 Our research is based on supervised learning methods and • We need to minimize the impact of weakly correlated
proposes a novel intrusion detection system, named ZeroXpert, features on the prediction results.
which is specifically designed to enhance model reliability GMRF is a probabilistic graphical model that is used to
while mitigating overfitting. ZeroXpert utilizes the Gaussian represent a set of random variables with Gaussian distribu-
Markov Random Field (GMRF) [38], [39] and sparsification tions, where the relationships between these variables satisfy
with regularization L0 , effectively captures spatial correla- the Markov property. Specifically, given the neighborhood
tions between feature vectors, helping to reduce the risk of of a random variable, the remaining variables are condioverfitting the model. Additionally, by applying sparsification tionally independent of the neighborhood of that random
to the model, we further decrease its dependence on weakly variable. This Markov property can be represented by a graph,
correlated features, thereby lowering the prediction probability where the edges indicate the conditional dependencies between
when encountering unknown attacks. This approach enables variables.
us to identify unknown attacks by setting a threshold on Assume that a random feature vector X is represented
the prediction probability. Finally, we conducted extensive as [x1 , x2 , x3 , . . . , xd ]. Its joint probability distribution P (X)
experiments on two public datasets, CICIDS-2017 [40], [41] follows a multivariate Gaussian distribution, which can be
and CSE-CICIDS-2018 [41], [42]. Our method achieves recall expressed as:
rates of 55% and 77% for unknown attacks while maintain-  
ing a recall of more than 95% for known attacks and low 1 1 T −1
 P (X) = d 1 exp − (X − µ) Σ (X − µ) ,
false positive rates (around 2% and 4%) for benign traffic, (2π) 2 |Σ| 2 2
demonstrating strong practical applicability. Compared with (1)
existing SOTA methods, ZeroXpert delivers superior perfor- where µ is the mean vector, Σ is the covariance matrix, |Σ|
mance across multiple metrics. In addition, detection latency denotes the determinant of the covariance matrix.
6526 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 1
 Since d 1 is the model parameter and is independent
 (2π) 2 |Σ| 2
of X, the probability distribution P (X) can be expressed as
follows:
  
 1
 P (X) ∝ exp − (X − µ)T Ω(X − µ)
 2
  
 1 T T
 ∝ exp − (X Ω − µ Ω)(X − µ)
 2
  
 1
 ∝ exp − (X T ΩX − X T Ωµ − µT ΩX + µT Ωµ) ,
 2
 (2)
where Ω represents the precision matrix, Ω = Σ−1 .
 Consider X and µ as a column vector of shape [d, 1]. Thus,
 X T Ωµ = µT ΩX
  
 1 T T T
 P (X) ∝ exp − (X ΩX − 2µ ΩX + µ Ωµ) . (3)
 2
 Similarly, µT Ωµ is independent of X, and Ω is a real
symmetric matrix, i.e. Ω = ΩT , then
 µT ΩT = (Ωµ)T
  
 1 T T
 P (X) ∝ exp − (X ΩX − 2(Ωµ) X) . (4)
 2
 Fig. 1. The density distribution of CICIDS-2017 and CSE-CICIDS-2018
 We analyze the density distribution of the flow features of datasets. The x-axis represents the feature value, while the y-axis indicates
the network. Taking flow duration as an example, in reality, the density, and darker colors correspond to higher density.
most users’ network flows end in a short time, with fewer
users maintaining a long-duration network flow. After Min-
Max normalization, the flow duration value density distribution
approximates a normal distribution with a mean of 0. The an undirected graph through cliques and potential functions.
features we extracted include time-related and packet length- In this graphical model, each variable is represented as a node,
related features, and our analysis shows that they conform to and conditional independence relationships are represented as
these characteristics. undirected edges, forming an undirected graph. In this model,
 Furthermore, we visualize the data distribution (randomly cliques are fully connected subgraphs, and potential functions
selecting six characteristics) in the CICIDS-2017 [40], [41] define the joint distribution of these cliques, thereby capturing
and CSE-CICIDS-2018 [41], [42] datasets in Fig. 1, and the dependencies between variables (as shown in Eq. (6), if
results are consistent with our analysis. Based on the above λij = 0, it indicates that there is no direct edge connecting
analysis, we can set µ in Eq. (4) to a zero vector; thus, the two nodes, meaning that they are independent). These
   potential functions allow the GMRF to flexibly represent
 1 T complex probability distributions, effectively capturing local
 P (X) ∝ exp − (X ΩX) (5)
 2 interactions and spatial dependencies.
   
 λ11 , λ12 , . . . λ1d x1 Compared with traditional graph-based NIDS methods,
 λ21 , λ22 , . . . λ2d  x2  GMRF does not construct graphs based on IP nodes, but
 X T ΩX = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xd ] 
   
 ..   ..  instead models the relationships among features. Graph con-
  .  . 
 struction based on IP nodes faces a fundamental challenge:
 λd1 , λd2 , . . . λdd xd when the number of IP nodes is large, the resulting graph
 d
 d X
 X becomes extremely large, and the construction and compu-
 = xi xj λij tation overhead grow rapidly, making such models difficult
 i=1 j=1 to deploy in practice. In contrast, GMRF builds the graph
 d
 d X
 X over features, enabling the model to capture local interactions
 = XX T Ω, (6) and spatial dependencies among features, which contributes
 i=1 j=1 to improved robustness. Traditional models tend to overfit
where represents element-wise multiplication. to a few dominant features, whereas GMRF emphasizes the
 We can obtain the expected objective: joint effects of multiple features, which is a key reason it
    can effectively alleviate overfitting. Moreover, our approach
 d X d
 1 X does not rely solely on GMRF. We aim to address these
 P (X) ∝ exp −  XX T Ω . (7) issues through the combination of structural constraints and
 2 i=1 i=j
 parameter constraints. The former is imposed by GMRF-based
 Ultimately, GMRF can be represented by a graphical model feature dependency modeling, while the latter is achieved
that describes the joint probability distribution of the nodes in through parameter sparsification (pruning).
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6527

 III. OVERVIEW OF O UR M ETHOD consider the regularized empirical risk minimization process
 with regularization L0 on spurious parameters:
 In this section, we develop a real-time NIDS, named ZeroX- !
 N
pert, aimed at accurately predicting known traffic patterns 1 X
while improving the detection capability for unknown attacks. R2 (Ω) = L (P (Yi |Xi ; Ω), Yi ) + λkΩk0 ,
 N i=1
 |Ω|
 X
A. Design Philosophy kΩk0 = I[Ωj 6= 0], (9)
 j=1
 Unknown attacks may locally resemble benign traffic, making it easy to evade existing NIDS and be classified as benign where |Ω| represents the number of parameters, λ is a weightby current AI models with a high prediction probability. We ing factor for the regularization of L0 .
consider this phenomenon an issue of overconfidence in AI We reduce the prediction probability of the model when
models and attribute it to their neglect of extensive spatial encountering unknown attack data in the second stage.
relationships between features, which refer to the combined Subsequently, by setting a minimum prediction probability
effects of multiple features on model predictions. threshold, we will distinguish unknown attack types.
 To solve the above issues, we propose using a GMRF
to learn the distribution of traffic features, with the aim B. Practical Solution
of strengthening the learning of spatial relationships among To achieve the objectives outlined in Eq. (8) and Eq. (9),
feature vectors. Additionally, by sparsifying the model param- we decompose the task into three modules as shown in Fig. 2,
eters, we further eliminate features weakly related to the specifically: Pre-Processing, GMRF, and Sparsification.
prediction results, thereby reducing the model’s overconfi- 1) Pre-Processing: We use CICFlowMeter [44] to parse the
dence in predictions. raw data, extracting more than 80 features related to network
 Specifically, we use P (X; Ω) to denote the probability flows. We remove all discrete features (as the experiments
distribution of GMRF based on the feature data X, and showed that they had no impact on model results) and remove
P (Y |X; Ω) to represent the maximum predict probability a small number of continuous features with many outliers.
based on P (X; Ω), Ω represents the parameters of the model, Ultimately, we applied the Min-Max Scaler [45] to the feature
Y labels the feature data X. If P (Y |X; Ω) → 1.0, X is data.
identified as the label Y ; conversely, if P (Y |X; Ω) → 0.0, it is a) GMRF: According to Eq. (7), we calculate XX T , the
not identified as such. P (Y |X; Ω) can be considered a general covariance matrix, which served as input to the model. Then,
form of a ML model for intrusion detection, which poses we model GMRF using a convolutional network [46] and an
little problem when only considering the closed set scenario. attention network [47]. The convolutional network is used to
However, in practical research, we found that when the model implement a Patch Embedding, sampling the relational subreceives unknown feature data XU , the predicted probability graphs (clusters) within the traffic feature space. The attention
P (Y |XU ; Ω) often approaches the larger probability, which network is used to learn the edge potential functions. Through
means that it is identified as a known type. If an unknown these two components, we can realize the GMRF. Additionally,
attack is identified as a known attack, the harm is relatively we add a fully connected layer after the GMRF to guide its
minor but still detrimental to our defense analysis work; if it learning according to Eq. (8) and Eq. (9). Details of GMRF
is identified as benign traffic, the damage can be enormous are provided in Section IV.
and immeasurable. 2) Sparsification: To better address the issue of model
 We decompose the model overconfidence problem into two overconfidence, we employ a sparsification method with L0
stages. In the first stage, we build a multiclass classification regularization [43] for the over-parameterized model to retrain
model based on the known traffic space (including benign the pre-trained model from the first stage. The calibrated
traffic and known attack traffic) and optimize it by minimizing prediction probability distribution of the retrained model can
its empirical risk. The specific process can be expressed as more effectively distinguish unknown attacks. Details of Sparfollows. sification are provided in Section V.
 N
 ! In general, the workflow in the training phase is as follows.
 1 X Firstly, the traffic data are processed by the Pre-Processing
 R1 (Ω) = L (P (Yi |Xi ; Ω), Yi ) , (8)
 N i=1 module and normalized into one-dimensional feature vectors.
 These vectors are then transformed into covariance matrices
where N denotes the number of sample pairs, L (·) cor- according to Eq. (7) and fed into the GMRF module, where
responds to a loss function, e.g., cross-entropy loss for the first training stage is performed using the optimization
classification. objective defined in Eq. (8). This stage enables the model
 Clearly, the first stage aims to learn the probability distribu- to achieve strong detection performance within the known
tion of the GMRF for the characteristic vector X and perform traffic space, although it may also lead to overconfidence
classification tasks within the known space. To further elimi- when encountering unknown attack traffic. The model then
nate the impact of weakly correlated features on the prediction undergoes a second training stage with the Sparsification
results and improve the confidence of the model, we perform module, whose optimization objective as described in Eq. (9).
parameter sparsification with L0 regularization in the second This step reduces the parameters that contribute to model
stage inspired by [43]. This is achieved by retraining based overconfidence while offering limited practical value, thus
on the pre-trained model from the first stage. Specifically, we improving the reliability of the final model decisions. In
6528 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

Fig. 2. The overview of our method. It consists of three main modules: Pre-Processing, GMRF, Sparsification. Pre-Processing involves extracting feature
information from the network flow and computing its covariance matrix for model input. GMRF includes a Patch Embedding layer and a shallow Attention
Block. Patch Embedding layer flattens the covariance matrix to meet the input requirements of the attention mechanism, while the Attention Block performs
feature extraction to accomplish the classification task. After Pre-Processing, we optimize the model using a Sparsification module to remove learning related
to weakly relevant features, thereby reducing the model’s overconfident predictions.

the inference phase, the workflow only requires the Pre- B. Encoder
Processing module and the GMRF model. Compared with The attention mechanism [47] is widely used in tasks
traditional AI-based classification models, ZeroXpert differs such as natural language processing and computer vision,
in that it determines whether a sample corresponds to an demonstrating strong performance. We utilize an encoder
unknown attack based on the output probability distribution composed of blocks of the attention mechanism to model the
of the model. edge potential functions in GMRF, aiming to extract spatial
 relationships between the feature subgraphs. Considering the
 IV. GMRF need for real-time performance in network intrusion detection
 In this section, we provide a detailed explanation of the systems, we employ a shallow neural network to achieve
implementation of the GMRF model. It mainly consists of a this functionality and remove the residual structure from
Patch Embedding layer and an Encoder layer, which respec- the attention mechanism blocks. Modified blocks include an
tively implement the clusters and edge potential functions in attention layer, a feedforward neural network, and two layers
the GMRF. of layer normalization [48], as specified below:
 0 0
 Xmha =M HA(Xtrans , Xtrans , Xtrans ), Xmha ∈ R(d ×d )×C ,
 0 0
A. Patch Embedding Xln = LayerN (Xmha ), Xmha ∈ R(d ×d )×C ,
 Assuming that the input covariance matrix is Xcov ∈ Xf f n = F F N (Xln ), Xf f n ∈ R(d ×d )×C ,
 0 0

 1×d×d
R , we perform a 3 ∗ 3 convolution on it. This opera- 0 0
tion can extract spatial correlation information within partial Xout = F latten(LayerN (Xf f n )), Xout ∈ R(d ×d ×C) ,
feature subgraphs of the matrix, thus capturing the cluster (12)
structure of the GMRF model described in Eq. (7). Specif- where M HA(·) denotes Multi Head Attention mechanism,
ically, it can be expressed as follows. LayerN (·) represents Layer Normalization, F F N (·) stands
 0 0
 Xconv = Conv2D(Xcov , k = 3), Xconv ∈ RC×d ×d , (10) for FeedForward Neural Network.
 After the encoding layer, we add a fully connected layer
where C denotes the output channels of Conv2D. to output the predicted probabilities and perform empirical
 Then, to meet the input shape requirements of the attention risk minimization according to Eq. (8) and Eq. (9) during two
mechanism (Encoder), we flatten the last two dimensions of different training stages.
Xconv , followed by a matrix transpose. This is expressed as
follows: V. S PARSIFICATION
 C×(d0 ×d0 )
 Xf la = F latten(Xconv , −1, −2), Xf al ∈ R , To further optimize the objective in Eq. (9), due to the non-
 Xtrans = XfTla , Xtrans ∈ R (d0 ×d0 )×C
 , (11) differentiability and combinatorial nature (2|θ| possible states)
 of the parameter vector θ, optimizing under this penalty is
where F latten(·) refers to Flatten. computationally infeasible. How can we relax the discreteness
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6529

 TABLE I
 E XPLANATION OF ATTACK T YPES IN THE DATASET

of the L0 penalty to allow efficient continuous optimization of 2) Implementation: The system is deployed on a Super-
Eq. (9) while still permitting exact zeros in the parameters? micro server with an 80-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6138
 Following [43], we introduce a binary gate zj to indicate CPU, 1 NVIDIA A100-PCIE-40GB, Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS and
whether a parameter exists, where the L0 regularization rep- 64GB of DRAM (details of our implementation can be found
resents the number of open gates. in Appendix B).
 |Ω|
 X 3) Datasets: We used two publicly available datasets,
 e j 6= 0, kΩk0 =
 e j zj , zj ∈ {0, 1}, Ω
 Ωj = Ω zj . (13) CICIDS-2017 [40], [41] and CSE-CICIDS-2018 [41], [42], to
 j=1 evaluate the performance of ZeroXpert. Both datasets contain
 benign traffic and up-to-date samples of common attacks,
 Letting each gate follow a Bernoulli distribution q(zj |πj ) =
 with data characteristics that closely resemble real-world data
Bern(πj ), we can reformulate Eq. (9), as follows:
 (such as in PCAP format). The CICIDS-2017 dataset includes
 |Ω| common attack types based on the 2016 McAfee report,
 N
 !
 1 X   X
R2 (Ω, π) =
 e L P (Yi |Xi ; Ω z), Yi
 e +λ πj such as Web attacks, brute force, DoS, DDoS, Infiltration,
 N i=1 j=1 Heartbleed vulnerabilities, Botnet and scanning attacks, and
 = LE + λLC , (14) the CSE-CICIDS-2018 dataset covers various attack types
 including brute force, heartbleed, botnet, DoS, DDoS, Web
where denotes the product in elemental terms. attacks, and internal network penetration. The explanations of
 Due to the discrete nature of z, it is challenging to optimize the attack abbreviations are provided in Table I.
Eq. (14) using gradient-based methods. Using a uniform We used CICFlowMeter [44] to extract network flow feadistribution u and a binary concrete random variable s which tures, resulting in more than 80 features. Network flow features
is distributed in the interval (0, 1), we can reparameterize are typically indexed using five tuples (source IP, source port,
(“smooth”) z in Eq. (14) as follows: destination IP, destination port, protocol), extracting protocolu ∼ U(0, 1), related, packet length-related, and time-related features. These
 flow features can be analyzed without accessing the plaintext
 s = Sigmoid ((log(u) − log(1 − u) + log(α))/β) ,
 content of the packets, making them particularly suitable
 se = s(ζ − γ) + γ, for encrypted traffic scenarios. Since there is no need to
 z = min (1, max(0, se)) , (15) decrypt the traffic, using flow features for detection effectively
 protects user privacy. Calculating flow features is generally
where α denotes location and β represents temperature, (ζ >
 more efficient than content analysis, enabling more real-time
1, γ < 0) are constants to stretch the distribution interval of
 intrusion detection. We partition attacks in both datasets into
s.
 known and unknown categories: benign traffic and known
 Consequently, the L0 complexity loss LC of the objective
 attack data are used for model training, while unknown attack
in Eq. (14) can be expressed as:
 data are excluded from the training process. For known traffic,
 |Ω|    the data set is randomly divided into the training set and the
 X −γ
 LC = Sigmoid log(αj ) − β log . (16) test set with a 7:3 ratio, and the partitioning and size of the
 ζ
 j=1 data set are summarized in Table II. Furthermore, considering
 the size of the data set and the need to reduce computational
 VI. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION costs, we performed random sampling on the experimental
A. Experiment Setup data set.
 1) Implementation: We developed the ZeroXpert prototype 4) Baselines: We used three state-of-the-art unknown
using Python 3.8.12, and the other modules are built using attack detection methods and one traditional machine learningscikit-learn [49] and PyTorch (2.0.1+cu117) [50]. based method as baselines.
6530 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 PARTITION OF K NOWN T RAFFIC & U NKNOWN ATTACKS FPR (B ENIGN ) ON CICIDS-2017 AND CSE-CICIDS-2018 DATASET

 B. Accuracy Evaluation
 Fig. 3 summarizes the detection performance of ZeroXpert
 and presents the results of related ablation experiments. Our
 ablation study is conducted by sequentially removing the
 GMRF component and the sparsification process to evaluate
 their impact. Our evaluation focuses on unknown attacks,
 and we paid particular attention to the rate of benign traffic
 misclassified as attack traffic.
 1) Detection Performance of ZeroXpert: First, we evaluated
 the recall performance of ZeroXpert on two different datasets.
 As shown in Fig. 3b, in the CICIDS-2017 data set, ZeroXpert demonstrates excellent recall rates for all known traffic
 (benign + known attacks), with all attack types exceeding
 99% recall, except for the DoS Slowloris attack, which has a
 • Binary-Cls (machine learning based method). We imple- recall rate of 82%. Furthermore, the system achieves a recall
 mented a method based on a combination of random rate of approximately 57% for unknown attacks. Similarly,
 forest [51] and one-class SVM [52], where random as illustrated in Fig. 3e, ZeroXpert also achieves outstanding
 forest is used for binary classification between benign recall rates on the CSE-CICIDS-2018 dataset, with results
 and known attacks, while one-class SVM distinguishes ranging from 95% to 99% for known traffic and around 78%
 between known and unknown attacks. for unknown attacks.
 • Kitsune@NDSS (reconstruction based method). Second, we assessed the precision performance of ZeroX-
 Mirsky et al. [18] employed a stacked auto-encoder pert on two different datasets. As illustrated in Fig. 3a,
 neural network to jointly differentiate between benign ZeroXpert achieves a detection precision between 90% and
 and malicious traffic patterns. 99% in the CICIDS-2017 dataset, demonstrating excellent
 • MTH-IDS@IoTJ (signature- or anomaly-based method). performance. Similarly, as shown in Fig. 3d, ZeroXpert per-
 Yang et al. [26] proposed using a clustering label (CL) forms well in the CSE-CICIDS-2018 data set, with detection
 k-means model as the initial layer to detect unknown precision ranging from 95% to 99% for all types of attacks
 threats. In the second layer of unknown threat detection, except benign traffic. Given that attack traffic can be mistaken
 they incorporated Bayesian optimization with Gaussian for benign traffic and that some false positives are inevitable, it
 processes and two biased classifiers to optimize the model is understandable that the precision for detecting benign traffic
 and reduce the classification errors of the CL-k model. is slightly lower. The precision in attack traffic detection is
 • CVAE-EVT@TIFS (reconstruction-based method). a crucial metric in intrusion detection, reflecting the extent
 Yang et al. [15] investigated the reconstruction error to which the model misclassifies attacks. Higher precision
 between the generated instances, conditioned on labels indicates fewer benign traffic instances misclassified as attacks.
 predicted by a probabilistic discriminative model (known From an impact perspective, a large number of benign traffic
 attack detector) and the input instances by training a misclassified as attacks is particularly problematic, as it could
 generative model. They then combined this approach severely disrupt user services.
 with extreme value theory to detect unknown attacks. Third, we evaluated the F1-Score performance of ZeroXpert
 • CADE@Security (machine learning based method). on two different datasets. As shown in Fig. 3c, ZeroXpert
 Yang et al. [53] proposed a contrastive learning–based achieves excellent F1 scores in the CICIDS-2017 data set, with
 approach that models the distributions of different attack all types except for unknown attacks scoring between 90%
 families in the latent space. Using the distance to cluster and 99%. The F1 score for unknown attacks is approximately
 centroids together with robust statistics, the method can 70%. Similarly, Fig. 3f illustrates that ZeroXpert performs
 detect distributional drifts and identify zero-day attacks. exceptionally well on the CSE-CICIDS-2018 dataset, with F1
 5) Metrics: We validated the prototype using precision, scores exceeding 90% for most types and the F1 score for
recall, F1 score, and false positive rate (FPR), as these are unknown attacks around 86%. It should be noted that unknown
widely used in the literature [15], [26]. attack data were not included in model training, and achieving
 6) Hyper-Parameter Selection: Our PatchEmbedding uti- such high performance for unknown attack detection without
lizes a 3×3 convolutional kernel with 1 input channel, 8 output affecting the detection results for known traffic is particularly
channels, and a padding of 1. In the encoder, we implemented impressive.
1 Attention Block configured with 4 heads and a dropout rate In real-world deployment scenarios, the FPR in benign
of 0.5. traffic is a crucial indicator of the practicality of an NIDS.
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6531

Fig. 3. Performance evaluation of ZeroXpert on different attack types in the CICIDS-2017 and CSE-CICIDS-2018 datasets, along with ablation study results.
The abbreviations in the figure are defined as follows: B.N. refers to Benign, F.P. refers to FTP-Patator, S.P. refers to SSH-Patator, D.G. refers to DoS-
Goldeneye, D.S. refers to DoS-Slowloris, D.T. refers to DoS-Slowhttptest, D.H. refers to DoS-Hulk, D.D. refers to DDoS, P.S. refers to Portscan, D.C. refers
to DDoS-HOIC, D.L. refers to DDoS-LOIC-HTTP, U.K. refers to Unknown attacks.

An excessively high FPR can cause a significant amount of
benign traffic to be incorrectly flagged as malicious, potentially disrupting legitimate operations and compromising the
usability and stability of the system. As presented in Table III,
our method achieved a test FPR of 1.02% in the CICIDS-2017
data set prior to the sparsity pruning process. After pruning and
subsequent reconstruction-based retraining, the FPR increased
slightly to 1.97%. Similarly, in the CICIDS-2018 dataset, the
FPR rose from 1.19% before pruning to 4.91% after pruning.
Although the pruning stage led to a moderate increase in FPR,
the overall values remained within an acceptable and practical
range for deployment.

 2) Visual Analysis of Results: We conducted a visual analysis of the detection results to improve the trustworthiness of
the predictions made by the proposed ZeroXpert. Specifically,
we determined whether a sample is classified as an unknown Fig. 4. Distribution of maximum prediction probabilities for ZeroXpert at
attack based on whether the model’s maximum prediction different training stages.
probability exceeds a predefined trustworthiness threshold. To
visually compare the distribution of the maximum prediction As shown in Fig. 4a, after pre-training in the CICIDS-2017
probabilities for unknown attacks versus known traffic, we dataset, the maximum prediction probabilities for known traffic
plotted the distribution for all test data. Fig. 4 presents these (including benign traffic and known attacks) in ZeroXpert
results: Fig. 4a and Fig. 4b show the maximum prediction are mostly concentrated above 0.95. However, a significant
probability distributions for ZeroXpert during the pretrain- portion of the unknown attack traffic also has maximum
ing and retraining stages in the CICIDS-2017 dataset, while prediction probabilities exceeding 0.9, indicating that the
Fig. 4c and Fig. 4d represent the same for the CSE-CICIDS- model is overly confident in detecting this type of traffic. In
2018 dataset. addition, a small portion of the traffic has maximum prediction
6532 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

probabilities distributed across various ranges. After applying
sparse pruning, as depicted in Fig. 4b, the maximum prediction
probabilities for known traffic remain above 0.95, while more
than half of the unknown attack traffic has its maximum prediction probabilities concentrated between 0.3 and 0.4. Fig. 4c
shows the ZeroXpert pre-training results in the CSE-CICIDS-
2018 dataset, where the maximum prediction probabilities for
known attack traffic are also higher than 0.95, while those for
unknown attack traffic are concentrated between 0.8 and 1.0. Fig. 5. Sensitivity analysis of Kernel size on CICIDS-2017 dataset.
After sparse pruning, the maximum prediction probabilities
shift to between 0.5 and 0.65. These results demonstrate that As shown in Fig. 5a, except for the case where the kernel
by analyzing the differences in probability distributions, it is size is 2, the experimental results for other kernel sizes remain
possible to effectively distinguish the presence of unknown within a stable range. The recall rate for benign traffic is
attacks. Sparse pruning helps reduce the influence of features approximately between 0.98 and 0.99, while the recall rate
weakly correlated with the model’s predictions, thereby low- for unknown attack traffic fluctuates slightly within the range
ering the model’s overconfidence in unknown attack data and of 0.55 to 0.57. Furthermore, as indicated in Fig. 5b, similarly,
enabling a more effective identification of unknown attack except when the kernel size is 2, the other experimental results
traffic. also demonstrate considerable stability. This indicates that the
 3) Ablation Experiments: We conducted three ablation Patch Embedding exhibits favorable sensitivity to kernel size
experiments on two different datasets, CICIDS-2017 and variation, without relying on a specific kernel size to achieve
CSE-CICIDS-2018, to evaluate the impact of GMRF and spar- its effect, and highlights the method’s desirable stability and
sification on model prediction performance. Initially, regarding robustness. When the kernel size is 2, the performance is
recall, when neither GMRF nor Sparsification is applied, relatively poorer, which may be attributed to an insufficient
the model performs well in recognizing known traffic on receptive field that fails to capture meaningful patches, thus
both datasets but struggles significantly in detecting unknown limiting the formation of discriminative patterns.
attacks (for this experiment, we remove the Patch Embedding, leaving only one Attention Block, as spatial structure
extraction is unnecessary). Next, we applied sparsification to D. Comparison With SOTA
the model, which does not lead to an improvement in recall. To compare detection performance with current research,
We then assessed the effect of incorporating GMRF on the we selected three existing state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods:
prediction results. In the CICIDS-2017 dataset, the model Kitsune [18], MTH-IDS [26], CVAE-EVT [15] and CADE
achieves a recall rate of approximately 30% to detect unknown [53]. In addition, we deployed a traditional machine learningattacks, while in the CSE-CICIDS-2018 dataset, the recall based intrusion detection system, Binary-Cls. This system first
rate for unknown attacks is only about 10%. In comparison, uses a random forest algorithm to perform binary classification
when both GMRF and sparse pruning are applied, the recall between benign traffic and known attacks, followed by the
rate to detect unknown attacks increases by nearly 30% in application of a one-class SVM model to distinguish between
the CICIDS-2017 dataset, reaching approximately 57%. The known and unknown attacks. Our primary focus is on the
improvement is even more pronounced on the CSE-CICIDS- detection performance of unknown attacks while ensuring the
2018 data set, with an increase of nearly 70%, resulting in a accuracy of detecting known data (if we solely pursued detecfinal recall rate of 78%. tion performance for unknown attacks, it can be achieved by
 Furthermore, we observed a significant improvement in adjusting the threshold, but this would significantly decrease
precision when GMRF and sparsification are combined. This the detection accuracy for known data). Therefore, we calcusuggests that the integration of these two methods effectively late the precision (Precision-B), recall (Recall-B), and the F1
removes features weakly correlated with the prediction results, score (F1 Score-B) for benign traffic, as well as the precision
thereby reducing the model’s overconfidence and substantially (Precision-U), recall (Recall-U) and the F1 score (F1 Scorelowering the likelihood of errors. In addition, the F1 score U) for unknown attack traffic. The results are presented in
on both data sets also shows superior performance after the Table IV. (Given the instability of the MTH-IDS experimental
combination of GMRF and sparsification. results, we conducted eight experiments and report the mean
 values.)
C. Sensitivity Analysis of Kernel Size Firstly, we observe the performance of two reconstruction-
 To evaluate the sensitivity of the Patch Embedding module based methods. CVAE-EVT demonstrates relatively good
in the ZeroXpert model to convolutional kernel sizes, a series performance in the CICIDS-2017 data set, achieving a recall
of experiments were conducted on the CICIDS-2017 dataset rate of 97.66% for benign traffic and 49% for unknown attacks.
with varying kernel dimensions. In these experiments, the In addition, it achieves decent levels of precision and an F1
convolutional kernel size was sequentially varied from 2 to score. In contrast, Kitsune performs moderately, with a recall
10, covering a total of nine different sizes with a stride of 1. rate of 50.25% for unknown attacks and only 40.94% for
For each experimental setting, the recall rate and the F1 score benign traffic, alongside similarly average precision and F1
were separately assessed for benign traffic and unknown attack score results. In comparison, our ZeroXpert shows a recall rate
traffic. The corresponding experimental results are presented of 98% for benign traffic and 56.82% for unknown attacks on
in Fig. 5. the CICIDS-2017 dataset, surpassing the other two methods.
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6533

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS FOR D ETECTION OF U NKNOWN ATTACKS

It also leads in precision and F1 score. In the CSE-CICIDS-
2018 dataset, CVAE-EVT performs poorly, with a recall rate
of around 90% for benign traffic but only 2% for unknown
attacks. Kitsune also shows moderate performance, with a
recall rate of 59.73% for unknown attacks and only 41.27%
for benign traffic. In contrast, our ZeroXpert maintains an
excellent recall rate of 95% for normal traffic in this data set,
despite a slight decrease compared to its performance on the
CICIDS-2017 data set. However, the recall rate for unknown
attacks increases significantly to 77%, with precision and the
F1 score far exceeding the other two methods. Fig. 6. Detection latency.
 Secondly, we focus on methods based on machine learning. In the CICIDS-2017 dataset, MTH-IDS and Binary-Cls traffic detection, but also improves the model’s robustness in
achieve recall rates for unknown attacks of approximately 16% complex network environments. Secondly, by implementing
and 18%, respectively, with modest recall rates for benign sparse operations, ZeroXpert effectively removes redundant
traffic (86% for MTH-IDS). CADE achieves 83.42% recall and unnecessary parameter branches, reducing the impact
for benign traffic but only 23.15% for unknown attacks, of noise and anomalous data on predictions. This enables
outperforming MTH-IDS and Binary-Cls in known traffic the model to better distinguish between benign and anomadetection, but still lagging behind ZeroXpert in unknown lous traffic when facing unknown attacks, thereby reducing
attack detection. In the CSE-CICIDS-2018 dataset, MTH- misclassifications and lowering the risk of high prediction
IDS and Binary-Cls slightly outperform ZeroXpert in benign probabilities. In contrast, several existing SOTA methods do
traffic detection (98.56% and 99.27%), while CADE achieves not thoroughly analyze the fundamental reasons for the diffia recall of 74.32% for benign traffic and 86.81% for unknown culty in detecting unknown attacks. Although these methods
attacks, demonstrating strong performance in unknown attack excel in detecting known attacks, they often perform poorly
detection. Despite this, ZeroXpert still maintains superior in handling unknown attacks and do not achieve comparable
overall performance, balancing known and unknown traffic detection effectiveness.
detection effectively.
 Due to the varying sample sizes of different classes across
datasets illustrated in Table II, the precision may differ E. Performance Results
accordingly. In addition, the complexity of attacks can vary 1) Model Size: The number of model parameters directly
significantly between datasets. For example, some anomalous determines its memory storage requirements and affects comtraffic may be disguised to closely resemble normal traffic. putational complexity and inference time. Given the need for
Even for the same attack type, such variations can lead to real-time performance in intrusion detection systems, models
observable differences in metrics such as the FPR. Neverthe- with a large number of parameters may struggle to meet this
less, we strictly ensure that all comparisons among different requirement. Our proposed ZeroXpert uses a model with a
baselines are conducted fairly, and each method is evaluated total of 21,936 parameters. This parameter count significantly
under the same experimental settings and benchmarks. reduces memory consumption and computational complexity
 The effectiveness of ZeroXpert in detecting unknown while maintaining model performance, making it effective in
attacks while maintaining accuracy in detecting known traf- resource-constrained environments.
fic can be attributed to several factors. Firstly, it leverages 2) Latency: We conducted eight independent experiments
GMRF to understand the spatial correlations in traffic, thereby for each batch size on a low-specification (13th Gen Intel(R)
preventing the model’s predictions from overly depending on Core(TM) i5-13500H, 32GB DRAM) computer and calculated
local features. This not only enhances the accuracy of known the average to evaluate the detection latency of ZeroXpert; the
6534 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 TABLE V is developed in Python. Although Python offers ease of use
 R ECOMMENDED H YPER -PARAMETER C ONFIGURATION and flexibility, it may not be the most optimal for performance
 in computation-intensive tasks. Therefore, implementing the
 system in a higher-level language like C++ could potentially
 further reduce the detection latency, thereby enhancing the
 overall performance and feasibility of the system in practical
 applications.
 VII. R ELATED W ORK
 In this section, we summarize previous related research
 efforts, with detailed information provided as follows.

 A. Machine Learning Based NIDS
 Machine learning-based network intrusion detection methods have shown superior performance compared to traditional
 signature-based methods, particularly in the identification of
 unknown attacks [3], [54]. Ahmad et al. [30] compared the
 research methods and performance of traditional machine
 learning algorithms (such as the support vector machine
 (SVM) and decision trees) in the detection of zero-day attacks.
 TABLE VI
 Fu et al. [25] proposed a real-time malicious traffic detection
 L ATENCY M EASUREMENTS FOR D IFFERENT BATCH S IZE
 system based on frequency domain analysis, which achieved
 accurate and robust network attack detection through feature
 extraction and automatic parameter selection, combined with
 statistical clustering algorithms. Yang et al. [53] introduced
 a contrastive learning–based method that models the distributions of different attack families in latent space, using
 distances to cluster centroids and robust statistics (e.g., MAD)
 to detect distributional drift and identify zero-day attacks.
 Yang et al. [26] introduced a multilayer hybrid intrusion detection system named MTH-IDS to detect known and unknown
 network attacks in vehicular networks. This system combined signature-based and anomaly-based detection methods
 and optimized model performance through machine learning
 algorithms. However, traditional machine learning methods
 exhibited limited generalization capability and failed to clearly
 distinguish between unknown and known attacks. Although
 Yang et al. [26] attempted to separate these categories, the
 false positive rate (normal traffic being misclassified as attack
 traffic) became uncontrollable.
 Transfer learning has also shown promising applications in
 intrusion detection. For example, Sameera and Shashi [24]
 proposed a deep transductive transfer learning framework for
Fig. 7. Distribution of detection latency. zero-day attack detection. This framework aligns the source
 and target domains into a common latent space through
results are shown in Fig. 6 (the raw experimental data can be manifold alignment, thereby avoiding discrepancies in feature
found in Appendix B.2, Table VI).. spaces and probability distributions. It generates soft labels
 Fig. 6 illustrates that as the batch size increases, the using cluster correspondence programs to address the scarcity
detection latency of ZeroXpert decreases from an initial of labeled instances in the target domain and employs deep
740 microseconds to approximately 130 microseconds. Fur- neural networks (DNNs) to build a binary classifier for zerothermore, Fig. 7 presents the density distribution of the latency day attack detection. Taghiyarrenani et al. [21] introduced
statistics for all samples (with a batch size of 8). It is a knowledge transfer method based on transfer learning
evident from this figure that the sample detection latency to better handle unknown attacks. Furthermore, Kim et al.
of ZeroXpert is predominantly within the range of 120 to [22] suggested using transfer deep convolutional generative
130 microseconds. Notably, this evaluation was conducted on adversarial networks (tDCGANs) to generate pseudomalicious
a low-spec machine without GPU acceleration. Despite these traffic based on known attack traffic, thus enhancing zero-day
constraints, ZeroXpert demonstrates a detection latency of attack detection performance through data set enhancement.
approximately 130 microseconds when concurrent processing Few-shot learning [55] and zero-shot learning [56] are becomis considered, meeting the stringent requirements for real-time ing increasingly common in intrusion detection. For example,
detection. It is also important to note that our prototype system Zhang et al. [57] introduced a zero-shot learning method based
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6535

on sparse autoencoders to detect unknown attacks. Yang et al. than relying on frequent model updates or explicit online
[58] proposed a mechanism for training models using a few- learning, ZeroXpert is designed to adapt to such dynamics
shot learning to acquire general knowledge about attacks rather through robust uncertainty-aware detection. By modeling the
than specific knowledge about individual categories, thereby spatial relationships among the traffic features using GMRF,
enhancing the detection of unknown attacks. However, while ZeroXpert captures stable structural dependencies within the
these methods demonstrated good generalization capabilities, known traffic space. The subsequent sparsification stage furthey still failed to explicitly distinguish between known and ther suppresses weakly relevant or spurious features, reducing
unknown attacks, which is crucial for defensive purposes. the model’s tendency to produce overconfident predictions. As
 a result, when encountering traffic generated by evolving or
B. Reconstruction Based Zero-Day Detection previously unseen attacks, the model typically yields lower
 In recent years, reconstruction-based methods to address the prediction confidence instead of forcibly assigning them to
challenge of unknown attack detection have gained increasing known classes. This confidence-aware decision mechanism
attention. The primary idea involves first auto-encoding the allows ZeroXpert to effectively flag evolving attack patterns as
known traffic and then reconstructing the encoded vectors. unknown without immediate retraining, making it well suited
Since unknown attack traffic is not included in the training pro- for deployment in dynamic network environments where traffic
cess, it tends to exhibit higher reconstruction errors, making it characteristics and attack behaviors change over time.
easier to identify as anomalous [59]. For example, Hindy et al.
[16] proposed using autoencoders with a reconstruction error B. Potential Directions for Future Work
threshold to detect zero-day attacks. Zha et al. [10] sug- ZeroXpert is designed to robustly identify evolving
gested applying a sigmoid kernel transformation to map traffic and previously unseen attacks without frequent retraining.
from a low-dimensional space to a high-dimensional space, Meanwhile, adapting to long-term distributional shifts and
thus amplifying the differences between unknown attacks and continuously emerging attack patterns is also an important
known traffic, and then using an encoder-decoder framework direction for future research. One promising extension is
for detection. Yang et al. [15] explored the training of a to incorporate lightweight drift detection mechanisms that
generative model to examine the deviation between the gen- monitor changes in the statistical properties of incoming traffic
erated instances conditioned on the labels predicted by a or the confidence distribution of the model, thus triggering
probabilistic discriminative model (a known attack detector) adaptive responses only when significant data drift is detected.
and the input instances. Additionally, they combined extreme In addition, future work may explore selective or incremental
value theory to detect unknown attacks. Tang et al. [17] model updates, where newly observed unknown samples
recommended employing an encoder-decoder recurrent neural with high confidence can be gradually incorporated into
network to train a self-translation machine, which captures the known traffic space without retraining the entire model
the syntactic and semantic patterns of benign requests while from scratch. Another potential direction lies in combining
marking incomprehensible requests as attacks. Furthermore, ZeroXpert with generative or replay-based techniques to
Mirsky et al. [18] introduced a stacked autoencoder neural mitigate catastrophic forgetting when adapting to new attack
network designed to jointly distinguish between normal and types while maintaining stable performance on previously
anomalous traffic patterns. learned patterns. Finally, investigating theoretically grounded
 Reconstruction-based methods have shown promise in the calibration strategies under data drift could further enhance
field of unknown attack detection. These approaches not only the reliability of confidence-based unknown attack detection
maintain effective detection performance, but also allow for in highly dynamic network environments.
the adjustment of reconstruction error thresholds to control the Meanwhile, data imbalance is an important issue that
false positive rate (i.e., misclassifying normal traffic as attack deserves careful consideration in network traffic detection, as
traffic), which is crucial. However, most of these methods the number of benign traffic samples typically far exceeds
rely on cosine similarity or Euclidean distance to measure that of attack traffic. Existing studies have explored mitithe reconstruction error. Given the characteristics of network gation strategies such as employing generative models [60]
traffic data (where, after normalization, most feature values are to synthesize minority-class samples to improve class balclose to 0 and a few are close to 1, as shown in Fig. 1), these ance. However, these approaches also suffer from inherent
metrics tend to focus more on changes in larger values while limitations, including the potential risk of data poisoning.
neglecting smaller ones, making the reconstruction process Developing a novel sampling strategy therefore represents a
relatively straightforward. Consequently, these methods are promising research direction. Unlike random downsampling
subject to certain limitations. We provide a theoretical analysis methods, which reduce the majority class at the cost of
to support this point (see Appendix A). losing informative samples, an effective solution to traffic
 imbalance should aim to reduce sample redundancy while
 VIII. D ISCUSSION preserving critical information. Such a strategy would have
 In this section, we discuss our proposed method further and the additional benefit of significantly reducing model training
explore potential directions for future work. time. These considerations constitute an important part of our
 future research agenda.
A. Adaptation to Dynamic Network Environments
 In real-world deployments, network environments are inher- IX. C ONCLUSION
ently dynamic, where attack patterns continuously evolve and In this study, we propose a method based on a Gausmay deviate from previously observed distributions. Rather sian Markov Random Field to capture the spatial feature
6536 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

 m m+n
distribution of network traffic, effectively modeling the rela- X X
 x21,i → 1, x21,j → 0
tionships between local features. GMRF also better satisfies
 i=1 j=m+1
the conditional independence assumption. Building on this, we
 m m+n
apply sparsification to the model by pruning weakly correlated X X
 x22,i → 1, x22,j → 0 (18)
parameters, reducing the prediction probability of unknown
 i=1 j=m+1
attack traffic. This creates a significant gap between the prediction probabilities of known and unknown traffic, enabling the By Eq. (17) and Eq. (18), we obtain the following.
effective detection of unknown attacks. As a result, ZeroXpert Pm
 x1,i x2,i
not only addresses the issue of model overfitting, but also cos(X1 , X2 ) = qP i=1 qP (19)
 m 2 m 2
mitigates the problem of overconfident predictions when faced i=1 x1,i i=1 x2,i
with unknown attack traffic. We evaluated the performance of
 Combining the characteristics of the network flow feature
our approach on two public datasets, CICIDS-2017 and CSEvalues, most of the feature values do not follow a normal
CICIDS-2018, through both detection performance evaluation
 distribution. Typically, a feature value’s distribution contains
and ablation experiments. The results show that our method
 a small number of extremely large values, while the majority
achieves recall rates of 57% and 77% for unknown attacks
 are distributed as smaller values (for example, flow duration,
while maintaining a recall rate above 95% for known traffic,
 where very few flows last for an extended period, while most
significantly outperforming several existing SOTA methods.
 end within a relatively short time). We have confirmed this
Additionally, performance tests on a low-spec machine demonphenomenon in several existing datasets [40], [41], [42], [61],
strate that the system maintains low detection latency, making
 which fully supports our assumption. According to Eq. (19),
it well-suited for real-time requirement.
 we can see that the reconstruction error depends on the few
 features with larger values, making the reconstruction less
 A PPENDIX challenging and presenting the “illusion” that unknown attack
 traffic is highly similar to known traffic.
A. Limitations of Reconstruction-Based Methods
 Similarly, the Euclidean distance is also more sensitive to
 In this section, we will theoretically elaborate on the poten- large feature values and less sensitive to small feature values.
tial shortcomings and limitations of unknown attack detection This indicates that the Euclidean distance calculation, in cases
methods based on encoder-decoder architecture [15], [16], where feature value differences are substantial, tends to reflect
[17], [18]. the differences in large feature values more prominently,
 The main idea of the unknown attack detection method thereby neglecting the impact of small feature values.
based on the encoder-decoder architecture is to first encode
the known feature vectors, then decode the encoded seman- B. Details of Implementations
tic vectors, and finally determine the presence of unknown
attacks based on the reconstruction error. The calculation 1) Detail of Recommended Hyper-Parameter: Table V
of the reconstruction error mainly uses Cosine Similarity or shows the hyperparameters used in ZeroXpert and the rec-
Euclidean Distance. However, we believe that methods such ommended values.
as cosine similarity and Euclidean distance have theoretical In the sparsification process, two important hyperparameters
flaws in this direction: they tend to ignore features with ζ and γ are required to satisfy ζ < 0.0 and γ > 1.0.
relatively small values, while features with larger values have This design ensures that, after the hard-thresholding operation
a more significant impact on the final result (e.g. cosine z = min(1, max(0, s̃)), the model can still produce exact 0 and
similarity). 1 values rather than only approximate ones. We recommend
 Assume there are two feature vectors X1 , X2 , each setting ζ = −0.1 and γ = 1.1, which are empirically
with m larger features and n smaller features, denoted as chosen [43]. If ζ becomes too negative (e.g., −10), the sig-
X1 = (x1,1 , x1,2 , . . . , x1,m , x1,m+1 , x1,m+2 , . . . , x1,m+n ) and moid/logistic transformation will push the gating probability
X2 = (x2,1 , x2,2 , . . . , x2,m , x2,m+1 , x2,m+2 , . . . , x2,m+n ). excessively toward 0 or 1, damaging the smoothness of the
The cosine similarity cos(X1 , X2 ) is expressed as: gradient; if ζ is too close to 0, the model will be unable to
 produce exact zeros. The parameter γ plays a symmetric role
 Pm Pm+n
 i=1 x1,i x2,i + x1,j x2,j in controlling the upper bound. In practice, a small outward
 qP qj=m+1 stretch (around ±0.1) is sufficient to allow some samples to
 m 2
 P m+n 2
 P m 2
 Pm+n 2
 i=1 x1,i + j=m+1 x1,j i=1 x2,i + j=m+1 x2,j fall outside the interval [0, 1], allowing exact 0/1 values after
 (17) hard thresholding.
 Furthermore, in relation to the hyperparameter β, it controls
 After normalization, all feature values are within the smoothness of the Concrete distribution. A larger β makes
the range of [0, 1]. For larger value features x1,i and the distribution closer to Bernoulli, whereas a smaller β yields
x2,i (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}), we assume x1,i → 1, x2,i → 1, smoother relaxations with a lower gradient variance but a
and for smaller value features x1,m+j and higher bias. We set β = 0.66, which has been shown in
x2,m+j (j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}), we assume x1,m+j → 0, previous work [62] to provide a good balance between training
x2,m+j → 0. Therefore, stability and the desired level of sparsity.
 m m+n 2) Raw Data of Latency Experiments: Table VI illustrates
 the raw data from eight independent experiments for the
 X X
 x1,i x2,i → 1, x1,j x2,j → 0
 i=1 j=m+1
 performance test (latency) described in Section VI-E.
ZHA et al.: SPARSE GAUSSIAN–MARKOV MODELING FOR ROBUST AND TRUSTWORTHY UNKNOWN CYBER DEFENSE 6537

 R EFERENCES [24] N. Sameera and M. Shashi, “Deep transductive transfer learning
 framework for zero-day attack detection,” ICT Exp., vol. 6, no. 4,
[1] J. Cao, Z. Yang, K. Sun, Q. Li, M. Xu, and P. Han, “Fingerprinting SDN pp. 361–367, Dec. 2020.
 applications via encrypted control traffic,” in Proc. 22nd Int. Symp. Res. [25] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
 Attacks, Intrusions Defenses (RAID), 2019, pp. 501–515. robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
[2] M. A. Jamshed et al., “Kargus: A highly-scalable software-based intru- no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
 sion detection system,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., [26] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 Oct. 2012, pp. 317–328. intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
[3] H. Li, H. Hu, G. Gu, G.-J. Ahn, and F. Zhang, “VNIDS: Towards Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 elastic security with safe and efficient virtualization of network intrusion [27] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
 detection systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 Secur. (CCS), Oct. 2018, pp. 17–34. 2020.
[4] J. Nam, M. Jamshed, B. Choi, D. Han, and K. Park, “Haetae: Scaling the [28] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
 performance of network intrusion detection with many-core processors,” contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 in Proc. 18th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, 2015, pp. 89–110, doi: 10.1007/ for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
 978-3-319-26362-5 5. pp. 633–642.
[5] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown [29] C. Zha, H. Pan, B. Bai, J. Wu, and R. Zhang, “FlowXpert: Contextencrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, aware flow embedding for enhanced traffic detection in IoT network,”
 no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Aug. 2024. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., pp. 1–18, 2026.
[6] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection: A [30] R. Ahmad, I. Alsmadi, W. Alhamdani, and L. Tawalbeh, “Zero-day
 survey,” ACM Comput. surveys (CSUR), vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 1–58, 2009. attack detection: A systematic literature review,” Artif. Intell. Rev.,
[7] P. Garcı́a-Teodoro, J. Dı́az-Verdejo, G. Maciá-Fernández, and vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 10733–10811, Oct. 2023.
 E. Vázquez, “Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, [31] C. Zha et al., “DM-IDS—A network intrusion detection method based
 systems and challenges,” Comput. Secur., vol. 28, nos. 1–2, pp. 18–28, on dual-modal fusion,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 22,
 Feb. 2009. no. 4, pp. 3646–3661, Aug. 2025.
[8] C. Lin, Y. Jiang, W. Zhang, X. Meng, T. Zuo, and Y. Zhang, “TraGe: A [32] J. Zhao et al., “ReTrial: Robust encrypted malicious traffic detection via
 generic packet representation for traffic classification based on header- discriminative relation incorporation and misleading relation correction,”
 payload differences,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 33rd Int. Symp. Quality IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 677–692, 2025.
 Service (IWQoS), Jul. 2025, pp. 1–6. [33] X. Wang, Z. Lu, X. Wang, M. He, and X. Wang, “GETRF: A general
[9] C. Zha et al., “A-NIDS: Adaptive network intrusion detection system framework for encrypted traffic identification with robust representation
 based on clustering and stacked CTGAN,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics based on datagram structure,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw.,
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 3204–3219, 2025. vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 2045–2060, Dec. 2024.
[10] C. Zha et al., “SKT-IDS: Unknown attack detection method based [34] Y. Liu and K. Yang, “Asynchronous decentralized federated anomaly
 on sigmoid kernel transformation and encoder–decoder architecture,” detection for 6G networks,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw.,
 Comput. Secur., vol. 146, Nov. 2024, Art. no. 104056. vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 3384–3396, Oct. 2025.
[11] C. Lin et al., “Convolutions are competitive with transform- [35] C. Wu, J. Sun, J. Chen, M. Alazab, Y. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “TCGers for encrypted traffic classification with pre-training,” 2025, IDS: Robust network intrusion detection via temporal contrastive graph
 arXiv:2508.02001. learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 20, pp. 1475–1486,
[12] M. Wang and W. Deng, “Deep face recognition: A survey,” Neurocom- 2025.
 puting, vol. 429, pp. 215–244, Mar. 2021. [36] N. Wang, S. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “FeCo: Boosting
[13] A. Holzinger, G. Langs, H. Denk, K. Zatloukal, and H. Müller, intrusion detection capability in IoT networks via contrastive learning,”
 “Causability and explainability of artificial intelligence in medicine,” IEEE Trans. Depend. Secure Comput., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 4215–4230,
 WIREs Data Mining Knowl. Discovery, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 1312, Jul. 2019. Jul. 2025.
[14] S. Jiang, H. Yang, Q. Xie, C. Ma, S. Wang, and G. Xing, [37] W. Wang, X. Du, D. Shan, R. Qin, and N. Wang, “Cloud intru-
 “Lancelot: Towards efficient and privacy-preserving Byzantine-robust sion detection method based on stacked contractive auto-encoder and
 federated learning within fully homomorphic encryption,” 2024, support vector machine,” IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput., vol. 10, no. 3,
 arXiv:2408.06197. pp. 1634–1646, Jul. 2022.
[15] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional [38] H. Rue and L. Held, Gaussian Markov Random Fields: Theory and
 variational auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage Applications. London, U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 2005.
 learning approach for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion [39] P. Sidén and F. Lindsten, “Deep Gaussian Markov random fields,” in
 detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 8916–8926.
 2021. [40] C. I. for Cybersecurity. (2017). Cicids 2017 Dataset. [Online]. Available:
[16] H. Hindy, R. Atkinson, C. Tachtatzis, J.-N. Colin, E. Bayne, and https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html
 X. Bellekens, “Towards an effective zero-day attack detection using [41] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 outlier-based deep learning techniques,” 2020, arXiv:2006.15344. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
[17] R. Tang et al., “ZeroWall: Detecting zero-day web attacks through ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, Jan. 2018.
 encoder–decoder recurrent neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM [42] C. I. for Cybersecurity (CIC). (2018). Cicids 2018 Dataset. [Online].
 Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 2479–2488. Available: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2018.html
[18] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An [43] C. Louizos, M. Welling, and D. P. Kingma, “Learning sparse neural
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, networks through L0 regularization,” 2017, arXiv:1712.01312.
 arXiv:1802.09089. [44] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
[19] T. Zoppi, A. Ceccarelli, and A. Bondavalli, “Unsupervised algorithms to “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 detect zero-day attacks: Strategy and application,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
 pp. 90603–90615, 2021. pp. 253–262.
[20] I. Ahmad, M. Basheri, M. J. Iqbal, and A. Rahim, “Performance com- [45] V. N. G. Raju, K. P. Lakshmi, V. M. Jain, A. Kalidindi, and V. Padma,
 parison of support vector machine, random forest, and extreme learning “Study the influence of normalization/transformation process on the
 machine for intrusion detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 33789–33795, accuracy of supervised classification,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Smart
 2018. Syst. Inventive Technol. (ICSSIT), Aug. 2020, pp. 729–735.
[21] Z. Taghiyarrenani, A. Fanian, E. Mahdavi, A. Mirzaei, and H. Farsi, [46] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based
 “Transfer learning based intrusion detection,” in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. learning applied to document recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 11,
 Comput. Knowl. Eng. (ICCKE), Oct. 2018, pp. 92–97. pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[22] J.-Y. Kim, S.-J. Bu, and S.-B. Cho, “Zero-day malware detec- [47] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 tion using transferred generative adversarial networks based on deep Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
 autoencoders,” Inf. Sci., vols. 460–461, pp. 83–102, Sep. 2018. [48] J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” 2016,
[23] S. Cui et al., “FG-SAT: Efficient flow graph for encrypted traffic arXiv:1607.06450.
 classification under environment shifts,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics [49] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” J. Mach.
 Security, vol. 20, pp. 5326–5339, 2025. Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, Nov. 2011.
6538 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 12, 2026

[50] A. Paszke et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep Tian Liu received the B.S. degree in mathematics
 learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019. and applied mathematics from Sichuan Univer-
[51] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–32, sity, China, in 2011, and the M.S. degree in
 2001. probability and statistics and the Ph.D. degree in
[52] M. Amer, M. Goldstein, and S. Abdennadher, “Enhancing one-class computer science and software engineering from
 support vector machines for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA, in 2016
 ACM SIGKDD Workshop Outlier Detection Description, Aug. 2013, and 2022, respectively. She is currently a Research
 pp. 8–15. Associate with Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural
[53] L. Yang et al., “CADE: Detecting and explaining concept drift samples Sciences (ZAAS). Before joining ZAAS, she was a
 for security applications,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., Van- Research Staff Member with Zhejiang Laboratory.
 couver, BC, Canada, 2021, pp. 2327–2344. [Online]. Available: https:// Her research interests include distributed machine
 www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentation/yang-limin learning and wireless computer networking, with an emphasis on system
[54] K. Borders, J. Springer, and M. Burnside, “Chimera: A declarative performance, optimization, and security/privacy.
 language for streaming network traffic analysis,” in Proc. USENIX Secur.
 Symp., 2012, pp. 365–379.
[55] F. Sung, Y. Yang, L. Zhang, T. Xiang, P. H. S. Torr, and
 T. M. Hospedales, “Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot
 learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun.
 2018, pp. 1199–1208. Chungang Lin received the B.S. degree from Xidian
[56] F. Pourpanah et al., “A review of generalized zero-shot learning University in 2022. He is currently pursuing the
 methods,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 4, Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Computing Techpp. 4051–4070, Apr. 2023. nology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current
[57] Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, S. Qiu, S. Zhou, and C. Zhang, “Unknown research interests include network traffic analysis,
 attack detection based on zero-shot learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, traffic classification, traffic engineering, and intellipp. 193981–193991, 2020. gent networking and systems.
[58] J. Yang, H. Li, S. Shao, F. Zou, and Y. Wu, “FS-IDS: A framework
 for intrusion detection based on few-shot learning,” Comput. Secur.,
 vol. 122, Nov. 2022, Art. no. 102899.
[59] M. Gharib, B. Mohammadi, S. H. Dastgerdi, and M. Sabokrou,
 “AutoIDS: Auto-encoder based method for intrusion detection system,”
 2019, arXiv:1911.03306.
[60] H. Ding, Y. Sun, N. Huang, Z. Shen, and X. Cui, “TMG-GAN:
 Generative adversarial networks-based imbalanced learning for net- Bing Bai received the M.S. degree in computer
 work intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, science and technology from the National University
 pp. 1156–1167, 2024. of Defense Technology. He is currently an Associate
[61] Y. Kim, S. Hakak, and A. Ghorbani, “DDoS attack dataset (CICEV2023) Investigator with the Research Center for Highagainst EV authentication in charging infrastructure,” in Proc. 20th Efficiency Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab.
 Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2023, pp. 1–9. His research interests include communication net-
[62] C. J. Maddison, A. Mnih, and Y. W. Teh, “The concrete distribu- works and security.
 tion: A continuous relaxation of discrete random variables,” 2016,
 arXiv:1611.00712.

 Ruyun Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in communications and information systems in 2011.
 Chao Zha is currently pursuing the combined M.S.- He is currently working as a Principal Investiga-
 Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology tor with the Research Center for High-Efficiency
 with the Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Computing Infrastructure, Zhejiang Lab. He is a
 Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research Researcher and a Ph.D. Supervisor for many years.
 focuses on network security, with particular inter- He has published several papers in international
 ests in network intrusion detection systems (NIDS), conferences and peer-reviewed journals, including
 encrypted traffic detection, malware analysis, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F OREN -
 intelligent defense systems. He has published some SICS AND S ECURITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 papers in peer-reviewed journals, including IEEE D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, Comput-
 T RANSACTIONS ON I NFORMATION F ORENSICS ers & Security, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE
 AND S ECURITY , Computers & Security, and IEEE M ANAGEMENT. His research interests include communication networks and
T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT. security.