IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 1865

 SPARSE: Semantic Tracking and Path Analysis for
 Attack Investigation in Real-Time
 Jie Ying , Tiantian Zhu , Member, IEEE, Wenrui Cheng , Qixuan Yuan , Mingjun Ma, Chunlin Xiong ,
 Tieming Chen , Mingqi Lv , and Yan Chen , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—As Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) become more I. INTRODUCTION
complex and destructive, attack investigation has gained impor-
 S THE Internet has developed over time, APT attacks have
tance. Analysts use provenance graphs for causality analysis on
Point-Of-Interest (POI) events to capture critical events. However,
existing methods suffer from problems of high false positives, high
 A grown more sophisticated and destructive. APT attacks
 target mainly large corporations such as Twitter [1], resulting in
overhead, and high latency due to the vast size of the provenance significant financial losses and reputational damage. In addition,
graph and the rarity of critical events. We propose SPARSE for
constructing critical component graphs (i.e., consisting of critical APT attacks are executed in multiple stages, which include
events) from streaming logs in real time. Our approach is based on initial access, persistence, lateral movement, collection, and
two key observations: 1) Critical events exist in suspicious semantic exfiltration [2].
graphs (SSGs) composed of interaction flows between suspicious While an intrusion may be noticed at any stage, detection
entities, and 2) Information flows accomplishing the attacker’s only uncovers isolated traces of the attack. As a result, analysts
goal exist as paths. SPARSE uses a two-stage framework that first
constructs the SSG using a state-based mode with semantic transfer must undertake causality analysis to capture the bigger picture
rules and storage strategies. Then, it identifies suspicious flow and obtain a sound understanding of the detected attack point.
paths (SFPs) related to the POI event and quantifies each path’s Achieving a secure system recovery after a cyber attack requires
influence to filter irrelevant events. Evaluation on a large-scale certain key steps. First, analysts must determine how the adverattack dataset shows our system generates a critical component sary infiltrated the system. Once the point of entry is identified,
graph (∼113 edges) in 1.6 seconds, which is 2014 × smaller than the
backtracking graph (∼227,589 edges). It is also 25 × more effective then analysts need to assess the obvious and hidden damage
in filtering irrelevant edges compared to other state-of-the-art done to the system, such as installed payload, modified files,
techniques. and exfiltrated information. In short, analysts need to identify
 the sequence of critical events leading up to the POI event
 Index Terms—Advanced persistent threat, intrusion/anomaly
detection and investigation, data provenance. and reconstruct the critical component (subgraph consisting of
 critical events), which is also called attack investigation.
 With the improvement of kernel-level monitoring frameworks [3], [4], [5], more and more causality analysis systems
 depend on a provenance graph consisting of entities (e.g., files,
 Received 9 September 2024; revised 8 August 2025; accepted 11 October processes, and sockets) and inter-entity interactions (e.g., pro-
2025. Date of publication 14 October 2025; date of current version 12 March cesses reading and writing files). However, a provenance graph is
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foun- a gigantic [6], [7] and coarse-grained data format that cannot didation of China under Grant U22B2028, Grant 62372410, and Grant 62002324,
in part by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under rectly determine the specific dependencies between all relevant
Grant LQ21F020016 and Grant LZ23F020011, and in part by The Fundamental events of an entity (e.g., a process has multiple read-in events
Research Funds for the Provincial Universities of Zhejiang under Grant RF- and write-out events) [8], which leads to a dependency explosion
A2023009. (Corresponding author: Tiantian Zhu.)
 Jie Ying, Tiantian Zhu, Wenrui Cheng, Qixuan Yuan, Mingjun Ma, and problem and the poor performance of existing causality analysis
Mingqi Lv are with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhe- systems [9], [10], [11].
jiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: jieying@ Previous Attack Investigation Techniques and Limitations:
zjut.edu.cn; ttzhu@zjut.edu.cn; zjutcwr@zjut.edu.cn; zjutyqx@zjut.edu.cn;
zjutmmj@zjut.edu.cn; mingqilv@zjut.edu.cn). Methodologically, causality analysis can be classified into three
 Chunlin Xiong is with China Unicom (Guangdong) Industrial Internet Com- categories: label propagation-based, anomaly score-based, and
pany, Ltd., Guangzhou 510555, China (e-mail: chunlinxiong@gmail.com). machine learning-based. Specifically, the label propagation-
 Tieming Chen is with the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China, and also with based approach [12], [13], [14], [15], [16] sets entity labels
the Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing, and transformation rules through heuristic rules but suffers
Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou 310023, China (e-mail: tmchen@ from a reliance on heavy manual effort and the incapacity to
zjut.edu.cn).
 Yan Chen is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer address zero-day vulnerabilities. The anomaly score-based ap-
Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA (e-mail: ychen proach [17], [18], [19], [20] quantifies the suspiciousness of de-
@northwestern.edu). pendency between entities, but faces challenges such as relying
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3621434, provided by the authors. on historical statistics and the inability to adapt to complex enter-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3621434 prise production environments. Earlier machine learning-based

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1866 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

approaches [21], [22], [23], [24] attempted to learn directly TABLE I
 ATTRIBUTES OF SYSTEM EVENTS
from attack samples using neural networks, but were limited
by insufficient sample size, poor generalization capability, and
high computational overhead. Recent studies [16], [25], [26],
[27], [28], [29] have employed self-supervised learning to model
normal system behavior and trigger alerts through anomaly
detection. However, in the field of attack investigation, these
approaches can only perform basic alert correlation, such as constructing reachable paths between alerts, yet fail to reconstruct
comprehensive attack scenarios. These issues make it difficult strategy. The framework consumes events as streams in low
for analysts to carry out comprehensive attack investigations in overhead without recording historical data. In addition, the
the optimal time (10 minutes) [30]. In summary, a general, effi- framework can output suspicious semantic graph related
cient, and cost-effective causality analysis system needs to meet to the POI event in real time. The graph consists of all
the following three requirements: 1) Reduced False Positives suspicious data flows and control flows that lead to the POI
to address dependency explosion, 2) Affordable Overhead to event, and thus contains all attack-related critical events. It
reduce the cost of attack investigation, and 3) Minimal Latency is phase I of SPARSE for filtering semantic-irrelevant events.
to prevent further losses caused by subsequent attacks. r We propose a path-level contextual analysis mechanism
 To meet the above requirements, after researching hundreds that incorporates suspicious flow path extraction and scorof APT attack descriptions [31] and analyzing numerous related ing. It utilizes an optimized BFS algorithm to extract all
dependency graphs [17], [19], [21], [32], [33], [34], we have the suspicious flow paths (SFPs) from the SSG. Then the
following two key observations. Firstly, suspicious semantics mechanism combines the properties of the POI event and
are introduced externally and transferred to non-suspicious characteristics of the path structure to quantify the impact
entities via interaction. Based on this, we propose a set of of each SFP on the POI event. Finally, it filters all events
predefined semantic transfer rules to process streaming logs to that only exist in SFPs with low scores. It is phase II of
construct the suspicious semantic graph (SSG). The SSG con- SPARSE for filtering impact-irrelevant events.
sists of suspicious entities (e.g., a process visiting an unknown r We implemented SPARSE and evaluated all its components
website) and suspicious events (data and control flows initiated in detail on a large-scale dataset with more than 150 milby the suspicious entities) via utilizing transfer rules. We believe lion logs. Specifically, the dataset contains 10 simulated
that the SSG contains all critical events (i.e., critical events are attacks [17] (∼ 100 million logs) and 5 attacks from the
a subset of suspicious events) and is much smaller than the DARPA TC program [36], [37] (∼ 50 million logs). Expersubgraph obtained by backtracking [35] from the POI event. imental results show that SPARSE can generate the critical
As shown in Section V, the SSG (∼417 edges) is 545 × smaller component graph (∼113 edges) in 1.6s, which is 2014 ×
than the backtracking graph (∼227,589 edges). smaller than the dependency graph (∼227,589 edges). The
 Secondly, information flows that accomplish goals exist in critical component graph (FP = 99) generated by SPARSE
the form of paths. There are still many false positives in the is 25 × more effective than other state-of-the-art causality
suspicious semantics graph. As shown in Section V, the SSG analysis techniques (FP = 2,473) in filtering irrelevant
(∼417 edges) is 3.7 times larger than the critical component edges while preserving the attack sequences. In addition,
graph (∼113 edges). Therefore, we aim to filter out the events SPARSE can run for a long time while processing streaming
that are contextually irrelevant to the POI event in the suspicious logs with a low memory overhead (30 MB).
semantics graph by performing path-level contextual analysis.
Based on this observation, we opine that evaluating whether to II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
filter an event cannot be done in isolation, but rather calls for a
comprehensive assessment of flow paths consisting of multiple A. Dependency Graph
events. Consequently, we construct all suspicious flow paths Recent literature has leveraged the concept of data prove-
(SFPs) related to the POI event from SSG and quantify the degree nance, i.e., instead of manually piecing together individual evof influence based on the properties (i.e., data flow amount and idence from raw logs, provenance-based systems can construct
timestamp) of the POI event and path structural characteristics dependency graphs that explain the relationships between each
to weed out irrelevant events. In summary, we achieve the attack event, simplifying the attack investigation. Specifically, a depeninvestigation through a two-stage step (i.e., SSG construction dency graph G(E, V ) is a heterogeneous graph consisting of
and path-level contextual analysis). nodes V representing system entities and edges E representing
 This paper proposes SPARSE1 and makes the following inter-entity events. The attributes of entities and events are carecontributions: fully selected from raw audit logs, which are lean and critical. For
 r We propose a state-based framework that contains suspi- entities, we choose processes (P rocessN ame, P rocessID),
 cious semantic transfer rule and suspicious event storage files (F ileN ame), and sockets (IP : P ort). For events,
 we made selections as shown in Table I. For any edge e ∈ E,
 1 SPARSE short for Semantic tracking and Path Analysis foR attack there is e = (u, v, t), where u represents the subject, v represents
inveStigation in real-timE the object, and t represents the timestamp of the event. For
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1867

Fig. 1. Partial dependency graph of one attack case Dataleak. The black dashed box indicates the backtracking graph (∼200,000 edges) constructed from the
POI event via backward propagation. The blue dashed box indicates the suspicious semantic graph (∼27 edges) constructed by SPARSE. The red dashed line box
indicates the critical component graph (∼22 edges) exported by SPARSE.

the two edges in the dependency graph, e1 = (u1 , v1 , t1 ), e2 = suspicious semantic-related to the alert. The red dashed box
(u2 , v2 , t2 ), we consider that there is a dependence (causality) denotes the critical component graph obtained by analyzing
between e1 and e2 if v1 = u2 and t1 < t2 . the path-level contextual semantics, which includes all events
 attack-related to the alert.
B. Attack Investigation Obviously, the number of attack-related critical events (∼22)
 is a drop in the ocean compared to the number of causal-
 The goal of attack investigation using dependency
 related non-critical events (∼ 200,000). This turns the attack
graphs [12], [13], [14], [15], [17], [18], [20], [22], [38] is to
 investigation into a needle-in-a-haystack process, making it
identify all critical events and critical components related to the
 challenging for analysts to complete the investigation in the
POI event. A critical component is a subgraph of the dependency
 optimal time (600 s) [30]. However, existing techniques such
graph that retains internal information critical to the attack
 as DEPIMPACT [17], as shown in Section V, have exhibited
investigation and eliminates irrelevant system activity. Typically
 poor performance. It requires 6,464 s (600 s) to generate
this analysis includes tracing the flow of data through the graph to
 dependency graphs with 2,473 false positives on average. In
identify potentially relevant events, and examining the properties
 addition, it needs to load raw audit logs, resulting in an endof nodes and edges to identify signs of compromise. The goal of
 less memory overhead. Therefore, we need an attack investian attack investigation is to determine both the source and scope
 gation system with low false positives, low latency and low
of the attack, ascertain the extent of damage or disruption, and
 overhead.
develop remediation and prevention strategies.
 III. OVERVIEW
C. Motivating Example
 As shown in Fig. 1, this is a typical data leakage attack. A. Threat Model
The attacker exploited a vulnerability in apache2 and down- First, we assume that the event logs and digital signatures are
loaded the malicious artifact gather.sh. After executing the credible, similar to previous work [13], [17], [18], [19], [33],
malware, the attacker collected sensitive data from the tar- [35], [39], [40]. In addition, events related to the attack did not
get host and saved it in the form of the file leaked.vm2. occur before the logs were processed.
After using gpg to compress leaked.vm2 into the file Second, we assume that the attacker is external to the sysleaked, the attacker transferred leaked to the C2 server tem and carries out their attack remotely. This may involve
192.168.2.3:xx via process ssh. exploiting vulnerabilities within the system or employing social
 In Fig. 1, the black dashed box denotes the backtracking engineering tactics to convince a user to download and run a
graph obtained by performing backward causality analysis [35], file containing malicious code. Therefore, we do not support
which includes all events causal-related to the alert. The blue side-channel attacks and insider attacks where the attacker has
dashed box denotes the suspicious semantic graph obtained by a legitimate way to access the machine without going through
using suspicious semantic transfer, which includes all events them.
1868 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 2. Architecture of SPARSE.

 Third, we exclude mimicry attacks [41] from consideration in A. Streaming Log Monitoring
our threat model. These attacks are designed to evade intrusion
 SPARSE makes use of mature auditing systems [4], [45], [46],
detection systems by creating a seemingly benign chain of events [47], [48] to access kernel-level logs and obtain the required data.
within an enterprise environment. Existing intrusion detection
 At the entity level, SPARSE focuses on three entity types: file,
systems [42], [43], [44] often rely on heuristics or analysis
 process, and socket. To differentiate, SPARSE needs to construct
of individual events, making them vulnerable to such attacks. unique identifiers for all entities. For the file, SPARSE records the
While detecting mimicry attacks is a limitation of current deabsolute path as the unique identifier. For the process, SPARSE
tection systems, it falls outside the scope of our work. Our concatenates the PID and name as the unique identifier. For the
focus is on identifying relevant events of alert generated by the socket, SPARSE constructs the 4-tuple (<srcip, srcport, dstip,
detection system as contextual information to investigate the
 dstport>) as the unique identifier. At the event level, SPARSE
attack. focuses on three event types: process interactions, file IO events,
 and network IO events. To the best of our knowledge, existing
B. Our Approach auditing systems are rich in semantics and meet the data requirements of SPARSE.
 In this section, we describe the architecture of SPARSE shown
in Fig. 2. Given a POI event, SPARSE can automatically identify
the critical component of the dependency graph. SPARSE con- B. Suspicious Semantic Transfer
sists of two phases: (I) suspicious semantic graph construction The letter P in APT stands for persistence, which means that
(SSGC) and (II) path-level contextual analysis (PCA). an attacker can lurk for a long time until achieves the goal.
 In Phase I, SPARSE makes use of mature auditing sys- To support real-time investigation and long-term monitoring,
tems [4], [45], [46], [47], [48] to access kernel-level stream- SPARSE utilizes a state-based structure and suspicious semantic
ing logs and process them into specific data structures. Then transfer rule to record state changes and associated events for
SPARSE proposes a suspicious semantic transfer rule and stor- each entity. Next, we describe the specific data structure and
age strategy to maintain the suspicious entity list and related transfer rule in turn.
event table with low memory overhead. Given a POI event, 1) Data Structure: For any entity v ∈ V , SPARSE represents
SPARSE can construct the suspicious semantic graph (SSG) in it as a triple < U, Ty , S >. U is the unique identifier of the
real-time. entity, the construction of U is described in Section IV-A. Ty
 In Phase II, SPARSE first performs edge compaction on the denotes the type of the entity and S denotes the state of the
suspicious semantic graph. Then SPARSE proposes a suspicious entity. When S is 0 it means that the entity is not suspicious, and
flow path extraction algorithm to identify possible propagation S is 1 it means that the entity is suspicious. Note that the file
paths of the data/control flow in the suspicious semantic graph and process have their S initialized to 0 when they are created,
(i.e., suspicious flow paths). Next, SPARSE performs path-level and the socket has their S initialized to 1 when it is created,
contextual analysis, scores each suspicious flow path, and deter- i.e., we default to all sockets that are not in the whitelist being
mines how relevant the path is to the POI event. Finally, SPARSE suspicious.
filters out all events that only exist in irrelevant paths from For any event e ∈ E, SPARSE represents it as a quintuple
suspicious semantic graph to generate the critical component < Us , Uo , O, Ti , D >. Us and Uo are unique identifiers for the
graph (CCG) as the output. subject and object of e, respectively. O denotes the type of e,
 Ti denotes the time when e occurred, and D denotes the data
 flow amount of e. Note that SPARSE is based on the direction of
 IV. SYSTEM DESIGN the data flow and control flow to determine the location of the
 In this section, we describe the design details of each phase of subject and object. For example, when O = Read, the data flow
SPARSE. As shown in Fig. 2, SPARSE is a two-phase framework is from the file to the process, so the file is the subject and the
(i.e., constructing suspicious semantic graph and performing process is the object. When O = W rite, the data flow is from
path-level contextual analysis) for mitigating the dependency the process to the file, so the process is the subject and the file
explosion problem. is the object.
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1869

 TABLE II
 SUSPICIOUS SEMANTIC TRANSFER RULE

Fig. 3. An Example of Suspicious Semantic Transfer. The red solid line indicates that the entity carries suspicious semantic. SEL is short for Suspicious Entity
List and RET is short for Relevant Event Table.

 2) Transfer Rule: Based on the idea of semantic transfer,
 Algorithm 1: Suspicious Semantic Graph Construction.
SPARSE constructs a set of predefined rules to process streaming
logs and identify entity states in real-time. As shown in Table II, Input:
each rule is a quadruple: < O, Ts , To , D >. O is the type of 1: Streaming logs in chronological order;
event, Ts and To are the entity types of the subject and object 2: Suspicious Entity List (SEL);
respectively, and D is a description of the rule. From Table II we 3: Related Event Table (RET);
can see that the subject can transfer suspicious semantics to the 4: POI event p;
object via a specific event, which is referred to as the ”suspicious Output: Suspicious Semantic Graph (SSG) for POI event
semantics transfer rule”. As shown in Fig. 3, T denotes the p;
moment, red entities denote suspicious entities, and red straight 5: for e ∈ Streaming logs do
arrows denote suspicious semantic transfer. When T = 3, a 6: Construct u, v from e where uU = eUs , vU = eUo
suspicious process (process A) writes data to a file (f ile C), 7: if uS == 0 and  uU ∈ SEL then
which in turn carries the suspicious semantic. When T = 4, the 8: continue;
suspicious file is read by another process (process D), which 9: else
then carries the suspicious semantic. Conversely, if an entity 10: vS = 1;
has no suspicious semantic, any event involving this entity as 11: if  vU ∈ SEL then
a subject will not propagate suspicious semantic. For example, 12: SEL.append(vU );
when T = 2, a file (f ile B) is read by the suspicious entity 13: end if
(process A), but there is no propagation of the suspicious 14: Add {vU : RET[uU ] + e} to RET;
semantic. 15: end if
 As shown in lines 5 to 11 in Algorithm 1, SPARSE processes the 16: if ∃ pUo ∈ SEL then
streaming logs, analyses data flows, and determines whether the 17: return graphConstruct(RET[pUo ])
entity state transitions. First, SPARSE accesses the event e =< 18: end if
Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > and constructs the subject and object u, v 19: end for
corresponding to that event. Then, SPARSE determines whether
the subject u is a socket or exists in suspicious entity list (SEL,
see Section IV-B3 for detailed definition). Finally, as soon as construction of the suspicious semantic graph. Specifically,
one of these two conditions is met, SPARSE will mark the object SPARSE designs a Suspicious Entity List (SEL) and a Related
v as suspicious and add it to SEL. Event Table (RET), as defined below.
 3) STORAGE STRATEGY: SPARSE designs two data structures Suspicious Entity List: A list that maintains all entities with
to enable efficient storage of relevant data and real-time suspicious semantics (possibly related to attacks). As shown in
1870 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 detail), the memory overhead of SPARSE is 30 MB on average,
 Algorithm 2: Suspicious Flow Path Extraction.
 and there is no problem with high memory overhead. Note that
 Input: we default sockets to suspicious entities, so only entities of file
 1: (1) Suspicious Semantic Graph G; type and process type are saved in SEL.
 2: (2) POI Event p; In summary, SPARSE will use these two data structures to
 3: (3) Q and V for the queue structure, T for the tree enable efficient storage of the necessary data and real-time
 structure; construction of the suspicious semantic graph. As shown in lines
 Output: Suspicious flow paths; 11 to 17 of Algorithm 1, SPARSE will add the object vU to the
 4: Q.add(p) SEL for any event e =< Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > that satisfies the
 5: T.creatN ode(p) semantic transfer rule. In addition, SPARSE stitches the related
 6: while Q.num = 0 do events of Us with event e and uses it as the related events of
 7: e = Q.pop() Uo to update RET. Finally, for any given POI event, SPARSE is
 8: V.add(e) able to extract all relevant events for the object of that POI event
 9: for ie ∈ G.inEdges(eUs ) do from the RET in real-time. SPARSE then uses a simple graph
 10: if ieTi < eTi and ie ∈/ Q and ie ∈ / V then construction algorithm, which extracts entities from entities as
 11: Q.add(ie) nodes and events as edges, to construct a suspicious semantic
 12: T.creatN ode(ie) graph associated with the POI event.
 13: T.creatEdge(e, ie)
 14: end if
 C. Edge Compaction
 15: end for
 16: end while A suspicious semantic graph often contains multiple parallel
 17: return T.allP aths() edges between two nodes. This is because operating systems
 typically complete read/write tasks (e.g., file read/write) by
 proportionally allocating data to multiple system calls. Inspired
 by recent work for graph reduction [11], SPARSE merges the
Fig. 3, when T = 1, the data flow passes from the suspicious
 edges between two nodes if the time difference between them
socket to process A (suspicious semantic transfer), so SPARSE
 is less than a given threshold. We ultimately chose 10 seconds
adds entity A to SEL. When T = 2, there is no suspicious
 as it demonstrates reasonable results in terms of various system
semantic transfer, so SEL is not changed. When T = 5, the data
 calls, such as file transfers and network connections.
flow passes from suspicious file C to process A, but entity A is
already in SEL, so SEL is not changed.
 Related Event Table: A table that holds all the related events D. Suspicious Flow Path Extraction
corresponding to all suspicious entities. The related events of In order to perform path-level contextual analysis, it is
a suspicious entity refer to the set of all data flows and con- first necessary to identify possible propagation paths of the
trol flows that lead to this entity’s semantic change. Specif- data/control flow in the suspicious semantic graph (i.e., susically, SPARSE will maintain a separate set of related events picious flow paths). SPARSE proposes a suspicious flow path
in RET for all suspicious entities. Whenever an event e =< extraction algorithm that can efficiently handle complex graph
Us , Uo , O, Ti , D > that satisfies the suspicious semantic structures. In brief, as shown in Fig. 4, SPARSE transforms
transfer rule occurs, SPARSE will stitch the related events of Us the suspicious semantic graph into a multiway tree and then
with event e and use it as the related events of Uo to update RET. traverses it to obtain all suspicious flow paths.
As shown in Section V-C, the size of the RET is much smaller Specifically, as shown in lines 1 to 5 of Algorithm 2, Q and V
than the raw audit logs and the time of read in is negligible. are the queue structures, where Q holds the events to be traversed
SPARSE can construct a suspicious semantic graph related to the and V holds the events that have been traversed. T is the multi-
POI event in real-time. way tree structure, which holds the topological information. As
 As shown in Fig. 3, when T = 1, SPARSE adds to RET with shown in lines 6 to 9 of Algorithm 2, SPARSE traverses event
A : {1}, indicating that the related event of the suspicious entity e, identifying all incoming edge ies (ies = G.inEdges(eUs )).
A is {1}. When T = 4, SPARSE adds to RET with D : {1, 3, 4}, As shown in lines 10-13 of Algorithm 2, SPARSE determines
stitched from the related events {1, 3} of subject C and the that the incoming edge ie (ie ∈ ies) occurred earlier than event
current event {4}. When T = 5, SPARSE updates RET with e and has not been traversed (ie ∈ / V ), then creates node ie in
A : {1, 3, 5}, stitched from the related events {1, 3} of subject the multiway tree T and the parent of that node is e. Finally,
C and the current event {5}. SPARSE traverses the multiway tree T to obtain all paths from
 In order to speed up the consumption of log streams, SPARSE the root node to the leaf nodes, which are output as suspicious
keeps the whole SEL in memory to determine the entity states flow paths.
and save suspicious entities in real-time. In contrast, inspired The suspicious flow path extraction algorithm takes into acby the CPU architecture, SPARSE keeps only some of the count the timeliness and directionality of the data/control flow
high-modification (frequent growth in a short period) RETs in and is able to handle the complex graph structure efficiently, as
memory and stores other low-modification RETs in the hard demonstrated in Section V-C, where SPARSE extracts over 140
disk. According to our experimental results (see Section V-C for suspicious flow paths in one second on average. Finally, it is
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1871

Fig. 4. Suspicious flow path extraction and path-level contextual scoring.

important to note that events exist as nodes in the multiway tree denotes the number of events in the path and is used to normalize
and suspicious flow paths, as shown in Fig. 4. the P athScore.
 SPARSE calculates the EventScore using the following
E. Path-Level Contextual Scoring equation:
 To avoid confusion, it is important to clarify that events in the Impact(e, f )
suspicious semantic graph (Fig. 4(a) are represented as nodes EventScore = α s f = parent(e)
 child(f ) Impact(s, f )
within both the multiway tree (Fig. 4(b) and the suspicious flow
 (2)
paths (Fig. 4(c). SPARSE quantifies the degree of influence that
a suspicious flow path exerts on the POI event (i.e., Event 10 in len(child(f ) − 1)
Fig. 4), which corresponds to the final node in the path. α=1+ (3)
 C
 Provenance graphs are coarse-grained by nature, making it
difficult to directly infer causal relationships between a process where parent(e) denotes the parent node of event e, and
node’s incoming and outgoing edges. Therefore, SPARSE adopts child(f ) denotes all the children of node f in the multiway tree.
the following intuitive assumptions: First, if the data volumes Impact(e, f ) denotes the degree of impact that event e exerts on
of an incoming and outgoing edge are similar, it is more likely event f , as defined later. α is an inflation factor designed to mitthat a causal relationship exists between them (e.g., a process igate the issue of relative impact attenuation caused by fan-out,
reads 526 bytes from the network and immediately writes 526 where a parent node has multiple child nodes. The multiway tree
bytes to a file, suggesting the same content is being transferred). constructed from the suspicious semantic graph often contains
Similarly, if the timestamps are similar, then there is a causal nodes with multiple outgoing edges. Without introducing this
relation between the events since we think that the exploitation is inflation factor, the final PathScore would disproportionately
automated and its steps quickly follow each other. Furthermore, rely on the EventScore of nodes near the root (e.g., node 10
considering the neighborhood structure in the suspicious seman- in Fig. 4(b), potentially leading to false negatives. As shown in
tic graph, if a node has only one incoming edge and one outgoing Equation (3), α is controlled by the super parameter C and the
edge, we assume the incoming edge has a 100% influence on the number of child nodes. It is negatively correlated with C and
outgoing edge. When a node has multiple incoming edges and a positively correlated with the number of child nodes.
single outgoing edge, SPARSE applies a weighted calculation to SPARSE picks two features (i.e., data flow amount and time),
assess the contribution of each incoming edge to the outgoing to calculate the Impact using the following equation:
edge.
 Impact(e1, e2) = CS(N or(e1D , e1Ti ), N or(e2D , e2Ti ))
 In summary, SPARSE estimates the degree of impact between
 (4)
events is determined by the event attributes (i.e., data flow
 where e1 and e2 are two connected events(i.e., the object node
amount and timestamp) and the neighboring relationships beof e2 is the subject node of e1). eD and eT denote the data flow
tween events (i.e., multiple incoming and outgoing edges).
 and occurrence time of event e, respectively. N or(·) denotes
 For each suspicious flow path p, SPARSE calculates the
 normalization, which removes differences in eD and eT on the
P athScore using the following equation:
 scale. CS(·) denotes the computation of cosine similarity.
 
 e
 SPARSE will iteratively calculate the scores of all suspicious
 P athScore = EventScore(e) / Len(p) (1) flow paths and consider the path whose score is below a threshold
 E
 T as an irrelevant path. Then, SPARSE filters out events that
where e denotes an event and E denotes the set of all events only exist in the irrelevant path and outputs the retained
contained in the path (e ∈ E). EventScore denotes the degree part as a critical component graph to help analysts in attack
of impact of event e on the parent node, as defined later. Len(p) investigation.
1872 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE III the attack case. Columns “# V” and “# E” indicate the number
 THE STATISTICS OF DEPENDENCY GRAPHS GENERATED FOR ALL THE 15
 ATTACKS
 of nodes and edges of the backtracking graphs after performing
 causality analysis [35] from POI events. Column “# CE” shows
 the number of critical events (related to the attack), which we
 explain in detail below.
 2) Obtaining Ground Truth: In order to evaluate the performance of SPARSE, we need to specify the ground truth for all
 attack cases (i.e., identify all critical events). Specifically, we
 analyzed the targets of each attack case and determined the
 corresponding POI events from massive logs. We then conducted
 back-propagation [35] from POI events to obtain backtracking
 graphs and searched for critical events within them. Finally, we
 manually ascertained the critical events based on Indicators of
 Compromise (e.g., file names and malware names) and attack
 steps (e.g., download then execution), as shown in Appendix A.
 Evaluation Metrics: First, we measure false positives (FP)
 and false negatives (FN). False positives refer to those edges that
 SPARSE identifies as critical but are not, while false negatives
 refer to those edges that SPARSE identifies as irrelevant but
 are critical. Then we compute the false positive rate F P R =
 V. EVALUATION F P/Etotal and false negative rate F N R = F N/Ec , where
 In this section, we first present the evaluation preparation, in- Etotal represents the number of edges and Ec represents the
cluding the characteristics of the dataset, the obtaining of ground number of critical edges, respectively. Finally, we also computed
truth, and the setting of evaluation metrics. We then evaluate the the precision, recall, and F-score as comprehensive evaluation
effectiveness and efficiency of each component separately. In metrics.
summary, we aim to answer the following questions:
 r RQ1: How effective is SPARSE in attack investigation?
 r RQ2: How efficient is SPARSE in attack investigation? B. RQ1 : How Effective is SPARSE in Attack Investigation ?
 r RQ3: How sensitive is SPARSE in parameter selection? There has been a lot of graph-based related work about attack
 investigation [12], [13], [16], [17], [18], [23], [25], [26], [27],
 [29], [51], [52]. However, HOLMES [12] and RapSheet [13]
A. Evaluation Preparation rely solely on defined TTP-like (Tactics, Techniques, and Pro-
 We deploy our implementation of SPARSE on a computer with cedures) rules for detection and investigation. Such approaches
Intel (R) Core (TM) i9-10900 K CPU @ 3.70 GHz and 64 GB suffer from heavy reliance on manual efforts and cannot efmemory. SPARSE processes streaming logs from the auditing fectively address zero-day vulnerabilities. HERCULE [51] and
systems Sysdig [47] and SPADE [5], extracts information in the WATSON [23] address attack investigation problems by discovformat as described in Section II-A, and runs continuously in a ering communities (i.e., behavioral abstractions) on the provelow-overhead state. nance graph. Their purpose is to assist analysts in identifying
 1) Attack Dataset: We evaluate the effectiveness of SPARSE attack stages from a community perspective, enabling a quick
in revealing attack sequences on a dataset with over 150 mil- understanding of the purpose of a subgraph in the provenance
lion system audit logs. As shown in Table III, this dataset graph (e.g., file compilation and uploading). HERCULE and
contains 15 attack cases (10 simulated attacks and 5 DARPA WATSON (subgraph-level) differ in granularity from SPARSE
attacks), and is provided by DEPIMPACT [17]. The simulated (event-level). KAIROS [26], FLASH [25], R-CAID [29], and
attacks consist of 7 (rows 2 to 8) single-host attacks based on PROVG-SEARCHER [16] are intrusion detection systems that
common exploits [11], [32], [34], [49] and 3 (rows 9 to 11) leverage self-supervised learning to identify anomalous behavmulti-host attacks based on Cyber Kill Chain [50] and CVE iors and incorporate attack investigation as a subcomponent.
reports [49]. The simulated attacks utilized deployed hosts with However, these frameworks are highly integrated, with their
12 active users and hundreds of processes, daily tasks such as investigation modules tightly dependent on the outputs of the
file manipulation, text editing, and software development were detection components, making direct reuse challenging. Hence,
carried out to simulate real-world usage. We detail these 10 we do not compare our work with theirs.
simulated attacks in Appendix A1 and A2. The DARPA dataset Here, we compare the performance of SPARSE with 4 statecontains 5 host attacks (rows 12 to 16), which was done by of-the-art approaches: SLEUTH [52], NODOZE [18], DISTtwo teams (FiveDirections and Theia), and differed in terms DET [27], and DEPIMPACT [17], which are more relevant in
of target systems (Windows, Linux) and vulnerability exploits terms of methodology (anomaly-score based) and granularity
(pine backdoor, firefox backdoor, and browser extension). (event-level) for our evaluation. SLEUTH defines TTP-like rules
 Table III shows the statistics of the generated dependency with the added constraint that these rules only fire when certain
graphs for all attacks. Column “Attack” indicates the name of confidentiality or integrity conditions are satisfied according to
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1873

 TABLE IV
 PERFORMANCE OF DEPENDENCY GRAPHS GENERATED BY DIFFERENT TECHNIQUES. PREC.: PRECISION; REC.: RECALL

a tag-based information flow propagation. NODOZE measures FPR = 42.54*10−2 ), resulting in ineffective support for attack
the rarity of different events in the environment and, based on investigation. NODOZE performed better than SLEUTH in
this, assigns anomaly scores to each event in the dependency including critical edges but worse in FPR (FP = 16,682, FPR
graph. We use logs that only contain normal behavior (captured = 7.329*10−2 ; FN = 2, FNR = 14.85*10−2 ), resulting in
outside of attack periods) as execution profiles (i.e., statistics of the ineffective reduction of investigation cost for analysts. The
events) to satisfy NODOZE. DISTDET is a distributed detection reason is that the performance of NODOZE relies on whether the
system that detects anomalous events by training a hierarchical execution profile comprehensively covers all benign behaviors
system event tree (HST) model and generates alert summary but ignores information in the form of streams. DISTDET congraphs (ASGs) as outputs for attack investigation. Specifically, siders the ancestor process nodes up to X preceding generations
DISTDET first identifies the X-generation ancestors and Y- (X = 12), the descendant process nodes up to Y subsequent gengeneration descendants of the subject process. It then incor- erations (Y = 2), and the top N (N = 15) outgoing nodes as part
porates the top N outgoing edges of each type (process, file, of the ASG. This comprehensive inclusion enables DISTDET to
and network) from these identified nodes (i.e., the events they achieve optimal performance in terms of false negatives (FN =
initiated) to form the ASG. Accordingly, we produce ASGs 0). However, due to the lack of further filtering mechanisms to
based on this heuristic rule and optimized hyperparameters eliminate irrelevant events, DISTDET performs poorly in false
(X=12, Y=2, N=15). DEPIMPACT assigns anomaly scores positive reduction (FP = 4052, FPR = 1.72*10−2 ). DEPIMto edges based on several characteristics (including time, data PACT heuristically selects 3 entry points (one each for files,
flow amount, and node access), and then aggregates the scores processes, and sockets), which amplifies the attack surface.
to determine the entry points through a propagation algorithm. DEPIMPACT directly takes the intersection between the for-
DEPIMPACT then takes as output the overlap events of the ward graph of the entry points and the backward graph of the
forward graph of the entry point and the backward graph of alert point as output, which introduces massive attack-irrelevant
the alert point. events (FP = 2,473, FPR = 1.087*10−2 ). Regarding the reduc-
 Table IV shows the performance of attack investigation for tion results, SPARSE exhibits the best performance (FP = 99, FPR
different techniques in all cases. Lower FP/FPR indicates a better = 0.043*10−2 ), we attribute the good performance of our system
ability to filter irrelevant edges and lower FN/FNR indicate to (1) SPARSE employs semantic transfer to construct a suspia better ability to retain critical edges. The results show that cious semantic graph related to the POI event that inherently
SPARSE performs the best. On average, the critical component filters out a significant number of irrelevant events (FP = 403,
graph generated by SPARSE (∼113 edges) is 8849 × smaller than FPR = 0.177*10−2 ), and (2) SPARSE evaluates the relevance of
the original dependency graph (∼1,000,000 edges), 22 × smaller context to POI events at the path-level rather than in isolation.
than the second-best result (i.e., DEPIMAPCT with ∼2,487 Finally, SPARSE outperforms all comparative methods across
edges). SPARSE demonstrates the best capability in filtering all comprehensive evaluation metrics (i.e., precision, recall,
irrelevant edges while preserving the attack sequences (FP = and F-score), indicating that it effectively meets the practical
99, FPR = 0.043*10−2 ), 25 × more effective than DEPIMPACT requirement for low false positives.
(FP = 2,473, FPR = 1.087*10−2 ). Moreover, SPARSE does not
miss any critical edges (i.e., FN = 0, FNR = 0).
 C. RQ2 : How Efficient is SPARSE in Attack Investigation ?
 SLEUTH investigates attack scenarios by defining confidentiality and integrity labels for label propagation. How- In this section, we evaluate the efficiency of SPARSE when
ever, SLEUTH cannot ensure to cover all the attack-related deployed in a real scenario. First, we evaluate SPARSE on the
edges and therefore performed the worst in FNR (FN = 5.73, real-time performance by comparing data generation rate and
1874 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE V increases overhead on the disk. In addition, the CPU overhead
 COMPARISON OF DATA CONSUMPTION RATE AND DATA GENERATION RATE
 of SPARSE is 4.5%, due to the simple yet intuitive and effective
 algorithm.
 In summary, we believe that SPARSE outperforms the latest
 work DEPIMPACT in all aspects of overhead and can satisfy
 the requirements of low overhead and latency in application
 scenarios.

 D. RQ3: How Sensitive is SPARSE in Parameter Selection?
 As shown in Section IV-E, there are two super parameters in
 SPARSE that need to be set: (1) the C affects the expansion factor,
 (2) the T filters the paths. As shown in Equation (3), the larger C,
 the smaller the expansion factor α, the lower the path score, and
 the fewer events will be retained by SPARSE. Parameter T , on the
 other hand, indicates the severity of SPARSE for path selection;
 the larger T is, the fewer events will be retained by SPARSE.
 We demonstrate the sensitivity of SPARSE in parameter selection by testing all combinations of the hyper-parameters C
data consumption rate. Table V shows that SPARSE can consume
 and T through grid search methodology. Specifically, we set the
events 15 × faster than the events generation rate of the host on
 minimum value of C to be 1, the maximum value to be 9, and
average, which shows the real-time of SPARSE is feasible. Then
 the step size to be 1; set the minimum value of T to be 0.1, the
we evaluate the overheads of each component of SPARSE on
 maximum value to be 0.9, and the step size to be 0.1; and test the
time, memory, CPU, and disk, as shown in Table VI. In addition,
 performance of SPARSE on the metrics FP/FN as shown in Fig. 5.
we conduct comparative experiments with the baseline method
 As parameter C increases, SPARSE reduces the path score and
DEPIMPACT.
 retains fewer events, hence the FP decreases. At the same time,
 Time and Memory: SPARSE can perform path-level contextual
 SPARSE misses some critical events, causing FN to rise. As the
analysis of the suspicious semantic graph and construct the
 threshold T increases, SPARSE blocks more paths and preserves
critical component graph in 2 s on average, which is 4091
 fewer events, so FP falls while FN rises. As shown in Fig. 5(a),
× faster than DEPIMPACT (∼6,464s). DEPIMPACT uses an
 FP decreases gradually from the upper left to the lower right; as
impact propagation algorithm to identify entry points. However,
 shown in Fig. 5(b), FN increases gradually from the upper left
when the number of edges in the backtracking graph is high
 to the lower right. The effects of these parameter changes on the
(e.g., case “Hide File”), it takes an extremely long time to reach
 SPARSE are in line with our predictions.
global convergence (19,814s). In terms of memory overhead,
 Obviously, FP and FN are two evaluation metrics that we both
three causes are making SPARSE smaller than DEPIMAPCT: (1)
 want to be as low as possible, but there is a trade-off between
SPARSE only stores suspicious nodes in memory when processtheir performance for a system (i.e., a rise in one leads to a fall in
ing streaming logs, so the memory overhead grows extremely
 the other). Finally, we choose C = 5 and T = 0.5 as the default
slowly and can be seen as constant in scale (i.e., 30 MB). (2) The
 parameters for SPARSE. Of course, the manufacturer can adapt
suspicious semantic graphs (∼403 edges) read in by SPARSE are
 these parameters to the specific scenario.
much smaller than the dependency graphs (∼one million edges)
read in by DEPIMPACT. (3) The suspicious flow path extraction
 VI. DISCUSSION
algorithm applied in PCA only traverses the graph structure once
(a complexity of O(E) ) and generates a smaller number of SFPs Cooperation with existing techniques: There is a requirement
(230 on average). For these reasons, the memory overhead of for defenders to be able to detect and handle real-world attacks
PCA (132.82 MB) is 2.4 × smaller than that of DEPIMAPCT in real time. As an attack investigation system, SPARSE can be
(320.81 MB). Finally, it is important to emphasize that SPARSE combined with a variety of existing techniques to meet this
is real-time for suspicious semantic graph construction (SSGC), goal. By working with intrusion detection systems [12], [14],
so we do not perform a time overhead evaluation for this [15], [53] that can provide real-time alerts and defenses, SPARSE
component. is able to investigate alerts for relevant events and provide a
 CPU and Disk: SPARSE stores the relevant event table (RET) brief critical component graph to analysts. By working with
in the database when processing streaming logs. To evaluate the compression systems [10], [11], [38], [54], [55] that can reduce
overhead of SPARSE on the hard disk, we also perform the rele- redundant information, SPARSE is able to reduce memory and
vant experiments. As shown in Table VI, SPARSE requires only disk overheads, enabling years of relevant data storage. By
21.03 MB of disk space, which is 9 × smaller than the original working with analysis systems [13], [18], [56] that automatically
logs (204.87 MB). This is because SPARSE only retains events of determine the authenticity of alarms, SPARSE is able to provide
suspicious semantic relevance, whereas other techniques [10], streamlined but sufficient relevant events to support the triage of
[17], [18], [19], [34] require the whole logs, which significantly alarms.
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1875

 TABLE VI
 OVERHEAD PERFORMANCE OF EACH COMPONENT OF SPARSE AND BASELINE APPROACH

Fig. 5. Hyperparameter Matrices for System Performance with Different Parameters.

 Evasion Attacks: Existing investigation techniques, such improve the detection of anomalous system activity, and SPARSE
as DEPIMAPCT, utilize weight computation and score- can work with these approaches to provide better defenses. If
propagation techniques to identify attack entry points. However, the detection system initiates false positives frequently, SPARSE
this insight of independently calculating the weights of events can only identify relevant events but cannot filter these false
does not fit the situation where information flows between en- alerts. But SPARSE can work with alarm triage techniques [13],
tities. As a result, an attacker can inject a payload by writing [18], [54] to help them filter false alarms by providing a
multiple times and thus evade tracking. In contrast, SPARSE streamlined critical component graph. In addition, as shown in
mitigates the impact of this by performing contextual analysis Section IV-B3, SPARSE needs to maintain a suspicious entity
in path-level to synthesize the relevance between a path and an list in memory and a related event table on disk. As the runtime
alert. An attacker may evade investigation by going the long way grows, there is redundant information in the related event table,
around (i.e., repeating nonsensical behavior) as in the attack case such as Event 10 being stored four times in Fig. 3. By working
“Hide File” where the attacker changes the file name multiple with existing compression systems [10], [11], [38], [54], [55],
times. As shown in Section IV-E, SPARSE is able to mitigate SPARSE can effectively mitigate this situation and enable long
this problem by performing relative score calculation and event deployment runs.
score inflation mechanisms.
 Limitation: To implement attack investigation, SPARSE relies
on alerts initiated by Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) VII. RELATED WORK
placed on the host. SPARSE cannot perform attack investigation The analysts need to perform threat alert validation and postif the detection system fails to launch alerts (identify suspicious mortem analysis of incidents. Currently, while auditing is by
behavior). Recent approaches [57], [58] propose solutions to no means the only form of forensic investigation, it is telling
1876 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

that 75% of incident response specialists consider logs to be the establish critical patterns of attack and non-attack behavior in
most valuable form of investigation artifact [59]. And in terms the dependency graph. On the other hand, DEPCOMM [22]
of methodologies for attack investigation using logs, they can proposes a novel graph summarization method by dividing the
be categorized into three categories: label propagation-based, large graph into process-centric subgraphs. DEPCOMM then exanomaly score-based, and machine learning-based. tracts summaries from each subgraph, enabling the generation of
 Label Propagation-based: Labels are given to nodes and are summary graphs from dependency graphs, thereby reducing the
propagated to other nodes by system calls. When an alert arises, difficulty of investigation for analysts. ConGraph [24] integrates
the analyst can easily retrace the events associated with the provenance graphs with multi-process contextual information
alert based on the label. Milajerdi et al. propose HOLMES [12], and employs a CNN-BiLSTM model to detect anomalous nodes.
which mitigates the dependency explosion problem by requiring These supervised learning-based approaches suffer from inadthe aggregation of more labels to raise the detection threshold. equate training samples, poor generalization capabilities, and
RapSheet [13] makes use of the tactical provenance graph high computational costs. Therefore, some studies leverage self-
(TPG), which instead of encoding low-level system event depen- supervised learning to model normal system behavior, enabling
dencies, reasons about the causal relationships between threat the generation of alerts upon detecting anomalies. These alerts
alerts. RapSheet proposes a threat scoring scheme that evaluates are subsequently correlated to produce the final output for attack
the severity of each alert based on TPGs to enable effective investigation. DISTDET [27] is a distributed detection system
investigation of alerts. CONAN [14] iteratively performs mali- that detects anomalous events by training a hierarchical syscious behavior determination with label passing and aggregation tem event tree (HST) model. Then, DISTDET marks detected
through data provided by ETW, enabling real-time detection anomalous events as alerts and generates alarm summary graphs
and investigation. ProvG-Searcher [16] employs graph reduction (ASGs). KAIROS [26] trains an anomaly detection model with
techniques to address the semantic gap between the query graph an encoder and decoder architecture and reconstructs the attack
and the provenance graph and simplify subgraph matching to through community discovery algorithms [60] to help security
straightforward comparisons between a query and precomputed analysts quickly understand the full attack scene. FLASH [25]
subgraph representations by using order embeddings. These incorporates a novel adaptation of a GNN-based contextual enlabel-based approaches rely on heuristic rules that cannot handle coder to efficiently encode both local and global graph structures
all types of attacks and have a high level of false negatives in into expressive node embeddings. Similarly, Flash implements
attack investigation. attack investigation at the end through the construction of an
 Anomaly Score-based: The essential view of these methods is attack evolution graph. MAGIC [28] uses masked graph repto quantify the suspiciousness of edges between pairs of nodes. resentation learning to model benign system entities and be-
Pei et al. ’s HERCULE [51] system correlates multi-source haviors, but without an explicit attack investigation component.
heterogeneous logs to construct a multi-dimensional weighted R-CAID [29] precomputes the root cause of each node during the
graph and uses the unsupervised community detection algo- graph construction phase and directly links each node to its root
rithm Louvain [60] to discover attack-related paths from it. during the embedding process, thereby preventing adversaries
NODOZE [18] and PRIOTRACKER [19], on the other hand, from masquerading as legitimate processes. Finally, R-CAID
perform statistics on historical data and assign anomaly scores includes all root cause nodes of the anomalous nodes as part
to events in the dependency graph. The score propagation al- of the attack investigation output. However, the investigation
gorithm is then used to find suspicious events. Both of these components in the aforementioned works typically rely on simmethods rely on statistics of historical data and cannot be ap- ple correlation of multiple alerts and exhibit a high degree of
plied in complex and variable generative environments. DEPIM- integration, making them heavily dependent on the outputs of
PACT [17] calculates dependency weights globally based on preceding detection components.
multiple features (including time, data traffic amount, and node In contrast to previous work, SPARSE employs a hybrid
access) and then aggregates the weights to nodes to determine method in the specific domain of causality tracking. SPARSE
suspicious points of intrusion. The overlapping parts between first uses suspicious semantic delivery rule to construct suspithe forward graph of the entry point and the backward graph of cious semantic graph. Then SPARSE uses path-level contextual
the alarm point are then considered attack-related events. These analysis to extract a streamlined critical component graph.
score-based methods can cover all critical events. However,
there is no restriction on the variation of scores to solve the
dependency explosion problem, thus leading to higher false VIII. CONCLUSION
positives. In addition, these methods require reading in all the We propose SPARSE, a system that processes streaming logs
logs to build the dependency graph, which is very expensive in and outputs critical events (attack-related events) according to
terms of hard disk and memory. alert in real-time. Specifically, SPARSE constructs a suspicious
 Machine Learning-based: Some techniques use machine semantic graph related to the POI event by suspicious semantic
learning methods to learn contextual and structural informa- transfer rule and storage strategy. Then SPARSE uses a sustion from dependency graphs to identify the most relevant picious flow path extraction algorithm to extract all reachable
abnormal events to alert. ATLAS [21] uses a novel combina- flow paths from the suspicious semantic graph. Finally, SPARSE
tion of causal analysis, natural language processing, and ma- uses path-level contextual analysis to score all paths and filters
chine learning to construct sequence-based models as a way to irrelevant events to obtain the final critical component graph.
YING et al.: SPARSE: SEMANTIC TRACKING AND PATH ANALYSIS FOR ATTACK INVESTIGATION IN REAL-TIME 1877

Our evaluation of real attacks demonstrates that SPARSE achieves cyber-physical system environment,” Electronics, vol. 13, no. 5, 2024,
low false positives (FP = 99), low overhead (30 MB for memory Art. no. 945.
 [25] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehenand 21.03 MB for hard disk), and low latency (1.58 s for attack sive approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation
investigation). learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3552–3570.
 [26] Z. Cheng et al., “KAIROS: Practical intrusion detection and investigation
 using whole-system provenance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
 2024, pp. 3533–3551.
 REFERENCES [27] F. Dong et al., “{DISTDET }: A { Cost-Effective} distributed cyber
 [1] “What Twitter’s 200 million-user email leak actually means,” 2024. [On- threat detection system,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023,
 line]. Available: https://www.wired.com/story/twitter-leak-200-million- vol. 23,pp. 6575–6592.
 user-email-addresses/ [28] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “{MAGIC}: De-
 [2] “Mitre att&ck,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://attack.mitre.org/ tecting advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation learn-
 [3] “System administration utilities,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: ing,” in Proc. 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2024, vol. 24, pp. 5197–5214.
 //access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/6/ [29] A. Goyal, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “R-CAID: Embedding root cause
 html/security_guide/chap-system_auditing analysis within provenance-based intrusion detection,” in Proc. IEEE
 [4] “About event tracing,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://docs.microsoft. Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3515–3532.
 com/en-us/windows/win32/etw/about-event-tracing [30] “Lateral movement,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.crowdstrike.
 [5] A. Gehani and D. Tariq, “Spade: Support for Provenance Auditing in com/cybersecurity-101/lateral-movement/
 Distributed Environments,” in Proc. ACM/IFIP/USENIX Int. Middleware [31] “Apt notes,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/aptnotes/data/
 Conf., 2012, pp. 101–120. [32] Y. Kwon et al., “MCI: Modeling-based causality inference in audit logging
 [6] S. Ma et al., “Kernel-supported cost-effective audit logging for causal- for attack investigation,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, vol. 2,
 ity tracking,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Usenix Annu. Tech. Conf., 2018, pp. 1–14.
 pp. 241–254. [33] P. Gao et al., “{AIQL}: Enabling efficient attack investigation from system
 [7] A. Bates et al., “Trustworthy whole-system provenance for the Linux monitoring data,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. Usenix Annu. Tech. Conf., 2018,
 kernel,” in Proc. 24th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2015, pp. 319–334. pp. 113–126.
 [8] M. A. Inam et al., “SoK: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing [34] S. Ma et al., “ProTracer: Towards practical provenance tracing by alterthe provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, nating between logging and tainting,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur.,
 2022, pp. 307–325. 2016, vol. 2, pp. 1–15.
 [9] K. H. Lee et al., “High accuracy attack provenance via binary-based [35] S. T. King and P. M. Chen, “Backtracking intrusions,” ACM SIGOPS
 execution partition,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2013, vol. 16, Operating Syst. Rev., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 223–236, 2003.
 pp. 1–16. [36] “Darpa,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.darpa.mil/program/
[10] Y. Tang et al., “NodeMerge: Template based efficient data reduction transparent-computing
 for big-data causality analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. [37] “Darap3 transparent engagement 3,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
 Commun Secur., 2018, pp. 1324–1337. drive.google.com/drive/folders/1QlbUFWAGq3Hpl8wVdzOdIoZLFxkII
[11] Z. Xu et al., “High fidelity data reduction for Big Data security dependency 4EK
 analyses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2016, [38] T. Zhu et al., “General, efficient, and real-time data compaction strategy
 pp. 504–516. for APT forensic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
[12] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakr- pp. 3312–3325, 2021.
 ishnan, “HOLMES: Real-time APT detection through correlation of sus- [39] P. Gao et al., “Enabling efficient cyber threat hunting with cyber threat
 picious information flows,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2019, intelligence,” in Proc. IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2021, pp. 193–204.
 pp. 1137–1152. [40] Gao et al., “{SAQL}: A stream-based query system for real-time abnormal
[13] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis system behavior detection,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp.,
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. 2018, pp. 639–656.
 Privacy, 2020, pp. 1172–1189. [41] D. Wagner and P. Soto, “Mimicry attacks on host-based intrusion detec-
[14] C. Xiong et al., “Conan: A practical real-time APT detection system with tion systems,” in Proc. 9th ACM Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2002,
 high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., pp. 255–264.
 vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan./Feb. 2020. [42] M. Bishop et al., Introduction to Computer Security, vol. 50. Reading,
[15] T. Zhu et al., “APTSHIELD: A stable, efficient and real-time APT detection MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2005.
 system for linux hosts,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, [43] C. Kruegel et al., Intrusion Detection and Correlation: Challenges and
 no. 6, pp. 5247–5264, Nov/-Dec. 2023. Solutions, vol. 14. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2004.
[16] E. Altinisik, F. Deniz, and H. T. Sencar, “ProvG-searcher: A graph repre- [44] “Insider threat monitoring software,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://
 sentation learning approach for efficient provenance graph search,” in Proc. www.netwrix.com/insider_threat_detection.html
 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 2247–2261. [45] “Auditd,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://linux.die.net/man/8/auditd
[17] P. Fang et al., “Back-propagating system dependency impact for attack [46] “Lttng,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://lttng.org
 investigation,” in Proc. 31th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2022, pp. 2461–2478. [47] “Sysdig,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/draios/sysdig
[18] W. U. Hassan et al., “Nodoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with [48] “Redhat,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/linux-audit/
 automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., [49] “Exploit database,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.exploit-db.
 2019, pp. 1–15. com/
[19] Y. Liu et al., “Towards a timely causality analysis for enterprise security,” [50] “Cyber kill chain,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.
 in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., 2018, pp. 1–15. lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html
[20] Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache nice things: Lightning-fast [51] K. Pei et al., “HERCULE: Attack story reconstruction via community
 threat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical storage,” in Proc. 36th discovery on correlated log graph,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput.
 Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 165–178. Secur. Appl., 2016, pp. 583–595.
[21] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for attack [52] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction
 investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., 2021, pp. 3005–3022. from cots audit data,” in Proc. 26th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2017,
[22] Z. Xu, P. Fang, C. Liu, X. Xiao, Y. Wen, and D. Meng, “DEPCOMM: pp. 487–504.
 Graph summarization on system audit logs for attack investigation,” in [53] T. Kim et al., “Intrusion recovery using selective re-execution,” in Proc. 9th
 Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2022, pp. 540–557. USENIX Conf. Operating Syst. Des. Implementation, 2010, pp. 89–104.
[23] J. Zeng et al., “WATSON: Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via [54] M. N. Hossain et al., “Dependence-preserving data compaction for scalaggregation of contextual semantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur., able forensic analysis,” in Proc. 27th USENIX Conf. Secur. Symp., 2018,
 2021, pp. 1–18. pp. 1723–1740.
[24] L. Li and W. Chen, “Congraph: Advanced persistent threat detection [55] N. Michael et al., “On the forensic validity of approximated audit logs,”
 method based on provenance graph combined with process context in in Proc. 36th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 189–202.
1878 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[56] W. U. Hassan et al., “This is why we can’t cache nice things: Lightning-fast Mingjun Ma received the BE degree in computer scithreat hunting using suspicion-based hierarchical storage,” in Proc. 36th ence from Zhejiang ShuRen University, HangZhou,
 Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., 2020, pp. 165–178. China, in 2023. He is currently working toward
[57] S. Wang et al., “Heterogeneous graph matching networks for unknown the MD degree in computer science with the Zhemalware detection,” in Proc. 28th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, jiang University of Technology. His research interpp. 3762–3770. ests include APT and cyber intelligence and mobile
[58] X. Han et al., “Unicorn: Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced authentication.
 persistent threats,” Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., pp. 1–18, 2020.
[59] “Carbon black,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.carbonblack.com/
 global-incident-response-threatreport/november-2018/
[60] V. D. Blondel et al., “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks,” J.
 Stat. Mech.: Theory Experiment, vol. 2008, no. 10, 2008, Art. no. P10008.
[61] Vpnfilter, New router malware with destructive capabilities,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https://symc.ly/2IPGGVE
[62] Ebay, “Ebay Inc. to ask Ebay users to change pass-words” 2014. [Online]. Available: http://blog.ebay.com/ebay-inc-ask-ebay-users-changepasswords/ Chunlin Xiong received the PhD degree on cyberse-
[63] “Schneier security: Router vulnerability the vpnfilter botnet,” 2018. curity from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
 [Online]. Available: https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2018/06/ in 2021. He is currently the chief security expert
 router_vulnerab.html of China Unicom (Guangdong) Industrial Internet
 Company, Ltd., responsible for the construction of
 SOC and large models in the security field.

 Jie Ying received the BE degree in digital media from
 the Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou,
 China, in 2020. He is currently working toward the
 PhD degree in computer science the Zhejiang University of Technology. His research interests include
 APT and cyber threat Intelligence.
 Tieming Chen received the PhD degree in computer software and theory from BeiHang University,
 Beijing, China, in 2011. He is currently a professor
 with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou,
 China. His research interests include cyberspace security and intelligence security. He is also a member
 of ACM.
 Tiantian Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree in computer science from Zhejiang University,
 Hangzhou, China, in 2019. He is currently an associate professor with the College of Computer Science
 and Technology, Zhejiang University of Technology,
 China. His research interests include system security
 and artificial intelligence.

 Mingqi Lv received the PhD degree in computer
 science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
 in 2012. His research interests include spatiotemporal
 data mining and ubiquitous computing.
 Wenrui Cheng received the BE degree in computer
 science and technology from Huzhou University,
 Huzhou, China, in 2022. She is currently working
 toward the PhD degree in computer science with
 Zhejiang University of Technology. Her current research interests include knowledge driven APT attack
 sample generation and detection.

 Yan Chen (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD degree
 in computer science from the University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, in 2003. He is currently a
 professor with the Department of Electrical Engineer-
 Qixuan Yuan received the BE degree in computer ing and Computer Science, Northwestern University,
 science and technology from ShanDong Normal Uni- Evanston, IL, USA. His research interests include
 versity, Jinan, China, in 2022. She is currently work- network security, measurement, and diagnosis for
 ing toward the PhD degree in computer science with large-scale networks and distributed systems.
 Zhejiang University of Technology. Her research interests include APT detection and cyber threat intelligence analysis.