This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS 1

 SpectraBayes: Exploring Traffic Series
 Reconstruction in Frequency Domain for
 Anomaly Detection
 Ruoheng Li , Diyin Tang , Member, IEEE, Fei Wang , Xi Zhu , and Xianbin Cao , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Timely detection of anomalies in traffic systems
is crucial for mitigating risks and economic losses. Current
time series anomaly detection methods often use reconstruction errors to identify anomalies, and their accuracy depends
on how well they can reconstruct normal patterns from the
original series. However, traffic data typically exhibit high
noise, spatiotemporal heterogeneity, and uncertain inter-series
correlations, complicating the learning of normal patterns. To
address these challenges, we introduce SpectraBayes, which
explores the reconstruction of density and volume series in the
frequency domain for anomaly detection. First, we transform
the series into the frequency domain and apply a low-pass filter
to remove noise. Then, we embed periodic information into the
frequency-domain representation through phase shifts to enhance
the temporal awareness. Additionally, we model the inter-series
correlations between density and volume resiliently using crossspectrum probabilistic modeling. Optimized by maximizing the
Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO), SpectraBayes ensures robust
reconstruction while avoiding overfitting against the uncertain
data. SpectraBayes outperforms 21 existing anomaly detection
models on traffic series anomaly detection tasks, achieving mean
improvements of 2.71% across three metrics over the secondbest model. Furthermore, it is lightweight and maintains robust Fig. 1. Spatial-temporal heterogeneity of traffic volume, which is revealed by
 varied distribution and autocorrelation coefficient across different dates and
performance under varying noise levels. locations. Data are selected from [1].
 Index Terms—Traffic anomaly detection, Bayesian neural network, frequency-domain representation.
 economic losses. Timely detection of such anomalies is crucial
 for traffic management and mitigation [1], [2].
 I. I NTRODUCTION Macroscopic traffic data, such as volume and density,
 are readily obtained from widely deployed loop detectors,
T RAFFIC anomalies, such as congestion or accidents,
 disrupt transportation systems and incur significant providing a convenient resource for anomaly detection. Existing traffic time series anomaly detection methods can be
 Received 8 April 2025; revised 14 November 2025 and 25 January broadly categorized as supervised or unsupervised. Supervised
2026; accepted 22 February 2026. This work was supported in part by approaches rely on labeled data, limiting their generaliza-
Beijing Natural Science Foundation under Grant 4254101 and in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62373029 and tion [3]. Early unsupervised methods assume normal patterns
Grant 62372430. The Associate Editor for this article was M. Mesbah. are in low-rank and detect anomalies as samples with
(Corresponding author: Xi Zhu.) large deviations [4], [5], [6]. However, these models often
 Ruoheng Li, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao are with the School of Electronic
and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China, requires large time windows for offline analysis. Recently,
also with the MIIT Key Laboratory of Aerospace Mobile Communications, deep learning–based reconstruction methods enhance temporal
Beijing 100191, China, and also with the National Engineering Labora- modeling and anomaly identification by using the advanced
tory for Comprehensive Transportation Big Data Application Technology,
Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: ruohengli@buaa.edu.cn; zhuxi@buaa.edu.cn; architecture [7], [8].
xbcao@buaa.edu.cn). However, traffic time series pose three main challenges
 Diyin Tang is with the School of Automation Science and Elec- for modeling normal patterns and detecting anomalies. First,
trical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail:
tangdiyin@buaa.edu.cn). they are highly noisy due to random individual behaviors
 Fei Wang is with the State Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of and detector inaccuracies, which can impair model robustness
Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, and discrimination. Second, traffic exhibits pronounced spa-
China, and also with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
100049, China (e-mail: wangfei@ict.ac.cn). tiotemporal heterogeneity, as shown in Figure 1. Volume dis-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TITS.2026.3667876 tributions and autocorrelation vary across locations and dates,
 1558-0016 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 II. R ELATED W ORK
 In this section, we review the current state of research on
 traffic time series anomaly detection, as well as the general
 time series representation models for anomaly detection.

 A. Traffic Time Series Anomaly Detection Methods
 Traffic time series anomaly detection methods can
 be broadly categorized into statistics-based, density-based,
 classification-based, and reconstruction-based approaches.
Fig. 2. Radar plots illustrate the normalized traffic volume and density Early statistical methods applied thresholds to macroscopic
across various dates at a specific location, revealing a variable correlation
between these variables. Under normal conditions, the correlation between
 [10], [11], [12] and microscopic [13] variables, enabling initial
traffic volume and density varies within a range. A rapid negative correlation, anomaly identification but offering limited adaptability. Fundamarked by a red background, indicates potential anomalies. Data and labels mental Diagram-based approaches [14], [15] detect deviations
are sourced from [1].
 in flow-occupancy pairs, despite the strong interpretability, their reliance on manual calibration restricts robustness
 to dynamic traffic conditions. Incoperating nonparametric
complicating the consistent definition of anomaly features.
 density-based methods, such as kernel density estimation [16]
Third, although traffic flow and density are strongly correlated
 and FastABOD [1], can help identify abnormal flow-density
in ideal normal patterns [9], their relationship fluctuates under
 pairs, but require retraining for different road segments.
normal conditions and deviates during anomalies (Figure 2),
 Classification-based methods, including logistic regression
highlighting the need for probabilistic modeling of inter-series
 [17], feedforward and recurrent neural networks [18], [19],
correlations.
 and graph convolutional networks [20], learn mappings from
 To address above challenging, we introduce SpectraBayes,
 spatiotemporal data to anomaly labels, but are limited by the
a frequency-domain reconstruction model that utilizes the
 availability of labeled data. Reconstruction-based approaches,
periodicity and cross-spectrum information for robust traffic
 encompassing tensor learning [5], [6], self-expressive models
series anomaly detection. Specifically, SpectraBayes employs
 [21], and deep time-series representation models [7], [22],
the real Fast Fourier Transform (rFFT) for domain transfordetect anomalies through deviations from learned normal
mation and integrates a low-pass filter for data denoising.
 patterns, offering finer temporal modeling but with perfor-
Then, SpectraBayes enhances the temporal awareness of
 mance varying across different setups [23]. Overall, traffic
model by embedding daily periodicity into the frequency
 anomaly detection remains challenging due to system uncerdomain. Meanwhile, the model explicitly quantifies corretainty and dynamics, motivating the development of tailored
lations between traffic volume and density, leveraging the
 methods.
Bayesian neural parameters to adaptively learn the desirable
correlated strength. The refined frequency representation is
 B. General Time Series Representation Models for Anomaly
then reconstructed back to the time domain through an inverse
 Detection
FFT. The model is trained with the Evidence Lower Bound
(ELBO) for probabilistic parameters estimation, which ensures Time-series representation models can be broadly categoboth reconstruction accuracy and regularization. rized into Encoder-Decoder and Encoder-only architectures.
 The main contributions of this paper are as follows: Classic Encoder-Decoder frameworks, such as Transformers
 [24], GANs [25], and VAEs [26], involve both encoding and
 1) We propose SpectraBayes, to our knowledge, which is
 decoding, increasing training complexity, whereas Encoderthe first probabilistic frequency-domain reconstructiononly models offer simpler structures for series modeling [22],
 based anomaly detection model that specifically
 [27]. Recent studies suggest that merely increasing model
 designed for traffic series, which enables efficient temcomplexity does not consistently improve anomaly detection
 poral modeling and robust pattern reconstruction in an
 [28], motivating approaches that explicitly capture anomalyintegrated framework.
 specific features, including inconsistency [29] and association
 2) We introduce a periodicity embedding mechanism that
 discrepancies [7].
 explicitly models daily cycles through phase-shifts in the
 For traffic data, spatiotemporal heterogeneity, inherent daily
 frequency domain, enhancing detection performance by
 periodicity, and stochastic variations due to road conditions
 introducing temporal awareness.
 and human factors complicate the modeling of general pat-
 3) We design a probabilistic cross-spectrum learning modterns. These characteristics should be explicitly considered
 ule that jointly models the spectral relationship between
 when designing time-series representation models for traffic
 traffic density and volume, which can handle the
 anomaly detection.
 aleatoric uncertainty inherent in traffic data.
 4) Extensive evaluations against 21 state-of-the-art base-
 III. M ETHOD
 lines confirm that SpectraBayes achieves superior
 detection performance (+2.71% over the second-best), A. Problem Formulation
 along with significant improvements in computational Let {Xtw }Tt=1 denote the traffic time series within winefficiency and model robustness. dow w, where temporal vector at each time Xtw ∈ R2 is
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 3

Fig. 3. Model structure of SpectraBayes. Input series Xtw are normalized and transformed into the frequency domain as X wf using the real Fast Fourier Transform
(rFFT), followed by low-pass filtering for denoising. Periodicity is then encoded through sinusoidal encoding as φw t , which is embed into frequency domain
as phase shifts. To quantify the correlation between volume and density, amplitude ratios (Hqd w , H w ) and phase differences (∆φw ,∆φw ) are measured, with
 dq qd dq
Bayesian parameters (α, β, γ, δ) adaptively adjusting their correlation strength. The resulted frequency representation is then upsampled using a complex-valued
linear layer to obtain the Xtu,w with the required length for the inverse real Fast Fourier Transform (irFFT). The series then undergoes inverse normalization
to recover the original scale. The Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO) optimizes the model, and reconstruction errors serve as anomaly indicators. During testing,
anomaly scores are rated based on the reconstruction error kXtw − X̂tw k22 .

defined as: The complex value of volume and density Qw ( f ) and Dw ( f )
 Xtw = ,
  
 Qwt Dwt (1) can be expressed in polar form:
where Qwt and Dwt represent traffic volume and density. w
 Qw ( f ) = Awq ( f )e jφq ( f ) ,
 w
 Dw ( f ) = Awd ( f )e jφd ( f ) , (5)
 Our objective is to learn a reconstruction model fζ that
reconstructs the normal traffic pattern from the original series where Awq ( f ) and Awd ( f ) represent the amplitudes of Qw ( f ) and
X̂tw = fζ (Xtw ). The anomaly scores is then determined by the Dw ( f ), and φwq ( f ) and φwd ( f ) denote the phases of Qw ( f ) and
 w
reconstruction error: D ( f ).
 To suppress noise in the frequency domain, a low-pass filter
 swt = kX̂tw − Xtw k22 . (2) is applied on X w ( f ). Specifically, a cut-off frequency F p is
 An anomalous alert occurs when swt > ξ, where ξ is a applied to retain frequency components below this threshold.
predetermined threshold. The selection of F p governs the denoising strength and can be
 determined by the harmonic content of the dominant frequency
B. Architecture [22]. However, given the heterogeneity across datasets, we
 The SpectraBayes model, illustrated in Figure 3, first trans- treat F p as a hyperparameter, whose impact is explored in
forms each traffic time window {Xtw }Tt=1 ∈ RT ×2 into the the parameter study.
spectral domain using rFFT and denoise it with a low-pass
filter. Daily periodicity is embedded through sinusoidal phase D. Periodicity Encoding
shifts, and cross-spectral correlations between density and Traffic series exhibit strong periodicity, and embedding
volume are refined through Bayesian learning. The spectrum periodicity into the data can enhance the capabilities of
is then inverted back to the time domain using irFFT, with temporal modeling [30], [31]. In Transformer architectures,
model parameters optimized by maximizing the ELBO. During Sinusoidal Positional Encoding is commonly employed to
testing, the reconstruction error serves as the anomaly score. provide positional awareness for the input. Drawing on the
The details explanation for each component is presented in properties of the Fourier transform [32], a time-domain shift
subsequent sections. x(t − τ) corresponds to a phase shift in the frequency domain,
 as given by:
C. Domain Transformation and Denosing
 Xτ ( f ) = A( f )e j(φ( f )−2π f τ) , (6)
 A reversible instance-wise normalization (RIN) [22] is first
applied on the time series Xtw to mitigate the influence of where τ denotes the time shift.
a prominent zero-frequency component. The rFFT is then Inspired by this principle, we encode periodicity information
employed to convert the time-domain series Xtw into the as phase shifts to capture temporal features. Specifically, for
frequency domain, as expressed by: a time window w containing T minute-of-day timestamps
 tm ∈ [0, 1439] (m = 1, . . . , T ), we generate a base temporal
 X wf = rFFT(Xtw ) ∈ CF×2 , (3) embedding ewd (t) for each timestamp following Time2Vec [30]:
where F = bT /2c + 1 denotes the number of frequency h    i
bins, with T denoting the size of detection window. X wf is ewd (t) = sin 2πtτd
 m
 cos 2πtm
 τd , (7)
a complex-valued matrix with dimensions F × 2, including
 where τd = 1440 minutes denotes the daily period.
complex-valued elements for volume and density:
 Next, the base embeddings for the window are concatenated
 X w ( f ) = Qw ( f ) Dw ( f ) . and flattened into a vector e0 wd ∈ R2T . The flattened temporal
  
 (4)
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

embedding is then processed through a Multilayer Perceptron where µ and σ2 denote the mean and variance of Gaussian
(MLP) and transformed into φwt ∈ RF p to ensure dimension priors. The Gaussian distribution enables closed-form updates
alignment: and facilitates the optimization of the Evidence Lower Bound
 (ELBO) during training [37]. While other distributions can
 φwt = W2 · σ(W1 e0 wd + b1 ) + b2 , (8) be used as alternatives, they may result in computational
where W1 ∈ RDt ×2T and W2 ∈ RF p ×Dt are weight matrices, inefficiencies.
b1 ∈ RDt and b2 ∈ RF p are bias vectors, and σ is the ReLU Based on the learnable parameters, the phase and amplitude
activation function. of the spectra are then refined as:
 Finally, φwt is applied to adjust the phases of both density φc,w
 d ( f ) = φ̃d ( f ) + (∆φqd ( f ) α( f )),
 w w
 (14)
φd and volume φwq components, expressed as:
 w

 d ( f ) = Ad ( f )
 Ac,w β( f )),
 w w
 (Hqd (f) (15)
 φ̃wq = φwq + φwt , φ̃wd = φwd + φwt , (9) φc,w
 q ( f ) = φ̃q ( f ) + (∆φdq ( f ) γ( f )),
 w w
 (16)
where φ̃wd and φ̃wq denote the adjusted phase. q ( f ) = Aq ( f )
 Ac,w δ( f )),
 w w
 (Hdq (f) (17)
 where denotes element-wise multiplication.
E. Probabilistic Cross-Spectrum Learning The spectral representation that incorporates the cross-
 Incorporating inter-series information can enhance the spectral information is denoted as:
reconstruction of normal patterns and improve anomaly detec- X c,w ( f ) = Qc,w ( f ) Dc,w ( f ) ,
  
 (18)
tion performance, particularly in systems where variables
exhibit strong correlations [33]. In the frequency domain, the where:
relationship between volume (Qw ) and density (Dw ) can be c,w
 Qc,w ( f ) = Ac,w
 q ( f )e
 jφq ( f )
 , (19)
quantified using cross-spectral information: amplitude ratios
 jφc,w
and phase differences. For volume relative to density, the D c,w
 ( f ) = Ac,w
 d ( f )e
 d ( f ). (20)
amplitude ratio Hqd w
 ( f ) and phase difference ∆φwqd ( f ) can be
 The refined spectra X c,w
 f models and utilizes the dynamic
calculated as:
 correlation between traffic volume and density, allowing for a
 |Qw ( f )|
  w 
 Q (f) more integrated spectral representation.
 Hqd ( f ) = w
 w
 , ∆φqd ( f ) = arg
 w
 , (10)
 |D ( f )| +  Dw ( f )
where  is a small positive constant to prevent division by F. Series Reconstruction and Uncertainty-Aware Training
zero. Conversely, for density relative to volume: Then, X c,w are upsampled through a complex-value linear
 f
 |Dw ( f )| layer:
  w 
 D (f)
 Hdq ( f ) = w
 w
 , ∆φdq ( f ) = arg
 w
 . (11) X uf = Wc X c,w
 |Q ( f )| +  Qw ( f ) f + bc , (21)

 The amplitude ratios reflect traffic efficiency, corresponding where Wc ∈ CF×F p and bc ∈ CF are learnable parameters of
to the slope of the Fundamental Diagram under varying the complex-value linear layer, mapping the frequency bins
traffic states [9]. In ideal normal conditions, Hqd w
 ( f ) and from F p back to F. After that, X uf is reconstructed back to
 w time domain through the irFFT:
Hdq ( f ) approximate constants that determined by road charw
acteristics. A high Hqd ( f ) indicates free-flow pattern where
 w X̂tw = irFFT(X uf ). (22)
volume dominates, while a high Hdq ( f ) signals congestion
where density prevails. Phase differences, meanwhile, encode Finally, the reconstructed series X̂tw undergoes an inverse
propagation delays in traffic waves. Positive ∆φwqd ( f ) typi- RIN to reverse the initial normalization.
cally suggests downstream acceleration waves where volume To train SpectraBayes, we employ variational inference to
changes precede density, whereas negative values indicate approximate the posterior p(θ|X ) of the Bayesian parameters
upstream shockwaves during congestion or incidents where θ = {α, β, γ, δ} given the observed data X . A Gaussian
density increases precede volume reductions. approximate posterior q(θ|X ) is used to approximate p(θ|X ),
 Applying these cross-spectral information can be viewed and the model is optimized by maximizing the Evidence
as adaptive filtering between variables [34]. Parameters Lower Bound (ELBO) [38]:
are introduced as learnable scalars to modulate the crosscorrelation strength of cross-spectral learning. Considering the L = Eq(θ|X ) [log p(X |θ)] − KL(q(θ|X )kp(θ)), (23)
stochasticity of traffic data [35], [36], we employ Bayesian where Eq(θ|X ) [log p(X |θ)] represents the expected logparameterization [37] within a variational inference framework likelihood of the observed data X with respect to the
to model cross-correlations strength probabilistically. Con- variational approximate posterior q(θ|X ), encouraging the
sidering both of the computational efficiency and stochastic model to reconstruct the observed data. The second term in
characteristic of traffic data [35], [36], we assign the priors of loss function KL(q(θ|X )kp(θ)) measures the Kullback-Leibler
parameters as Gaussian distributions: (KL) divergence between approximate posterior q(θ|X ) and the
 α( f ) ∼ N (µα ( f ), σ2α ( f )), β( f ) ∼ N (µβ ( f ), σ2β ( f )), (12) prior p(θ) over all Bayesian parameters, acting as a regularizer.
 During training, θ is sampled using the reparameterization
 γ( f ) ∼ N (µγ ( f ), σ2γ ( f )), δ( f ) ∼ N (µδ ( f ), σ2δ ( f )), (13) trick for gradient computation.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 5

 Assuming a Gaussian likelihood Q for the observed data, is dominated by rFFT (O(T log T )), periodicity embedding
which can be given by p(X |θ) = ni=1 N (Xi |X̂i (θ), σ2X ) (where (O(Dt ×T )), and frequency-domain reconstruction (O(T ×F p )),
i represents the i-th data point), the expected log-likelihood resulting in an overall time complexity of
becomes:
 T (T , F p , Dt ) = O max(T log T , Dt × T , T × F p ) .
 
 n (29)
 Eq(θ|X ) [log p(X |θ)] = − log(2πσ2X )
 2 The space complexity is mainly determined by storing
 n
 1 X temporal embeddings and frequency-domain representations,
 − Eq(θ|X ) [(Xi − X̂i (θ))2 ]. (24)
 2σ2X i=1 resulting in a space complexity of S (T , F p , Dt ) = O(T × Dt ).

 Based on the assumption, σ2X is a constant and can be omitted during optimization, the training objective is equivalent to IV. E XPERIMENTS
minimizing: We conducted various experiments to answer the following
 n
 X questions about our model: Q1. Accuracy. How accurately
 Lloss = Eq(θ|X ) [(Xi − X̂i (θ))2 ] + KL(q(θ|X )kp(θ)). (25) does our method detect anomalies compared to other baseline?
 i=1 Q2. Effectiveness. How do the modules designed in Spec-
 For Gaussian priors p(θ) ∼ N (µ p , σ2p ) and posteriors traBayes work? Q3. Robustness. How does the performance
q(θ|X ) ∼ N (µq , σ2q ), the KL divergence can be obtained by: vary under datasets of different noisy levels and parameter
 configurations?
 σp
  ˇ   
 KL N (µq , σq )ˇN (µ p , σ2p ) = log
 ˇ
 2 ˇ
 σq
 A. Experimental Details
 σ2q + (µq − µ p )2 1
 + − . (26) Below present details about our experimental setting,
 2σ2p 2 including dataset configurations, baselines for comparison, and
 During test, means of the variational posterior q(θ|X ) are parameter settings.
used for inference, representing the most likely parameters. 1) Dataset Setup: We adopt the traffic time-series anomaly
 dataset released by Sarteshnizi et al. [1], which consists of
G. Adaptive Anomaly Measurement 10 sub-datasets sampled at 15-minute intervals. To obtain
 higher temporal resolution, we linearly interpolated the data to
 Reconstruction error swt serves as the anomaly score for each 1-minute intervals. Unlike real-world minute-level traffic meadetection window, reflecting deviations from learned traffic surements, which typically exhibit high stochasticity and low
patterns. Anomaly is identified when swt exceeds a threshold signal-to-noise ratios due to sensor noise and environmental
. Considering the spatiotemporal heterogeneity of traffic, we factors [16], [40], interpolated series tend to be overly smooth.
adopt two adaptive strategies to determine the threshold. First, To better approximate realistic traffic fluctuations, we injected
a scenario-specific threshold is optimized on each validation zero-mean Gaussian noise into the interpolated data.
dataset using grid search: The mean z-score of anomaly points in the original dataset
  s = arg max F1(; Dval,s ). (27) is 0.27, indicating that excessive noise may introduce artificial
 
 anomalies and distort ground-truth labels. Accordingly, we set
 Second, an adaptive threshold based on rolling statistics is the noise variance to 0.01 to simulate mild stochasticity while
employed, which adapts online during testing. Specifically, the preserving anomaly integrity. To further assess robustness,
threshold is updated within a sliding window of length W in higher noise variances (0.04, 0.09, 0.16, and 0.25) were also
a causal manner: evaluated, with results reported in Section IV-F.
 σt ,
 r (t) = µ̃t + k · e (28) The task is formulated as series-level anomaly detection.
 Time series are segmented into sequences using a sliding
where µ̃t and e σt denote the median and median absolute
 window with window size T = 80 and stride 1. Samples are
deviation (MAD) calculated from the window of size W that
 split into training, validation, and testing sets with a 6:2:2
includes data from time (t − W + 1) to time t. If t is less than
 ratio. The average anomaly ratios across the 10 datasets are
W, the window will include all available data up to time t. The
 26.36%, 20.12%, and 28.04%, respectively.
parameter k acts as a scaling factor, controlling the sensitivity
 2) Baselines: To comprehensively evaluate the perforof the threshold. It can be optimized offline on the validation
 mance of SpectraBayes, we compared it with 21 repredata to accommodate diverse datasets.
 sentative anomaly detection methods covering density-based,
 distance-based, and reconstruction-based paradigms. Specifi-
H. Complexity Analysis cally, density-based methods include LOF [41], KDE [42], and
 We analyze the computational complexity of SpectraBayes ConFlow [43], which identify anomalies as low-density samper detection window using big O notation [39], which ples. ConFlow further models temporal dependencies through
provides asymptotic upper bounds while omitting constant fac- graph-augmented normalizing flows. Distance-based methods,
tors and less significant contributions. Influencing parameters including iForest [44], KNN [45], and Fast-ABOD [46], detect
including the window size T , cutoff frequency F p , and hidden anomalies based on isolation characteristics or distance and
dimension Dt for periodicity encoding. The time complexity angular deviations.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE I CUDA 12.4. Each model was trained for 40 epochs using
 S ELECTED BASELINES AND THE T UNED H YPERPARAMETERS the Adam optimizer, with a learning rate of 0.0001 and a
 weight decay of 0.0005. Optimal hyperparameters for each
 model were determined through a parameter search, with
 candidate values detailed in Table I. For Transformer-based
 architecture and TimeNet, a fixed dropout rate of 0.1 and
 the GELU activation function were applied. All models are
 trained and evaluated five times with fixed random seeds, with
 mean performance reported. Deterministic methods, such as
 LOF, KDE, Fast-ABOD, KNN, and PCA, had identical results
 across runs.
 4) Evaluation Metrics: Model performance is evaluated
 using the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic
 Curve (AUC-ROC) and the F1 score (F1). AUC-ROC measures the trade-off between true positive and false positive rates
 across varying thresholds, reflecting the overall discriminative
 capability. The F1 score evaluates detection performance at a
 specific decision threshold.
 To account for spatiotemporal heterogeneity, we adopt
 both offline scenario-specific thresholding and an online
 dynamic thresholding strategy, which is explained in detail in
 Section III-G. The offline threshold is optimized for using
 grid search on validation data. The online threshold is determined through a rolling statistics method that adapts causally
 during testing. For online thresholding, the window size is
 fixed to W = 500 for all methods, while the scaling factor
 k ∈ {0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3} is selected based on validation performance.

 B. Comparative Study
 We compared SpectraBayes with 21 baseline models
 using three evaluation metrics: AUC-ROC (Table II), F1-
 score with a scenario-specific threshold  s (F1- s , Table III),
 and F1-score with a rolling-statistic threshold r (F1-r ,
 Table IV). Generally, the scenario-specific threshold  s , determined through a fine-grained search on validation datasets,
 achieved higher detection accuracy than the rolling-statistic
 threshold r . Across all datasets and metrics, Spectra-
 Bayes demonstrated superior performance, achieving the best
 Reconstruction-based methods include both classical results on 9 out of 10 datasets in terms of AUC-ROC,
and deep learning approaches. Classical PCA [47] 7 out of 10 for F1- s , and 8 out of 10 for F1-r .
identifies anomalies by low-rank reconstruction errors. Notably, SpectraBayes outperformed the second-best method
Deep learning–based models span recurrent architectures by up to 4.65% in AUC-ROC (dataset 8-E), 6.21% in
(AE-LSTM, OmniAnomaly [8]), graph neural networks F1- s (dataset 1-W), and 3.03% in F1-r (dataset 8-E). On
(MTAD-GAT [33]), convolutional models (TimesNet [48]), average, SpectraBayes consistently led across all three metlinear models (Dlinear [49], FreTS [50], FITS [22]), and rics, surpassing competitors such as InverseTransformer and
Transformer-based methods, including Anomaly Transformer PatchTST by ranges from 1.78% to 3.3%.
[7], TranAD [24], DCdetector [29], InverseTransformer Classical machine learning methods, including LOF, iForest,
[51], PatchTST [52], FEDformer [53], and Freqformer [54]. KNN, FastABOD, PCA, and KDE, exhibited limited effec-
These models enhance temporal representation ability of tiveness due to their inability to model temporal patterns.
Transformer architecture through attention mechanisms, Among these, PCA achieved the highest average AUC-ROC
patch-wise modeling, adversarial training, dual-attention (61.08%), KNN led in F1- s (46.73%), and PCA led in F1-r
designs, or frequency-domain modeling. (38.54%). ConFlow, which employs conditional normalizing
 3) Experimental Setting: All experiments were conducted flows to integrate temporal information, outperformed tradion a server running Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS, equipped with tional methods with an average AUC-ROC of 74.02%, F1- s of
192 GB of RAM, an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU @ 50.37%, and F1-r of 47.04%. However, its performance was
3.10 GHz, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU. All constrained by the noisy nature of traffic data, which diminmodels were implemented using PyTorch version 1.7.1 with ished the discriminative ability of density-based approaches.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 7

 TABLE II
 C OMPARISON OF AUC-ROC (%) B ETWEEN S PECTRA BAYES AND BASELINE M ODELS

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF F1-S CORE (%) B ETWEEN S PECTRA BAYES AND BASELINE M ODELS W ITH S CENARIO -S PECIFIC T HRESHOLD  s

 Among deep learning models, simpler linear architectures accuracy. FreTS, with its Frequency Channel Learner for modoften outperformed more complex ones. SpectraBayes, Dlin- eling inter-series correlations, outperformed FITS by 2.12%
ear, FITS, and FreTS are linear-based models that operate in AUC-ROC and by 0.97% in F1- s . Complex architectures
in the time or frequency domain, performing better than designed for multivariate time series, such as MTAD-GAT
complex architectures specifically designed for multivariate (which uses a dual graph attention network for fine-grained
time series. Dlinear, which decomposes series into high- and inter- and intra-series correlation modeling), exhibited unsatlow-frequency components for separate temporal modeling, isfactory performance (AUC-ROC: 61.75%, F1- s : 45.67%,
achieved the third-highest average AUC-ROC (76.05%). Inter- F1-r : 37.22%). OmniAnomaly performed better than MTADseries correlation remains important for improving detection GAT by leveraging stochastic neural networks (AUC-ROC:
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF F1-S CORE (%) B ETWEEN S PECTRA BAYES AND BASELINE M ODELS W ITH ROLLING -S TATISTIC T HRESHOLD r

67.37%, F1- s : 46.63%, F1-r : 43.95%). However, it did
not explicitly incorporate inter-series correlations, resulting in
limited performance similar to that of AE-LSTM. The convolutional variant, TimeNet, achieved superior performance
(AUC-ROC: 70.50%, F1- s : 53.54%, F1-r : 53.54%) compared to OmniAnomaly, owing to its use of TimeBlocks for
embedding multi-periodicity.
 Transformer-based methods exhibited varied performance.
InverseTransformer, which tokenized entire series for
global correlation modeling, achieved second-best results in
AUC-ROC (76.38%) and F1- s (55.44%). PatchTST,
employing a patching strategy for patch-wise dependencies,
secured the second-best F1-r (51.67%). However, the
frequency-variant Transformer architecture FEDformer
performed poorly due to its embedded random frequency Fig. 4. Ablation Results. Baseline (w/o all), with periodicity encoding
sampling mechanism, which retained many noisy components modules (w/ T), with cross-spectrum modules (w/ C), full model (w/ all).
(AUC-ROC: 61.79%, F1- s : 44.98%, F1-r : 38.84%).
Freqformer, a frequency-domain Transformer without such
sampling, performed better (AUC-ROC: 70.97%, F1- s : C. Ablation Study
52.24%, F1-r : 46.11%). Transformer-based models that We evaluated the effectiveness of the modules designed
specifically designed for time series anomaly detection tasks in SpectraBayes by testing various combinations of modules,
(AnomalyTransformer, DCdetector, and TranAD) exhibited including temporal embedding (T), and cross-spectrum learnsuboptimal performance on noisy traffic data, as their ing (C) module. The results of ablation study are illustrated
discriminative strategies, such as association or representation in Figure 4.
discrepancy, were less effective with uncertain data. The baseline model (w/o all) demonstrated varied per-
 These results highlight that complex architectures do formance across datasets, ranging from 69.75% to 77.47%.
not guarantee superior performance. Instead, decoupled When evaluating the individual contributions of each modmechanisms (Dlinear), inter-series correlation modeling ule, the incorporation of Periodicity Encoding (w/ T) and
(InverseTransformer, PatchTST), and frequency-domain cross-spectrum learning (w/ C) module consistently improved
representations (FreTS, Freqformer, SpectraBayes) enhance performance across all datasets. Specifically, the inclusion of
robustness against noisy traffic data. SpectraBayes, due to module C alone led to more significant performance gains
its effective denoising and probabilistic correlation modeling, (2.52% on 1-N dataset, 6.03 on % 1-W dataset, 1,93%
consistently achieving the best performance. on d005es1553 dataset, 2.08% on d090es0035 dataset). In
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 9

 Fig. 6. Performance comparison between probabilistic and non-probabilistic
 learning under various noisy level.

 descent, which is a frequentist point estimate. In contrast, the
 second (probabilistic) employed a Bayesian formulation that
 explicitly modeled aleatoric uncertainty through probabilistic
Fig. 5. Visualization of amplitude and phase adjustment for 1-N datasets. parameter estimation. As illustrated in Figure 6, the Bayesian
Normal series are sampled to keep the same number with anomalous series. model consistently outperformed its deterministic counterpart
 across all noise levels, achieving up to a 3.8% improvement
 in AUC-ROC. This consistent gain demonstrates the benefit
contrast, Periodicity Encoding module achieves smaller perof uncertainty-aware modeling, which enables the system to
formance gains (1.46% on 1-N dataset, 0.6 % on 1-W dataset,
 better capture the stochasticity inherent in traffic data and
0.56% on d005es1553 dataset, 0.63% on d090es0035 dataset).
 maintain better performance under noisy conditions.
When both modules were integrated (w/ all), the model
achieved the best detection performance across all datasets.
Notably, on Melbourne subset 1-W, the combination of all E. Computational Efficiency Comparison
modules boosted performance to 84.68%, representing an Computational efficiency comparison experiments were
improvement of 6.57% over the baseline model. conducted on an Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS server equipped with
 an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU (192 GB RAM) and
 an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. We evaluated the computa-
D. Module Analysis tional efficiency and deployment feasibility of SpectraBayes
 1) Visualization of Cross-Spectrum Learning: To demon- compared to the baselines (TimesNet, AnomalyTransformer,
strate the impact of our cross-spectrum module, we visualized DCdetector, PatchTST, InverseTransformer, FEDformer, and
the amplitude and phase adjustments for density in cross- FreTS). The metrics evaluated are the number of trainable
spectrum learning, as shown in Figure 5. These heatmap parameters, Multiply-Accumulate Operations (MACs), and
showed obvious difference between normal and anomalous average inference time per detection window, which corseries. For instance, in Figure 5 (a), amplitude adjustments for respond to the space complexity, theoretical computational
the 1-N dataset show that normal samples exhibit uniform and complexity, and empirical computational complexity, respecminimal changes, consistently near 1.0, indicating negligible tively. The low number of trainable parameters and MACs
modification of the original signal. In contrast, anomalous suggests minimal memory usage and computational demand
samples display adjustments spanning a wider range (from 0 on resource-constrained hardware, while the short inference
to 3), reflecting significant amplitude discrepancies between time demonstrates the high computational efficiency. All meadensity and volume. Regarding phase adjustments, normal surements were obtained using the standard PyTorch profiler,
samples show minimal and uniform shifts, clustering near with inference times averaged over five runs. For Transformerzero, as depicted in Figure 5 (b). However, anomalous sam- based models (AnomalyTransformer, DCdetector, PatchTST,
ples, particularly in the low-frequency range, exhibit larger InverseTransformer, and FEDformer), the number of layers,
phase shifts (−π to π). By leveraging cross-spectrum learning, attention heads, and hidden dimensions were set to 2, 4, and
SpectraBayes enhances the discriminability of reconstructed 128, respectively. For the convolutional model (TimesNet), the
sequences in the feature space, thereby improving detection layer depth, kernel size, and hidden dimension were fixed at
performance. 2, 3, and 128. The frequency-domain model (FreTS) used a
 2) Effectiveness of the Bayesian Parameters: To assess hidden dimension of 128. For SpectraBayes, the cut-frequency
whether incorporating probabilistic modeling can enhance Fq and temporal embedding dimension were set to 15 and 128.
detection robustness, we compared two model variants across The results in Table V show that SpectraBayes achieved
datasets with varying noise intensities, where Gaussian noise the lowest values across all metrics, demonstrating superior
variance was set to different levels. The first variant (non- efficiency. It required only 0.08 M trainable parameters,
probabilistic) adopted conventional deterministic parameters in approximately 38.5% fewer than the second-lightest model
cross-spectrum learning optimized through stochastic gradient (DCdetector, 0.13 M). In terms of theoretical computation,
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

 TABLE V
C OMPARISON OF M ODEL PARAMETERS , MAC S , AND I NFERENCE T IME
 FOR THE 1-N DATASET W ITH A D ETECTION W INDOW S IZE OF T = 80

SpectraBayes used just 0.13 M MACs, over ten times fewer
than the next-best baseline (InverseTransformer, 1.67 M) and
far below larger models like TimesNet (550.67 M). The
empirical inference time per window for SpectraBayes was
0.002 ms, which was four times faster than the second-fastest
baseline (InverseTransformer, 0.008 ms) and over 500 times
faster than the slowest (FEDformer, 1.081 ms).
 Fig. 7. Model performance (AUC-ROC) under varying noise levels (with
 Gaussian distribution variances set at different levels).
F. Robustness Analysis
 1) Robustness Comparison Under Different Noise Levels: TABLE VI
To evaluate the model robustness under varying noise con- M ODEL D ETECTION U NDER VARIOUS DATA M ISSING R ATIOS
ditions, we conducted comparative experiments on datasets
with different levels of injected Gaussian noise. We chose
Dlinear, FreTS, InverseTransformer, and PatchTST for comparison since they achieved competitive performance in the
comparative study under low noise levels. Specifically, the
noise level was parameterized by the variance of the Gaussian
noise, ranging from 0.01 to 0.25 times the variance of the
original data.
 Results are shown in Figure 7. Specifically, increasing noise indicating the filling strategy is effective in moderate data
levels led to performance degradation for all models, highlight- missing.
ing the challenges of increased data uncertainty. SpectraBayes
consistently outperformed the baselines at every noise level,
 G. Parameter Study
achieving the highest AUC-ROC scores consistently. With the
increasing of the noisy level, its performance had an absolute We tested how our model perform under different hyperdrop of 11.4% and a relative decline of 14.36%. In comparison, parameters setting, including the selection of Low-pass
Dlinear showed the largest degradation, with scores dropping frequency F p , the size of detection window T , and the prior
from 76.1% to 60.4% (absolute drop of 15.7%, relative drop of distribution of Bayesian parameter.
20.63%). FreTS, PatchTST, and InverseTransformer exhibited 1) Setting of Low-Pass Frequency: The effect of cutoff
relative drops of 18.41%, 18.10%, and 17.21%, respectively. frequency F p on the model performance was assessed across
The robustness of SpectraBayes can be attributed to its explicit distinct datasets, as shown in Figure 8. In general, the perlow-pass denoising and probabilistic modeling mechanisms, formance of the model reveals a consistent and stable trend
effectively separating the high-frequency noise and handling across the range of the F p settings. For the 1-N and 1-W
the data uncertainty. datasets, AUC-ROC performance showed almost no change
 2) Model Robustness Under Missing Value: In this exper- across different low-pass frequencies (variation <0.0002), with
iment, missing values are introduced by randomly masking no discernible pattern. For the d090es0035 and d005es15531
individual time points with a predefined missing ratio, simu- datasets, AUC-ROC performance decreased slightly as the
lating the scenarios where sensor readings may be incomplete. low-pass frequency increased.
We employ forward and backward fill to address this issue, 2) Detection Window and Stride Size: Figure 9 summarize
ensuring data continuity and allowing models to process the AUC-ROC performance under different combinations of
sequences without interruption. Model results are shown in window size (ws) and stride size (ss). Across all datasets,
Table VI. As the missing ratio increases from 0.05 to 0.25, window size exhibits a substantially stronger influence on
the AUC-ROC decreases slightly from 79.24% to 78.06%, detection performance than stride size.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 11

Fig. 8. Performance under different low-pass frequency on four selected
datasets.
 Fig. 10. Performance under different prior distribution setting on four selected
 datasets.

 Overall, these results indicate that appropriate window size
 selection is critical for optimal performance.
 3) Setting of Prior Distribution: We investigated the impact
 of prior distribution settings on model performance, as illustrated in Figure 10. The Gaussian prior setting governs the
 strength of the cross-spectrum learning, thereby influencing
 the correlation intensity learned between traffic series. A larger
 prior mean (µ p = 1) indicates a greater adjustment magnitude
 and a larger prior variance (σ p = 1) indicates greater flexibility
 in correlation learning. Overall, as depicted in Figure 10,
 employing a higher prior mean (µ p = 1) and variance (σ p = 1)
 generally leads to improved model performance. Specifically,
 prior variance demonstrates a particularly pronounced effect.
Fig. 9. Performance under different window and stride size on four selected Increasing it from 0.1 to 1 typically results in a significant
datasets, ws and ss are abbreviation for window size and stride size, performance enhancement (e.g., up to 3.8% on 1-N dataset).
respectively. Prior mean also influences model performance, but to a
 lesser extent than prior variance. This observation suggests
 For the Melbourne datasets (1)-N and 1-W), AUC-ROC that macroscopic elements within the traffic system exhibit
consistently improves as the window size increases, indicat- strong correlations and inherent uncertainty. Consequently,
ing that longer temporal contexts lead to more stable and employing higher prior mean and variance values facilitates
discriminative representations for anomaly detection. This improved model performance.
improvement is closely associated with an increase in the
proportion of stationary sub-series under larger windows, V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
suggesting that extended temporal aggregation enhances sta- This paper introduced SpectraBayes, which is a novel
tistical stability in these datasets. In contrast, for the Seattle frequency-domain reconstruction model specially designed for
datasets (d005es15531 and d090es00353), performance peaks traffic series anomaly detection. SpectraBayes improved the
at moderate window sizes (typically ws = 30–40) and grad- detection ability of frequency-domain model through the inteually degrades as the window size further increases. This gration of periodicity embedding and probabilistic correlation
behavior can be attributed to a decreasing level of stationarity learning. Extensive evaluations against a broad range of baseunder larger windows, where excessively long temporal con- lines demonstrated the superior performance of SpectraBayes
texts introduce stronger non-stationary variations that hinder on traffic series anomaly detection.
anomaly discrimination. In response to the recent call by Sarteshnizi [1] for
 Meanwhile, variations in stride size lead to only marginal advancements in deep learning-based anomaly detection for
performance changes when the stride is smaller than the traffic series anomaly detection, our comparative experiments
window size. For a fixed window size, AUC-ROC remains involved a diverse array of deep learning models. Our findings
relatively stable across a wide range of stride values, demon- indicated that architectural complexity alone is insufficient
strating that the proposed method is robust to stride selection. to ensure superior detection performance. Complex models
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

trained on noisy time series tend to overfit noise, diminishing [17] Z. Yuan, X. Zhou, and T. Yang, “Hetero-ConvLSTM: A deep learning
the discrimination between normal and anomalous series. approach to traffic accident prediction on heterogeneous spatio-temporal
 data,” in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
Instead, our results corroborate the importance of decoupled Mining, Jul. 2018, pp. 984–992.
mechanisms, frequency representation, and correlation mod- [18] S. Thajchayapong, E. S. Garcia-Trevino, and J. A. Barria, “Distributed
eling as critical components for achieving effective traffic classification of traffic anomalies using microscopic traffic variables,”
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 448–458, Mar. 2013.
anomaly detection. [19] S. Zhao, D. Zhao, R. Liu, Z. Xia, B. Chen, and J. Chen,
 However, SpectraBayes remains a data-driven approach that “GMAT-DU: Traffic anomaly prediction with fine spatiotemporal granulacks a certain level of physical interpretability, which holds larity in sparse data,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 11,
 pp. 13503–13517, Nov. 2023.
significant potential for advancement. Combining the Funda- [20] J. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang, F. Gao, and Z. Xiong, “Understanding
mental Diagram with the Physics-Informed Neural Networks urban dynamics via context-aware tensor factorization with neighbor-
(PINNs) represents a potential solution. Explicitly integrat- ing regularization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 11,
 pp. 2269–2283, Nov. 2020.
ing the domain-specific physical principles with machine [21] M. Nouri, E. Konyar, M. Reisi Gahrooeri, and M. Ilbeigi, “Detecting
learning techniques can enhance model interpretability in traffic anomalies during extreme events via a temporal selfdetecting anomalies. Moreover, the development of more expressive model,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 10,
 pp. 13613–13626, Oct. 2024.
comprehensive, system-wide datasets with detailed annotations [22] Z. Xu, A. Zeng, and Q. Xu, “FITS: Modeling time series with 10k
is essential to support empirical studies, thereby foster- parameters,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Represent. Learning (ICRL), 2023,
ing improvements in traffic system safety, efficiency, and pp. 26295–26318.
resilience. [23] S. Schmidl, P. Wenig, and T. Papenbrock, “Anomaly detection in time
 series: A comprehensive evaluation,” Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 15,
 no. 9, pp. 1779–1797, May 2022.
 R EFERENCES [24] S. Tuli, G. Casale, and N. R. Jennings, “TranAD: Deep transformer
 networks for anomaly detection in multivariate time series data,” Proc.
[1] I. Taheri Sarteshnizi, S. A. Bagloee, M. Sarvi, and N. Nassir, VLDB Endowment, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1201–1214, Feb. 2022.
 “Traffic anomaly detection: Exploiting temporal positioning of flow- [25] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
 density samples,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5, anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
 pp. 4166–4180, May 2024. Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
[2] S. Mu, Z. Gu, H. Lyu, Y. Gao, and S. Xu, “Stereo-based 3D anomaly [26] Z. Zhang et al., “STAD-GAN: Unsupervised anomaly detection on mulobject detection for autonomous driving: A new dataset and baseline,” tivariate time series with self-training generative adversarial networks,”
 2025, arXiv:2507.09214. ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 1–18,
[3] M. A. Abdel-Aty and R. Pemmanaboina, “Calibrating a real-time Oct. 2023.
 traffic crash-prediction model using archived weather and ITS traffic [27] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
 data,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 167–174, graph AutoEncoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,”
 Jun. 2006. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 72, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[4] S. Yang, K. Kalpakis, and A. Biem, “Detecting road traffic events by [28] R. Wu and E. J. Keogh, “Current time series anomaly detection
 coupling multiple timeseries with a nonparametric Bayesian method,” benchmarks are flawed and are creating the illusion of progress,” IEEE
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1936–1946, Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 2421–2429, Mar. 2023.
 Oct. 2014.
 [29] Y. Yang, C. Zhang, T. Zhou, Q. Wen, and L. Sun, “DCdetector: Dual
[5] X. Wang and L. Sun, “Diagnosing spatiotemporal traffic anomalies
 attention contrastive representation learning for time series anomaly
 with low-rank tensor autoregression,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 detection,” in Proc. 29th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 7904–7913, Dec. 2021.
 Mining, Aug. 2023, pp. 3033–3045.
[6] Y. Hu and D. B. Work, “Robust tensor recovery with fiber outliers for
 [30] S. Mehran Kazemi et al., “Time2 Vec: Learning a vector representation
 traffic events,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discovery from Data, vol. 15, no. 1,
 of time,” 2019, arXiv:1907.05321.
 pp. 1–27, Feb. 2021.
[7] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time [31] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, W. Wei, and Y. Xu, “Spatial–temporal
 series anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. identity: A simple yet effective baseline for multivariate time series
 Conf. Learn. Represent., 2021, pp. 1–27. forecasting,” in Proc. 31st ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage.,
[8] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly New York, NY, USA, Oct. 2022, pp. 4454–4458.
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural [32] J. G. Proakis, Digital Signal Processing: Principles Algorithms and
 network,” in Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Applications. London, U.K.: Pearson, 2001.
 Data Mining, Jul. 2019, pp. 2828–2837. [33] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph
[9] M. Treiber and A. Kesting, Traffic Flow Dynamics. Cham, Switzerland: attention network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining (ICDM),
 Springer, 2013. Nov. 2020, pp. 841–850.
[10] A. Ceder, “Relationships between road accidents and hourly traffic [34] B. Farhang-Boroujeny, Adaptive Filters: Theory and Applications. Hoboflow—II: Probabilistic approach,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 14, ken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2013.
 no. 1, pp. 35–44, Feb. 1982. [35] S. E. Jabari and H. X. Liu, “A stochastic model of traffic flow:
[11] J.-L. Martin, “Relationship between crash rate and hourly traffic flow Theoretical foundations,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 46, no. 1,
 on interurban motorways,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 156–174, Jan. 2012.
 pp. 619–629, Sep. 2002. [36] S. E. Jabari and H. X. Liu, “A stochastic model of traffic flow: Gaussian
[12] P. Ferrari, “The reliability of the motorway transport system,” Transp. approximation and estimation,” Transp. Res. B, Methodol., vol. 47,
 Res. B, Methodol., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 291–310, Aug. 1988. pp. 15–41, Jan. 2013.
[13] J. A. Barria and S. Thajchayapong, “Detection and classification of [37] L. V. Jospin, H. Laga, F. Boussaid, W. Buntine, and M. Bennamoun,
 traffic anomalies using microscopic traffic variables,” IEEE Trans. Intell. “Hands-on Bayesian neural networks—A tutorial for deep learning
 Transp. Syst., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 695–704, Sep. 2011. users,” IEEE Comput. Intell. Mag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 29–48, Feb. 2022.
[14] B. Persaud, F. L. Hall, and L. M. Hall, “Congestion identification [38] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational Bayes,” in
 aspects of the mcmaster incident detection algorithm,” Transp. Res. Rec., Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), Banff, AB, Canada, 2014,
 no. 1287, pp. 167–175, 1990. pp. 1–14.
[15] F. L. Hall, Y. Shi, and G. Atala, “On-line testing of the mcmaster [39] I. Chivers and J. Sleightholme, “An introduction to algorithms and the
 incident detection algorithm under recurrent congestion,” Transp. Res. big O notation,” in Introduction to Programming With Fortran. Cham,
 Rec., no. 1394, pp. 1–7, 1993. Switzerland: Springer, 2015, pp. 359–364.
[16] K. Kalair and C. Connaughton, “Anomaly detection and classification [40] P. Varaiya, “Freeway data collection, storage, processing, and use,” in
 in traffic flow data from fluctuations in the flow–density relationship,” Proc. Transp. Res. Board Workshop, Roadway Infostructure, Aug. 2002,
 Transp. Res. C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 127, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 103178. pp. 1–22.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

LI et al.: SpectraBayes: EXPLORING TRAFFIC SERIES RECONSTRUCTION IN FREQUENCY DOMAIN 13

[41] O. Alghushairy, R. Alsini, T. Soule, and X. Ma, “A review of local Diyin Tang (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
 outlier factor algorithms for outlier detection in big data streams,” Big and Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University, Bei-
 Data Cognit. Comput., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1, Dec. 2020. jing, China, in 2008 and 2015, respectively. From
[42] G. R. Terrell and D. W. Scott, “Variable kernel density estimation,” Ann. 2012 to 2013, she was a Visiting Ph.D. Student
 Statist., vol. 20, pp. 1236–1265, Sep. 1992. with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial
[43] R. Li, Z. Liu, X. Zhu, L. Li, and X. Cao, “Detecting multivariate time Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
 series anomalies with cascade decomposition consistency,” IEEE Trans. Canada. She is currently an Associate Professor
 Instrum. Meas., vol. 74, pp. 1–14, 2025. with the School of Automation Science and Elec-
[44] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th trical Engineering, Beihang University. Her research
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., Dec. 2008, pp. 413–422. interests include fault prognostics, degradation-based
[45] T. M. Cover and P. E. Hart, “Nearest neighbor pattern classification,” modeling, and condition-based maintenance.
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-13, no. 1, pp. 21–27, Jan. 1967.
[46] H.-P. Kriegel, M. Schubert, and A. Zimek, “Angle-based outlier detection in high-dimensional data,” in Proc. 14th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf.
 Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2008, pp. 444–452. Fei Wang received the Ph.D. degree in computer
[47] H. Abdi and L. J. Williams, “Principal component analysis,” Wiley architecture from the Institute of Computing Tech-
 Interdiscipl. Reviews, Comput. Statist., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 433–459, nology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2017.
 2010. From 2017 to 2020, he was a Research Assistant
[48] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: with the Institute of Technology, Chinese Academy
 Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in of Sciences. Since 2020, he has been working as an
 Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2022, pp. 1–23. Associate Professor with the Institute of Comput-
[49] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective ing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
 for time series forecasting?,” 2022, arXiv:2205.13504. main research interests include spatiotemporal data
[50] K. Yi et al., “Frequency-domain MLPs are more effective learners in mining, timeseries analysis, and AI for science.
 time series forecasting,” in Proc. 37th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023, pp. 1–24.
[51] Y. Liu et al., “ITransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
 Xi Zhu received the B.E. degree in electronic
 series forecasting,” in Proc. 12th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR),
 and information engineering and the M.E. degree
 2023, pp. 1–25.
 in control science and engineering from Beijing
[52] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
 University of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2010
 is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
 and 2013, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in
 Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2022, pp. 1–24.
 signal and information processing from Beihang
[53] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FedFormer:
 University, Beijing, in 2018. He is currently an Asso-
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series
 ciate Researcher with the School of Electronic and
 forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
 Information Engineering, Beihang University. His
[54] T. Dai, J. Wang, H. Guo, J. Li, J. Wang, and Z. Zhu, “Freqformer:
 research interests include multivariate time series
 Frequency-aware transformer for lightweight image super-resolution,”
 analysis, spatiotemporal data mining, and target
 in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell. (IJCAI), 2024, pp. 731–739.
 behavior cognition.

 Ruoheng Li received the B.S. degree from Nan- Xianbin Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 jing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, B.E. and M.E. degrees in computer applications and
 Nanjing, China, in 2020, the B.S. degree from the information science from Anhui University, Hefei,
 Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology University, China, in 1990 and 1993, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 Melbourne, VIC, Australia, in 2020, and the M.S. degree in information science from the University
 degree from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, in
 Astronautics in 2023. She is currently pursuing the 1996. He is currently a Professor with the School
 Ph.D. degree with Beihang University. Her current of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beiresearch interests include data science and intelligent hang University, Beijing, China. His current research
 transportation. interests include intelligent transportation systems,
 air traffic management, and intelligent computation.