5486 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 SRViT: A Robust Online Encrypted Traffic
 Classification Based on Vision Transformer
Chang Liu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Lei Han , Zulong Diao, Zheng Wu , Xin He , Member, IEEE,
 Weibei Fan , Member, IEEE, and Fu Xiao , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The dramatic rise in encrypted traffic brings huge management and cyberspace security. In network management,
challenges to traditional traffic classification methods. Deep traffic priority classification can help ensure the differentiated
learning-based traffic classification methods have been demon- Service-Level Agreement (SLA) requirements [1], [2], [3], [4].
strated to significantly improve performance. However, the
following limitations remain: i) It is challenging to concurrently In cyberspace security, accurate traffic identification can prefocus on both global and local information in traffic flows, vent the spreading of a significant variety of malicious attacks
resulting in the absence of important information. ii) The [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. Nowadays, with the widespread adoption
existing methods relying on temporal information suffer from of encryption for privacy protection, encrypted traffic has risen
low robustness in case of packet disordering or loss. iii) The use dramatically and occupies a large share of network traffic [10],
of multi-layer encryption and random routing in Tor technology
poses more challenges for traffic identification. In this paper, we [11], [12]. Therefore, encrypted flow classification has become
propose a novel ViT-based model for more accurate encrypted a topical issue and has attracted extensive attention from both
traffic classification, called SRViT to overcome the above chal- industry and academia. How to capture the robust patterns
lenges. Firstly, SRViT proposes a novel mechanism of multi-size implied in diverse encrypted traffic and support accurate and
patch division to learn comprehensive hidden knowledge and generalized traffic classification is crucial for achieving high
dependencies between packets. Secondly, we propose a selfattention operation with a relative position bias to learn the network security and effective network management.
relative position relationship. After that, an incremental update However, malware traffic and cybercriminals can consemechanism is proposed to adapt to dynamic changes in the quently evade monitoring systems through privacy-enhancing
real traffic environment. At last, the comprehensive experiments encryption techniques such as Tor, VPN, etc., which lead
on 5 real-world encrypted traffic datasets are carried out. The to the ineffectiveness of traditional rule/DPI-based classiexperimental results indicate that SRViT outperforms the stateof-the-art methods with an average accuracy improvement of fication approaches due to the randomized communication
24.62% while keeping higher robustness and execution efficiency. contents [13]. Some studies [14], [15], [16], [17], [18] combine
 machine learning algorithms with statistical features manually
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, vision transformer, Tor traffic. extracted from raw traffic to handle encrypted traffic. And,
 Lichy et al. [19] demonstrated that, in some cases, classical
 I. I NTRODUCTION machine learning models (e.g., random forests) perform better
 in malware traffic classification tasks. However, these methods
N ETWORK traffic classification is an important task of
 applications or Web services identifying in network
 are highly dependent on expert-designed features and have
 limited generalization capabilities. Recently, deep learning
 Received 4 September 2024; revised 29 May 2025 and 22 September 2025; methods automatically learn complex patterns from raw trafaccepted 28 May 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK - fic and achieve significant performance improvements. Some
ING Editor D. Pei. Date of publication 3 June 2026; date of current version
9 June 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Major Science
 methods [20], [21], [22], [23] extract information, such as
and Technology Program of China under Grant 2026ZD1307700; in part by packet size or packet intervals sequence, from a temporal perthe Major Scientific Instruments and Equipment Development Project of the spective. However, these approaches may suffer from a drastic
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62427809; in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62572187,
 drop in performance under packet disorder and packet loss.
Grant 62472168, Grant 62402234, Grant 62202237, and Grant NY223168; Some researchers [24], [25], [26] take the encrypted traffic
in part by the Key Program of Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu classification as a computer vision task through transforming
Province under Grant BK20243053; in part by the Research Foundation of encrypted traffic flows to images. These methods focus on
Education Bureau of Hunan Province, China, under Grant 25B0452; in part
by the Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture under local information extraction of each traffic flow while ignoring
Grant HLW2025MS24; and in part by the State Key Lab of Processors, the global and contextual information understanding. However,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, under
Grant CLQ202506. (Corresponding author: Fu Xiao.)
 fixed convolution kernels can’t adapt to dynamic changes in
 Chang Liu, Lei Han, Zheng Wu, Xin He, Weibei Fan, and Fu encrypted traffic patterns.
Xiao are with the College of Computer, Nanjing University of Unlike CNNs, a Transformer [27] based on the self-attention
Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210003, China (e-mail: mechanism can take into account both local interactions
2023040503@njupt.edu.cn; hanlei@njupt.edu.cn; zwu@njupt.edu.cn;
xhe@njupt.edu.cn; wbfan@njupt.edu.cn; xiaof@njupt.edu.cn). and long-distance dependencies through the dynamic com-
 Zulong Diao is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, putation of attention scores with appropriate generalization
Hunan University of Science and Technology, Xiangtan 411201, China
(e-mail: diaozulong@hnust.edu.cn).
 biases according to different task goals. ET-BERT [28] intro-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3699540 duces a Transformer-based large model into encrypted traffic
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5487

 encrypted traffic classification. To be specific, we introduce
 a multi-size patch overlapping division mechanism to enable
 the model to more comprehensively learn the characteristics of
 encrypted traffic. In addition, we add relative position bias to
 the self-attention mechanism in the encoding layer to learn the
 relative position relationship of encrypted traffic. Finally, we
 also incorporate an incremental update mechanism to enable
 the model to adapt the dynamically changing traffic quickly.
 Compared with methods, our paper makes the following
 contributions:
Fig. 1. Tor system structure.
 • We introduce ViT into encrypted traffic classification
 tasks and propose a novel end-to-end identification model,
 which transforms traffic flows into image patches and
 dynamically learns the local/global dependencies between
 packets.
 • We propose a novel multi-size patch mechanism to further
 comprehensively learn the hidden features and resolve
 the multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads,
Fig. 2. The visualization results of Tor-encrypted traffic compared to non-
Tor-encrypted traffic. random routing, and traffic pattern uncertainty problems.
 In addition, we propose a self-attention operation with
classification tasks for performance improvement. NetGPT a novel relative position bias, which can dynamically
[29] proposes a generative pre-trained transformer for network adjust the attention scores and learn the relative position
traffic. YaTC [30] introduces a masked autoencoder (MAE) relationship.
based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation • We design a novel incremental update to adapt to the
for traffic classification. However, most of these methods dynamically changed traffic by only updating a small proinevitably incur high computational complexity in the flow portion of parameters when a sharp drop in identification
representations learning, pre-training, and fine-tuning process. accuracy occurs.
 With increasing traffic arrival rates, excessive computa- • We conduct a series of experiments over 5 real-world
tional complexity would impede the deployment of traffic encrypted traffic datasets. Compared with the state-ofidentification methods. In this paper, we aim to propose the-art methods, SRViT achieves the highest classification
a transformer-based traffic classification method to utilize accuracy, with an average improvement of 25.04% in
both temporal and 2-dimensional spatial information while accuracy, while keeping higher robustness and execution
requiring substantially fewer computational resources. ViT efficiency.
(Vision Transformer) [31] is a natural choice. It applies a pure The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We
transformer directly to sequences of image patches and attains first summarize the related work of traffic classification in
excellent classifying results [32]. Section II and introduce the preliminary work in Section III.
 However, there exist some compatibility problems when We then present the technical details of our novel SRViT
directly introducing ViT into traffic classification tasks, espe- framework in Section IV. After that, we evaluate the perforcially for Tor traffic identification [7]. The Tor [33] system’s mance of our proposed model by conducting experiments on
architecture is shown in Fig. 1. The user randomly selects three real-world datasets in Section V. Finally, we present a detailed
onion routes and establishes a circuit with these nodes. Muti- discussion of SRViT in Section VI and conclude this paper in
plexing multiple circuits per connection. The client encrypts Section VII.
the packets in three layers and decrypts them sequentially
by each relay node. The path randomization and multi-layer II. R ELATED W ORK
encryption mechanisms may result in different numbers of
 In this section, we briefly introduce these related works and
encryption layers in received packets of varying traffic flows or
 classify them according to conventional traffic classification,
applications for an onion router. Fig. 2 shows the visualization
 machine learning-based methods, and deep learning-based
results of Tor-encrypted traffic compared to non-Tor-encrypted
 methods as follows.
traffic. The figure clearly shows that there is an obvious
difference in the visualization of traffic between the different types of traffic. However, the difference between traffic A. Conventional Traffic Classification
encrypted with Tor seems to be much weaker than the traffic Traffic classification primarily involves port-based methods
without using Tor encryption. These characteristics of multi- and deep packet inspection (DPI)-based methods. The portlayer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads, random routing, based approach [34] is used to identify the application type
and traffic pattern uncertainty impair the effectiveness of fixed by a given list of ports provided by the Internet Assigned
patch-wise interaction learning in ViT. Numbers Authority (IANA). However, this method fails in
 To address the above challenges, we propose SRViT (multi- cases of dynamic port allocation and the use of generic
size relative ViT), a novel ViT-based model for more accurate communication protocol ports [35]. The port allocation and
5488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

port masquerading make it no longer applicable in traffic knowledge from traffic sequences for the first time. Specifclassification. ically, it uses the sequence of message type to construct a
 The payload-based approaches exploit the specific signature first-order Markov model with MGP (maximum generation
in the payload for matching. Roughan et al. [36] used statis- probability). Building on this work, Shen et al. improve the
tical signatures to classify P2P application traffic. Meanwhile, classification performance under the second-order Markov
Keralapura et al. [37] provided a self-learning traffic classi- model [41], [42]. In addition, FU et al. [43] extract packet
fier for identifying P2P traffic in high-speed networks with length and time delay sequences to construct a Hidden Markov
application payload signatures. Model. Due to inefficiency in capturing long-term relation-
 However, due to the emergence of traffic encryption and ships for lower-order Markov models and high computing
encapsulation, and the concern of privacy protection in recent complexity for higher models, these methods are likely to
years, most payload methods become inapplicable anymore. be unsuitable for complex networks such as those with high
Thus the advent of encrypted traffic makes network traffic throughput. These methods are incapable of capturing longclassification more challenging. term relationships and at the same time segmenting the feature
 learning and classification process.
B. Encrypted Traffic Classification With Machine Learning
 Different from the packet inspection method under plain text C. Encrypted Traffic Classification Based on Deep Learning
traffic, which fails when the traffic is encrypted, some research Deep learning has been well used in the fields of image
suggests using unencrypted protocol field information. For processing and natural language processing, and researchers
example, FlowPrint [15] extracts the device, certificate, size, have made multiple attempts to apply them in encrypted traffic.
and temporal features from the header field of each packet The use of supervised deep learning for encrypted traffic
to make the representation of each flow and then constructs classification has become a popular approach. Beauty [44] and
a fingerprint database. Finally, through the techniques of DF [24] are based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
clustering and cross-correlating, the identification of each type An autonomous model updating framework [26] is proposed
of flow is achieved. However, these fingerprints are more to perform accurate traffic classification using improved CNN
likely susceptible to the noise from the network environment, classifiers. FS-Net [20] uses recurrent neural networks (RNNs)
leading to the loss of useful knowledge especially in virtual to automatically extract representations from the raw data
communication networks. packets of encrypted traffic. Deeppacket [25] employs stacked
 With the advent of machine learning techniques, recent autoencoder and 1D convolutional neural networks to achieve
research has employed machine learning techniques to deal end-to-end traffic classification. GraphDApp [45] introduces
with encrypted traffic classification. Researchers have mainly Traffic Interaction Graphs (TIGs) to represent each individual
worked on the extraction of effective and stable information encrypted flow, serving as a method for DApp fingerprinting
from the packet header. Namely, considering how to construct using graph neural networks (GNNs). ET-BERT [28] proposes
enough valid features rather than extracting signatures from a pre-training framework where the downstream task uses
packet payload. There are two types of features commonly a transformer model for encrypted traffic classification. In
used in encrypted traffic classification: statistical features and addition, the work [46] proposes Mini-FlowPic, using augsequential features. mentations for few sample traffic classification, which utilizes
 Statistical Features: Combining with various traditional CNN and comparative learning techniques to achieve efficient
machine learning algorithms, most encrypted traffic clas- and accurate cryptographic traffic classification with limited
sification problems are addressed using statistical features. labeled data. EC-GCN [47] classifies encrypted traffic flows
Examples include logistic regression, random forest, and sup- based on multi-scale graph convolutional neural networks.
port vector machine. For instance, AppScanner [38] extracts DMSTG [48] employs a dynamic learning module to timely
statistical features based on packet length and uses a random estimate the graph Laplacian for GCN and a self-attention
forest classifier. Through the analysis of encrypted network module to adaptively weight traffic data, enabling the effectraffic, it proposes a robust method for identifying smartphone tive fusion of multi-view spatio-temporal features to capture
applications with the concept of burst and traffic statistics dynamic changes in traffic patterns. RBLJAN [49] proposes
features. STM-DT [18] is a method for classifying network Robust Byte-Labeled Joint Attention Network, which is an
attacking traffic based on the decision tree. HyperVision [6] efficient and robust deep learning-based framework for both
is a machine learning-based method for detecting unknown packet-level and flow-level encrypted network traffic classipatterns in encrypted malicious traffic using an in-memory fication. RBLJAN shows superior performance in terms of
graph. NetBeacon [39] deploys machine learning models in detection speed and robustness.
the Intelligent Data Plane (IDP) for malicious traffic detection. Our approach mainly differs from existing ones in the
However, these methods often rely on much expertise and spe- following aspects: Firstly, we introduce ViT into encrypted
cialized knowledge, resulting in the difficulty in generalizing to traffic classification tasks and an overlapping multi-size patch
the flows from constantly emerging applications and the traffic division mechanism that allows the model to learn the features
in complex network environments such as packet disorder and of encrypted traffic more comprehensively and improves the
packet loss. efficiency of Tor-encrypted traffic classification. In addition,
 Sequential Features: The work [40] proposes to use we add relative position bias to the self-attention mechanism
the Markov transformation matrices to learn the temporal in the encoding layer to adjust the self-attention score and
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5489

learn the relative position relationship of encrypted traffic is not perfectly random and implicit patterns exist. Theredynamically to enhance the robustness of the model. Finally, fore, deep learning methods can be used to extract the
we incorporate an incremental update mechanism that updates implicit deep information in raw traffic. Even in encrypted
only a small number of parameters when the model’s recogni- and anonymized environments like Tor, deep learning models,
tion accuracy suffers a large degradation, allowing the model to especially those designed for sequence analysis like Transquickly adapt to dynamically changing traffic reaching online former, can learn to extract and identify correlations in these
classification. subtle packet sequences that are not immediately apparent to
 human analysts, and identify traffic when traditional methods
 III. P RELIMINARIES fail.
A. Tor and Traffic Analysis
 B. Vision Transformer
 Tor [33], also known as The Onion Router, is an
open-source network designed to facilitate anonymous com- Transformer based on self-attention mechanism has made a
munication over the Internet. Its primary goal is to obscure great success in the field of NLP. Although the Transformer
the user’s real IP address and the content of their commu- structure has become a standard in the NLP, its application
nication by routing and encrypting the user’s data over the in the computer vision field is still very limited. ViT (vision
Internet. Tor system consists of users, onion proxies, onion transformer) is a model that directly applies the Transformer
routers, directory servers, and target application servers. The to image classification and achieves good performance.
architecture is shown in Fig. 1. Transformer consists of multi-head self-attention layers and
 The Tor network includes thousands of relay nodes (onion feed-forward neural network layers. The self-attention layer
router, OR) operated by volunteers worldwide, using a multi- is used to encode the sequence and the feed-forward neural
hop proxy mechanism for user communication privacy. The network layer is used to process the features at each position
client runs an Onion Proxy to randomly select onion routers in the sequence. The self-attention mechanism calculates the
from the directory server and establish a path that we call attention scores between each pair of tokens in the input data,
a circuit. Typically, this circuit consists of three ORs: Entry thus enabling the model to capture complex dependencies
Node (or Guard Node), Middle Node, and Exit Node, and then regardless of their distance in the sequence. Transformer
the user establishes a circuit with these nodes hop by hop. uses the self-attention mechanism for greater parallelism and
During data transmission, OP encrypts user data in multiple computational efficiency when dealing with long sequences
layers and decrypts it sequentially by each relay node. Onion and large-scale data. Multi-head attention splits the input
router uses public keys to establish TCP connections secured into multiple subsets and computes the attention scores for
by TLS, multiplexing multiple circuits per connection. When each subset independently, which allows the model to learn
a client accesses different target servers, a new circuit is built information in multiple subspaces and enhances the model’s
in real-time. In addition, the client OP re-selects a new circuit sensitivity to different locations, thus enabling the model to
every 10 minutes. Therefore, the same node may appear in capture different types of relationships and patterns in the data
different locations on multiple circuits simultaneously and the simultaneously.
packets through it may vary in the number of encrypted layers. ViT divides the input image into a sequence of non-
Through providing sender privacy for internet services to its overlapping patches, and then the sequence of patches is
users, Tor has become a popular and low-latency anonymity treated as tokens, which can be fed into the original Transnetwork. The characteristics in the Tor network can be sum- former to accomplish the classification task. Since the latent
marized into the following three aspects: feature extraction of encrypted traffic packets is more suitable as a CV task [30]. ViT can utilize both temporal and
 • Multi-layer Encryption (Onion-like encryption): Each
 2-dimensional spatial information, the model is simple, effec-
 OR decrypts only one layer of encryption corresponding
 tive and highly scalable. Therefore, this paper makes ViT the
 to it to reveal the next relay node in the path and forwards
 backbone network but devises a dedicated ViT structure to
 the remaining encrypted data to it.
 make it more suitable for Tor-encrypted traffic classification.
 • Fixed-size Cells: Tor divides data into fixed-sized onion-
 First, we design an overlapping multi-size patch mechanism
 encrypted units called cells (typically 512 bytes) before
 to learn the features of Tor encrypted traffic flows more
 transmission. This standardization helps to obfuscate the
 comprehensively. Second, we propose a relative position bias
 actual size and structure of the data, making it harder to
 in the multi-headed self-attention mechanism to dynamically
 analyze and correlate by size alone.
 adjust the attention score and learn the relative position
 • Random Routing: The circuit through which data travels
 relationship in each encrypted traffic flow. As detailed in
 is randomly selected for each session, and it changes peri-
 Section IV.
 odically. This dynamic and unpredictable routing makes
 it difficult for adversaries to track users’ activities or
 correlate traffic between relays. IV. P ROBLEM D ESCRIPTION AND M ODEL
 Although encryption makes the payload look cluttered and In this section, we introduce the encrypted traffic classificaunsemantic, Sengupta et al. [50] exploit the randomness tion problem and the basic framework of our proposed model.
difference between different ciphertexts to distinguish differ- After that, we describe our flow representation and classifier
ent applications, which suggests that the encrypted traffic structure in detail.
5490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 L IST OF N OTATIONS • Q2: How to maintain the high robustness of Tor traffic flow classification when facing disorders and packet
 losses in the network?
 • Q3: How to keep the high identification accuracy under
 dynamic changes in network traffic data?
 Considering the above problems, we convert the problem
 of encrypted traffic identification into an image recognition
 problem in computer vision and propose our novel framework
 SRViT, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Our framework mainly consists
 of a preprocessing module, an embedding layer with a multisize patch mechanism, an encoding layer containing a Bias
 Unit, and an output layer. To address the first problem, we
 design an overlapping multi-size patch mechanism in the
 embedding layer to learn the features of encrypted traffic flows
 more comprehensively. By analyzing patches of multiple sizes,
 the multi-size patch mechanism ensures that both features at
 different granularity levels, including fine details and overarch-
A. Problem Definition
 ing patterns, are captured simultaneously, thus providing richer
 Our paper focuses on building an end-to-end encrypted feature sets for the model to improve classification accuracy
traffic identification model to accurately categorize malicious and robustness. In addition, to solve the problem of Tor’s
encrypted traffic by taking each traffic flow as input. To random routing or packet disorder when the network condition
maintain consistency in input length, we only select the first n is poor, we propose a novel self-attention operation in the
bytes of each flow and formulate it as (x1 , x2 , . . . , x p ) after encoding layer to dynamically adjust the attention score and
patch splitting, where p is the number of patches and xi learn the relative position relationship in each encrypted traffic
denotes the ith patch token. The output is a vector Y ∈ RZ , flow. Finally, we design an incremental update mechanism to
where Z denotes the number of categories. If a traffic flow quickly adapt our framework to the dynamic network environbelongs to the jth class, then Y j = 1, otherwise Y j = 0. The ment by updating only a small proportion of parameters when
notations used in this paper are shown in Table I. the framework suffers from a large degradation in classification
 accuracy.
B. Overview of The Model C. Preprocessing Module
 Encryption typically makes traffic appear more random and This module is mainly responsible for transforming the realless predictable. Multi-layer encryption aggravates this effect, time traffic in the format of pcap into the input data that meets
with each encryption layer changing the statistical proper- requirements. We intercept the information from the raw flow
ties of the traffic, and patterns recognizable in single-layer data to form a two-dimensional matrix, which is processed
encrypted traffic are further obscured in multi-layer encrypted as an image and categorized by the vision transformer algotraffic. Because of the characteristics of multi-layer encryption, rithm. Different layers of encryption may affect the traffic
highly obfuscated payloads, and random routing, the similarity differently, creating complex multi-dimensional challenges for
between the same category of Tor traffic flows is nearly weak feature extraction and analysis. The reason for representing the
and the difference between different categories is not obvious, flow as a two-dimensional matrix rather than one-dimensional
which makes traditional encrypted traffic identification algo- is to utilize the second dimension to depict the multilevel
rithms have not performed optimally in Tor encrypted traffic information of the Tor flow [30]. Encrypted network traffic
identification. often exhibits temporal patterns. ViT can capture these patterns
 Furthermore, with the explosive growth of massive Inter- and correlate them with spatial patterns in images.
net traffic, the number of packets required to be analyzed For encrypted traffic data, a lot of useful information is
is constantly increasing. As a result, the performance of lost if only the packet size sequence is utilized. Especially
traditional identification algorithms on large scale training for the Tor encrypted traffic, the characteristic of fixed-size
samples and features is far from satisfactory. Although the cells impairs the effectiveness of the methods that use only
model based on Transformer has achieved great improvement packet sizes. During TLS communication, the client and server
in Tor traffic identification accuracy, its high computational exchange handshake plaintext data to negotiate the parameters
complexity incurred during traffic representation learning, pre- used in subsequent encrypted connections, such as version,
training, and fine-tuning impedes the practical deployment and cipher suite, extensions, and certificates. Previous research
application of the model. This poses more problems for the has shown that this information is very effective in encrypted
encrypted traffic identification task. traffic recognition [51]. We convert the bytes of the encrypted
 • Q1: How to design a mechanism to help the model network flows into images, with one byte corresponding
 automatically extract long-term stable features for Tor to one pixel of the image. Although encryption makes the
 traffic flows encrypted at multiple layers while reducing payload more randomized, most of the original information in
 the required computational resources? the network traffic can be retained since the image features
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5491

Fig. 3. Overview of our method SRViT.

are extracted from the raw data of the encrypted traffic. D. Multi-Size Patch Division
As a result, the image features have received widespread
attention and utilization in encrypted traffic identification Multiple encryption layers obscure traffic patterns, making
research. it difficult to analyze or classify traffic based on traditional
 However, encryption would introduce noise in the image feature extraction methods. Vision Transformer (ViT) proconverted by the traffic, so choosing an appropriate image size cesses input images by dividing them into a spatially regular
is particularly important in the feature extraction process of the grid of equal-size patches without overlapping. It hinders the
image. If the size chosen is too small, the image will not be application of ViT in network traffic identification and may
able to fully describe the information of the encrypted traffic lead to some information loss in feature extraction, especially
and if the size chosen is too large, the information redundancy for encrypted Tor traffic. Thus we propose a novel patch
will affect the accuracy and efficiency of the identification dividing mechanism by multi-size division with overlapping
model. In order to keep the information of the encrypted traffic to complement the extracted features of the flow.
completely and also ensure high accuracy and efficiency, we Image features are discrete, while network traffic features
select the first 784 bytes of the original encrypted traffic to are continuous. This makes it possible that the direct applibe converted into a grayscale image for identification after cation of ViT may miss key features of the traffic, especially
sufficient experiments [52]. for Tor traffic flows encrypted at multiple layers, potentially
 We recognize packets with the same IP address, port num- leading to decreased recognition accuracy. To solve the above
ber, and protocol type as the same flow and only keep the first problem, we design a simple multi-size patch mechanism that
n bytes of each flow. Then, we format the byte sequence into can well capture the features of Tor traffic, characterized by
an image of size H × W × C through a reshaping operation, multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payload, and random
where H, W, C denote the height, width, and number of routing. Multi-layer encryption can impact traffic features
channels of the image, respectively. In this paper, n is taken at various scales. Smaller patches in the multi-size patch
as 784, and the intercepted encrypted traffic flow is converted mechanism might capture fine-grained, localized details that
to a grayscale map with a size of 28 × 28 × 1. Fig. 2 displays larger patches might miss, while larger patches can capture
some visual results of preprocessed network flows belonging broader, more global patterns.
to different types. From the visualizations, we conclude that As shown in Fig. 4, the input image x ∈ RH×W is first
the different classes of traffic are obviously discriminated from split into overlapping 2D patches of size P × P with a total
each other and have a high consistency across each class, number of p. We use two layers with two different patch
so it is reasonable to assume that good performance can be sizes P1 , P2 along with two different stride lengths S 1 , S 2
obtained with our approach. At the same time, the differences to extract different feature information from the input data.
between the traffic with Tor encryption seem to be much These features are represented as X00 = [x1p1 ; x2p1 ; . . . ; xNp1 ], X01 =
smaller compared to the traffic without Tor encryption, which [x1p2 ; x2p2 ; . . . ; x M
 p2 ]. The numbers of patches generated by each
impairs the effectiveness of directly using computer vision of the two layers are denoted as N = HW/S 12 , M = HW/S 22 ,
 2 2
algorithms such as CNN, ViT, etc. and patches are represented as x p1 ∈ RN×P1 , x p2 ∈ R M×P2 . The
5492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 with each other based on the relevance of different heads
 Concat(head1 , . . . , headh ), and each head is computed by the
 attention function:
 Q · KT
  
 MS AB = so f tmax √ + BRPB · V,
 d
 Q = xl W Q , K = xl W K , V = xl W V , (2)
 where Q, K, V stand for Query, Key, and Value, respectively,
 and they are all matrices. W Q , W K , W V ∈ Rd×d are learnable
 parameters. d is the embedding dimension, which is used for
 normalization. Note that the bias unit is a trainable parameter.
Fig. 4. The schematic illustration of multi-size patch division. BRPB needs to be calculated according to Equation Eq. (5) in
 the next section. It can be seen that BRPB serves to add a value
patches are then mapped to d-dimensional vectors by a linear to each element of Q· K T , the essence of which is that it wants
layer as patch embeddings. self-attention to be further biased. The relative position does
 The patch size and stride length need to be set reasonably. If not completely model the position information of each input,
they are too large, they cannot capture the local information of but the relative distance between the current position and the
the multi-layer encryption of Tor traffic effectively; if they are position that is being attended is considered when counting
too small, they cannot learn the global information effectively, attention score, which can be used to adjust the scores of the
and this will lead to excessively long model training times. attention between the different positions in the self-attention
According to the characteristics of Tor traffic, we experimented computation and make the model learn the relative position
with several sets of parameters, setting P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 to 3, 2, 7, relationship.
and 4 respectively. This configuration allows our model to Finally, the encoding layer consists of the RPB self-attention
capture the multi-layer encryption information of Tor traffic module and MLP block stacked in L layers. The mathematical
while maintaining short classification times. format is shown in Eq. (3) and Eq. (4). To enhance the
 Meanwhile, since traffic data transmission is highly related robustness and convergence speed of the model, layer norto sequential order, the position embeddings are added to the malization (LN) is applied before every block, and residual
patch embeddings as the input to the traffic encoder to main- connections are applied after every block. The MLP Block
tain the crucial position information. With fixed localization includes the Fully Connected Layer and the GELU Activation
of packets, coupled with position embedding, our approach Function.
transcends location limitations to capture long-term stable
dependencies in traffic. Additionally, similar to the [class] Xl0 = MS AB (LN(xl−1 )) + xl−1 , l = 1 . . . L, (3)
token in BERT, a learnable embedding also needs to be Xl = MLP(LN(xl0 )) + xl0 , l = 1 . . . L. (4)
prepended to the sequence of embedded patches (X00 = xclass ).
The equation for this step is shown in Eq. (1):
 F. RPB Unit
 p2 E; . . . ; x p2
 X0 = [xclass ; x1p1 E; . . . ; xNp1 E; xN+1 N+M
 E] + E pos . (1) To address the challenge of traffic identification posed by
 the random routing characteristics of Tor traffic, we add
E. RPB Attention Module relative position bias to the self-attention mechanism. Relative
 Traffic data is highly related to order, especially since Tor- position bias makes it possible to discriminate the relative
encrypted traffic is characterized by random routing, so the positions between different tokens by fine-tuning the selforder between packets is particularly important. ViT only adds attention arithmetic process. The aim is to make the position
positional embeddings to the embedding layer to represent vectors of the same dimension at different positions contain
absolute positions, which is insufficient in many cases for Tor- the relative position information between them, which can
encrypted traffic. In encrypted traffic, especially in the case be realized by the periodicity of the function. Therefore,
of disorder and packet loss, the relative distances between trigonometric functions can be utilized to represent the relative
different packet patches are obviously different. Thus position position information, which is essentially the use of sine/cosine
information with different relative distance values also needs formulas with different frequencies for different dimensions
to be assigned to different patches. Therefore, we propose to thus generating high-dimensional position vectors for different
add a relative position bias to solve this problem. locations. It is calculated by the following equation Eq. (5):
 (
 However, if the relative position embedding is added sin(ωk pos), i = 2k
directly to the embedding layer, after a series of matrix PE pos =
 (i)
 cos(ωk pos), i = 2k + 1
operations in self-attention, the relative position information is
still lost and only the absolute position information remains. 1
 ωk = , (5)
A natural idea is to add the relative position information back 100002k/dmodel
into the attention bias computation. Therefore, we introduce where the resulting PE is computed as a 2-dimensional
a relative position bias unit BRPB in the multi-headed self- matrix with pos corresponding to each input position and i
attention mechanism, in which patches can effectively interact representing the ith position of each position vector. dmodel is
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5493

the vector dimension such that each position has an encoding
that matches the dmodel dimension. Note that in this paper the
position vectors are summed with the results of the previous
vectors and therefore the value is taken as the length of the
sequence. The equation shows that different dimensions use
sine/cosine functions with different frequencies to generate
high-dimensional position vectors for different positions that
express relative position information. The advantage of using
trigonometric design in this way is that: firstly, the positional
encoding at position i can be linearly represented by the
positional encoding at position i + k, reflecting the relative
positional relationship between the two positions. Secondly,
the inner product of the positional encoding at positions i
and i + k decreases as the relative position increases, thus
characterizing the relative distance of the positions. Finally, it Fig. 5. The schematic diagram of the Incremental Update Mechanism.
ensures that the position encoding of each token is unique and
regular, with small differences between neighboring positions H. The Incremental Update
and larger differences between positions that are farther away. Since Tor traffic is characterized by uncertain traffic patterns
Moreover, it ensures that the relative positions are bounded and the nature of Internet traffic flow is dynamic over time,
and located in a continuous space. therefore we design the process of an incremental update to
 adapt to the changing characteristics. When a significant drop
Algorithm 1 Soft Relative Vision Transformer (SRViT) in the accuracy of traffic recognition is monitored, our model
 1: Input: Image X with dimensions H × W × C determines that there is an obvious change in flow represen-
 2: Output: Class predictions Y tations, indicating the current model parameters are no longer
 3: Initialization: applicable. However, retraining the model is expensive, the
 4: Embedding dimension d, Number of attention heads h, incremental update mechanism updates the specific parameters
 Number of transformer layers L, Patch size p1 , p2 . of the model to achieve accurate online traffic classification
 5: Multi-size Patch Division: without retraining the whole model.
 6: Divide the image into overlapping patches, linearly project Layers closer to the bottom encode generic reusable feapatch vectors to d-dimensional space and add positional tures, whereas encoding layers closer to the top may focus
 encoding and class token as section IV-D. additionally on task-specific context and semantics, so the
 7: X0 = [xclass ; x1p1 E; . . . ; xNp1 E; x p2 E; . . . ; x p2
 N+1 N+M
 E] + E pos top layers capture more abstract features and encode more
 8: RPB Attention Module: specialized features that are better adapted to the specific task.
 9: RPB Unit: Updating these specialized features is more useful. Specifically
10: PE (2k) = sin 10000 pos 
 2k/d speaking, we freeze most of the parameters of the model and
11: PE (2k+1) = cos 10000 pos 
 2k/d update only the parameters of the MLP layer for each Trans-
12: for l = 1 to L do former encoder layer. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the other parts of
13: for i = 1 to h do  T  the model (depicted as blue blocks in Fig. 5) are loaded with
14: MS ABi = softmax Q·K √ + BRPB · V
 d
 weights from the original model, and the parameters are kept
15: end for frozen. The MLP layer parameters (depicted as red blocks
16: Xi0 = LN(Xi−1 )Xi−1 in Fig. 5) are updated on a new task-specific data domain
17: Xi = MLP(LN(Xi0 )) + Xi0 containing task-specific losses.
18: end for In this paper, we detect the output probability distribution
19: Output Layer: when the model classifies the current traffic, which usually
20: return Y = LN(XL0 ) reflects the model’s confidence that the traffic is classified into
 the current category. We set the threshold of the maximum
 output probability to 0.9, which means that the incremen-
G. Output Layer tal update mechanism is triggered when the average of the
 Since the task of this paper is to classify the encrypted model’s maximum classification probability for the current
traffic, the role of this module is to extract the correspond- batch of data is detected to be below 0.9. A decrease in the
ing [class] token to output classification results. The shape output probability when the model classifies may suggest a
of the output tensor after passing through the Transformer decrease in the model’s confidence in classifying the current
Encoder remains the same as the input tensor. The output traffic data, so we train the original model with incremental
layer in Vision Transformer is composed of a fully con- updates using newly arrived traffic.
nected layer and GELU activation and a fully connected
layer. The detailed calculated formulation is as follows V. E XPERIMENTS
(Eq. (6)), In this section, we perform four encrypted flow classification
 Y = LN(XL0 ). (6) tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of the SRViT model
5494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE II
 DATASETS 10 applications across 5 traffic categories. The dataset is
 divided into 10 categories, containing 5 categories of VPN
 and 5 categories of non-VPN traffic data.
 Dataset 6: The Gotham2025 dataset [58] is a large-scale IoT
 network traffic dataset based on the Gotham testing platform.
 It contains traffic generated by 78 simulated IoT devices,
 covering protocols such as MQTT, CoAP, and RTSP. The
 dataset includes 1 category of benign and five distinct types
 of malicious traffic.
 2) Data Pre-Processing: In this paper, the data preproin solving different encryption scenarios and data distribu- cessing is carried out according to Section IV-C to convert
tion imbalance problems. In addition, we perform ablation flows into grayscale images. The datasets are split by the
experiments to verify the effects of our key designs in SRViT. five-fold cross-validation to guarantee the credibility of the
We also compare our model with the state-of-the-art models experimental results.
in terms of robustness, online classification performance and 3) Evaluation Metrics: Generally four evaluation metrics:
execution effectiveness. accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 are used to evaluate and
 compare the performance of the models. Accuracy is used to
 evaluate the overall performance of the classifiers. In the case
A. Experiment Setup of class imbalance, precision and recall need to be considered,
 1) Datasets and Classification Tasks: To assess the effec- while the F1 score balances the relationship between precision
tiveness and generalization of SRViT, we conducted exper- and recall, therefore making it more robust compared to
iments on encrypted traffic classification tasks using five accuracy. T P represents the number of correctly classified
different types of public datasets. The corresponding datasets positive samples, T N represents the number of correctly clasare presented in Table II. sified negative samples, FP represents the number of instances
 Dataset 1: The USTC-TFC dataset [53] comprises encrypted incorrectly classified positive samples, and FN represents the
traffic samples consisting of both malicious software and number of instances incorrectly classified negative samples.
benign applications. It is utilized for the task of encrypted The formulas are as follows:
malicious traffic classification, consisting of a total of TP + TN
20 categories, including 10 benign and 10 malignant traffic Accuracy = , (7)
 T P + FP + FN + T N
types. The size of the USTC-TFC dataset is 3.71 GB. TP
 Dataset 2: The ISCX-VPN dataset [54] is composed of Precision = , (8)
 T P + FP
6 communication applications in both VPN and non-VPN TP
scenarios captured by the Canadian Institute for Cybersecurity. Recall = , (9)
 T P + FN
It is designated to classify encrypted traffic that uses Virtual Precision × Recall
Private Networks (VPNs) for network communication. The F1 = 2 · . (10)
 Precision + Recall
dataset contains 14 types of raw traffic data, consisting of
7 types of non-VPN and VPN traffic respectively. 4) Implementation Details: For the training phase, we use
 Dataset 3: The ISCX-Tor dataset [55] is a labeled dataset the Adam optimizer for 100 epochs with the base learning rate
of Tor traffic published by the University of New Brunswick set to 1 × 10−3 and a batch size of 32. The batch size is 64 for
(UNB). It aims to classify encrypted traffic that uses an testing. We implemented the proposed method using PyTorch
Onion Router (Tor) to enhance communication privacy. The 2.1.1 and trained it on the GPU environment of NVIDIA
dataset contains 16 traffic classes, 8 categories of Tor traffic, GeForce GTX3090.
and 8 categories of non-Tor traffic. This traffic obfuscates In time performance experiments, we compare and analyze
the communication between senders and receivers through a the time performance of the ET-BERT algorithm and our
distributed routing network, further obscuring the behavior algorithm respectively in a GPU environment, which is an
of the traffic, and thus enhancing the difficulty of traffic NVIDIA GeForce GTX3090.
classification.
 Dataset 4: The CIC-IoT2022 dataset [56] is a multi-purpose B. 7 State-of-the-Art Models
academic IoT dataset for profiling, behavioral analysis, and
vulnerability testing of different IoT devices. We selected real- We compare SRViT with 7 various state-of-the-art models,
istic traffic flows captured in interaction experiments, including including:
4 different interaction methods for 28 devices. Categorizing by • ET-BERT [28] treats traffic representation extraction as an
device type generates the dataset containing 4 different device NLP task for pre-training and then fine-tunes the classifier
types. with limited labeled data. It’s important to note that the
 Dataset 5: The VNAT dataset [57] is a VPN/non-VPN ET-BERT model requires pre-training. In reproducing the
network application traffic dataset provided by MIT Lin- experiments, we directly downloaded the pre-training files
coln Laboratory, which primarily contains labeled PCAP data provided by the original authors and trained only in the
files covering encrypted and non-encrypted traffic data for fine-tuning phase.
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5495

 respectively. Furthermore, we observe that DL-based methods
 perform poorly, whether using sequence features or payloads
 as inputs. The reason is more likely that the initial traffic in
 Tor is not only encrypted with multiple layers, but also carried
 out antagonistic obfuscation, making it difficult to analyze the
 payload directly, and the sequence features hardly work on
 limited captured packets. Meanwhile, Tor traffic is characterized by variable packet lengths the use of intercepting raw
 bytes does not help discriminate each type of traffic encrypted
 with Tor and cannot differentiate the traffic information, while
 our multi-size patch mechanism can solve this problem by
Fig. 6. The results of accuracy comparison. extracting features in multiple layers.
 IoT traffic classification: As shown in the results, our
 method outperforms all previous models in all metrics, including ET-BERT. ET-BERT achieves similarly excellent results to
 our model on the first three datasets. This is because ET-BERT
 needs to be pre-trained with a large amount of data, and the
 traffic of the first three datasets is included in the pre-training
 of the ET-BERT model. However, the traffic of this dataset is
 not included in the pre-training, so ET-BERT does not have
 the related knowledge of the IoT traffic. Our model does not
 need the pre-training process and still obtains 99.63% accuracy
Fig. 7. Performance comparison on 6 datasets. on the CIC-IoT2022 dataset and 99.62% on the Gotham2025
 dataset.
 • FS-Net [20], Deep Fingerprinting (DF) [24], GraphDApp D. Robustness Study
 [45], Beauty [44], and 2D-CNN [52] are DL-based traffic
 analysis methods, which is training by the supervised way In real deployments, the data acquisition end often has the
 using raw packet information. situation of out-of-order and packet loss, which will affect
 the identification method of encrypted traffic negatively. In
 this experiment, we randomly modified some of the traffic
C. Accuracy Comparison packets to explore the robustness of the algorithms in harsh and
 The experimental results of accuracy performance are high-noise conditions. We conducted two sets of experiments:
shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. (1) packet disordering: randomly selected part of the packets
 Encrypted malicious traffic: The results for USTC-TFC to disrupt the order, and (2) packet loss: randomly selected
indicate that our model outperforms all other methods on four part of the packets to be discarded. We set the ratio range of
metrics, with our model achieving an accuracy of 99.99%. noise labeling from 0.2 to 0.8.
The malicious traffic in this dataset contains application-layer Both FS-Net and CNN are classical DL-based traffic clasunencrypted data, which makes it easier for other models to sification algorithms, CNN leverages the spatial features of
utilize such plaintexts for classification. the traffic while FS-Net uses RNN which can focus on the
 VPN encrypted traffic classification: The VPN encrypted temporal features of the traffic, therefore we select these two
traffic classification contains two datasets. On the ISCX-VPN methods as the representatives and compare our approach with
dataset, our method outperforms other models for all metrics, them. We demonstrate the results obtained by our method, the
and we achieve the best performance on F1, which can CNN model, and FS-Net on the Tor dataset in the presence of
reach 98.61%. In addition, this dataset poses the challenge of noise, and similar results are obtained on other datasets.
data imbalance to classification algorithms. The experimental In Fig. 8, the first and last four plots show the experimental
results suggest that our model exhibits better performances results of packet disordering and packet loss, respectively.
in identifying obfuscated traffic even in the presence of data The experimental results indicate that each model shows a
imbalance. Meanwhile, the accuracy of our algorithm can still different degree of degradation in the robustness experiments.
reach 99.74% on the VNAT dataset. As can be seen from the Compared with the previous traffic classification model, our
figure, our algorithm has the best results on all metrics. model is more fault-tolerant with an average improvement of
 Tor encrypted traffic classification: The results on ISCX- 13.68% in accuracy, 54.83% in precision, 56.91% in recall,
Tor show that our algorithm results in a 45.17% accuracy and 55.83% in F1 at a noise ratio of 0.8 in the case of packet
improvement over the ET-BERT model, which holds the best disordering. Even when the noise rate reaches 0.8, SRViT still
performance among the models we compared. Our method can has strong classification capability.
achieve 99.96% accuracy, 99.89% recall, 99.91% precision, We can observe that the performance of our model decreases
99.90% F1. Moreover, on this dataset, our method achieves an the least in the case of equal noise. It is because at first, the
average improvement of 22.31% accuracy, 63.89% precision, mechanism of multiple layers of patches with different sizes
67.91% recall, and 68.33% F1 over the previous algorithms, is used to minimize the impact by dividing the packets into
5496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 8. Performances on robustness.

 the introduction of the multi-size patch mechanism. Second,
 from the results, we can see that the accuracy of SRViT
 (embedding) is the same as that of SViT, which can also prove
 that by adding relative position embedding directly, the relative
 position information is still lost in the calculation of attention
 scores, and thus the performance is not significantly improved.
 However, the performance of the classifier improves when
 relative position bias is introduced. In conclusion, the two
 mechanisms we introduce can extract deeper long-term stable
Fig. 9. Performance of ablation experiments and incremental update.
 features of encrypted traffic as well as inter-packet position
 information to improve the classification performance of the
the same patch even when they are disordered. Secondly, we model.
introduce the relative position bias into the model, making
the classification performance more stable, while the absolute F. Online Classification Performance
position instead brings about adverse impacts in case of
disorder or packet loss. In this section, the results of the incremental updating
 experiments are shown to verify the effectiveness of our online
 performances. We first train the SRViT model using the VPN
E. Ablation Study dataset with 100 epochs and test it, and then test it using
 To verify the contribution of the multi-size patch mechanism the other datasets to simulate the long-term change of traffic.
and relative position bias in solving the problems of multi- Through the proposed mechanism of incremental update, our
layer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads, random routing, model could adapt to these dynamic changes and keep a stable
and traffic pattern uncertainty for Tor-encrypted traffic, we performance, compared with other methods. Fig. 9(b) shows
show the results of the ablation experiments in Fig. 9(a). the results of the last 10 tests and the results of 5 tests after
ViT denotes the algorithm that utilizes the Vision Transformer using the incremental update. During online classification, we
model directly. SViT refers to the algorithm that incorpo- test the output probability of the model. In our experiments,
rates multi-size overlapping patches on top of the Vision we use labeled datasets and show the accuracy as a compar-
Transformer model. Then, RViT denotes the algorithm that ison. As can be seen from Fig. 9(b), the output maximum
introduces relative position bias to the Vision Transformer probability of the model suffers a large drop when traffic
model. Furthermore, SRViT (embedding) combines multi-size arrives from a new dataset, and the accuracy rate drops draoverlapping patches and directly includes a relative position matically at that time. Therefore, we may determine whether
embedding in the Vision Transformer model. Lastly, SRViT the model needs to be an incremental update by detecting
(Bias) adds multi-size overlapping patches and includes a the maximum output probability. After this, the incremental
relative position bias in the Vision Transformer model. update can quickly recover the model’s classification accuracy,
 We observe that the highest performance of the model is and the output probability also gradually recovers in the
achieved after combining the two mechanisms introduced. same trend as the accuracy. Similar results were found on
First, the accuracy of our model increases to 97.52% after other datasets. Furthermore, to validate the robustness of the
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5497

 TABLE V
 TABLE III T RAINING T IME ON GPU
 N UMBER OF PARAMETERS & FLOP S OF THE T WO M ETHODS

 TABLE VI
 TABLE IV T ESTING T IME ON GPU
 T HE GPU E NERGY C ONSUMPTION

confidence-based update mechanism, we conducted experiments following the robustness test setup described in
Section V-C. Results demonstrate that even under packet
loss or out-of-order conditions, our method maintains high
confidence above the trigger threshold.

G. Time Consumption Comparison Fig. 10. Influence of number of bytes, patch size and stride length.
 The goal of this paper is to propose a transformer-based
traffic classification method to maintain the model classifi- until after completing model convergence, and the time per
cation performance while substantially reducing the required epoch is the average of the time it takes for the model to train
computational resources. Therefore, we compare the time one epoch.
performance energy consumption with the transformer-based In the ET-BERT experiments, the total training time does
model ET-BERT. In this section, we display the results of the not include the time spent in the pre-training phase, but only
time performance on the ISCX-VPN dataset, and the same the time spent in the fine-tuning phase using the transformer
results are obtained on the other datasets. model to classify the encrypted traffic. The experimental
 1) The Number of Parameters: FLOPs is the number of results are shown in Table V, which indicates that the training
floating point operations, a measure of the computational time of our model is much shorter than that of ET-BERT if
complexity of a model/algorithm. The larger the FLOPs, the pre-training is included. The last column in the table represents
higher the computational complexity of the model. Therefore, the percentage reduction in time.
we compared the number of training parameters and FLOPs 4) Testing Time: The testing time means the time it takes
of our model and ET-BERT. Our model has a total parameter to output the classification results of the encrypted flows on
count of 1.16 × 106 , with all of them being trainable, while the test set. We divide the total time by the number of flows
the total number of parameters and the number of trainable contained in the test set to get the time to classify each flow.
parameters of the ET-BERT model is 1.32×108 . Moreover, our As can be seen from Table VI, the classification time of
model has FLOPs of 3G, while ET-BERT has FLOPs of 348G, ET-BERT is approximately twice as slow as that of our
indicating that our model is more lightweight and convenient method.
to deploy. Comparison results are shown in the Table III.
 Although FLOPs is a commonly used evaluation metric for
measuring algorithms today, FLOPs does not take into account H. Influence of First n Bytes
MAC (Memory Access Cost) and parallelism, etc., so it may To select the appropriate number of the first n bytes, we
not fully represent the model speed and energy consumption. have chosen different n for the experiments. Fig. 10(a) shows
We also conducted the following experiments. the experimental results on the Tor dataset.
 2) The GPU Energy Consumption: We compare the energy We randomly selected half of the traffic in the Tor encrypted
consumption of the two models deployed on the same GPU. traffic dataset for our experiments. From the Fig. 10(a), we
The experimental results in the Table IV demonstrate that our can observe that the accuracy can achieve 98.44% when n is
results outperform ET-BERT in all metrics, where the average taken 784. Moreover, optimal results are achieved on the other
GPU power, SRViT, is 30.59% lower than ET-BERT, and the three metrics, with average improvements of 5.42% on recall,
average GPU memory is 79.85% lower. This indicates that our 7.26% on precision, and 7.47% on F1 compared to taking
algorithm can reduce the resource consumption more while other byte numbers. According to the experimental results,
maintaining a higher performance. with n set at 784, each metric reaches or closely approaches
 3) Training Time: The total training time of the model its optimal value, and a balance can be achieved among
refers to the total time spent from feeding data into the model the metrics. We achieve similar comparison results on other
5498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

3 datasets. Therefore, we can confirm that setting n to 784 is addition, we propose a self-attention operation with a novel
suitable to reach optimal values of metrics while maintaining relative position bias, which can dynamically adjust the attenhigh efficiency. tion scores and learn the relative position relationship. After
 that, we design a novel incremental update to adapt quickly to
I. Influence of Patch Size and Stride Length the dynamically changed traffic. At last, the comprehensive
 experiments on 5 real-world encrypted traffic datasets are
 In order to select the appropriate patch size and stride
 carried out. The experimental results indicate that our SRViT
length, we perform comparative experiments by selecting
 outperforms the state-of-the-art methods with an average accudifferent groups of patch sizes and stride lengths, respectively.
 racy improvement of 24.62% while keeping higher robustness
The stride length varies with the patch size. Fig. 10(b) shows
 and execution efficiency. Furthermore, the effectiveness of
the experimental results on the VPN dataset.
 our proposed key designs for classifying encrypted traffic is
 The Fig. 10(b) illustrates that when P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 take the
 demonstrated in ablation experiments.
values of 3, 2, 7, and 4, better results can be achieved for all
 However, there are still some issues to be further investhe metrics. Among them, the accuracy can reach 98.21%. We
 tigated in this work, such as the deployment of SRViT and
obtained similar results on other datasets. This is because the
 security performance, adaptive parameter selection, and more
convolution can extract more local features and improve the
 robust training techniques. In future work, we will further
identification accuracy when the value of patch size is taken
 investigate the ability of SRViT to resist attacks, as well as
smaller. Therefore, we confirm that setting P1 , S 1 , P2 , S 2 to
 few-shot learning or unsupervised learning methods.
3, 2, 7, and 4 respectively is appropriate to achieve the optimal
values for each metric.
 R EFERENCES
 VI. D ISCUSSION
 [1] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network
 In this section, we discuss the limitations of this work, as traffic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM
well as further research efforts in this area. We convert the Comput. Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2021.
problem of encrypted traffic flow recognition into an image [2] R. Zhao, X. Deng, Z. Yan, J. Ma, Z. Xue, and Y. Wang, “MT-
 FlowFormer: A semi-supervised flow transformer for encrypted traffic
recognition problem in computer vision and propose a novel classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery
end-to-end recognition model SRViT. We propose a novel Data Mining, 2022, pp. 2576–2584.
multi-size patch division mechanism, a relative position bias [3] K. Xie, X. Ruotian, X. Wang, G. Xie, D. Zhang, and J. Wen, “NMMFstream: A fast and accurate stream-processing scheme for network
and an incremental update mechanism. However, there are still monitoring data recovery,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., May
some issues to be further investigated in this work. Firstly, 2022, pp. 2218–2227.
since different classes of encrypted traffic have different types [4] J. Fan, C. Guan, K. Ren, and C. Qiao, “Middlebox-based packetlevel redundancy elimination over encrypted network traffic,” IEEE/ACM
of packets, the more appropriate byte number, patch size, Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1742–1753, Aug. 2018.
and stride length still need to be further investigated. One [5] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Frequency domain feature based
future work is to explore an adaptive or data-driven selection robust malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31,
 no. 1, pp. 452–467, Feb. 2023.
of these parameters. For example, different types of traffic [6] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Detecting unknown encrypted malicious traffic
or different applications might benefit from different image in real time via flow interaction graph analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib.
sizes (larger image for flows that carry more data, or smaller Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 1–18.
 [7] P. Dodia, M. AlSabah, O. Alrawi, and T. Wang, “Exposing the rat in the
for flows with less data). Secondly, while SRViT has good tunnel: Using traffic analysis for tor-based malware detection,” in Proc.
robustness in various encrypted traffic scenarios, it relies on ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2022, pp. 875–889.
clean pre-training data. The attacker can intentionally add [8] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet
low-frequency mislabeled traffic data to carry out a poisoning Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
attack against the model, and the decision boundaries of the [9] C. Duan et al., “IoTa: Fine-grained traffic monitoring for IoT devices via
model will be modified, thus spoofing the model used for a fully packet-level models,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
specific classification task and leading to a degradation of vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 1–17, Jul. 2024.
 [10] J. Liu, Y. Fu, J. Ming, Y. Ren, L. Sun, and H. Xiong, “Effective and
the accuracy. In addition, newly arriving traffic data in the real-time in-app activity analysis in encrypted internet traffic streams,”
incremental update mechanism may also cause the model to in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
have odd shifts or catastrophic forgetting, thus we need to 2017, pp. 335–344.
 [11] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted
focus further on more robust training techniques. TLS traffic classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw.,
 vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 164–177, Feb. 2023.
 VII. C ONCLUSION [12] P. Lin, K. Ye, Y. Hu, Y. Lin, and C.-Z. Xu, “A novel multimodal
 deep learning framework for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM
 We introduce ViT into the encrypted traffic classification Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1369–1384, Jun. 2023.
task and propose SRViT, a novel end-to-end identification [13] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
model that transforms traffic flows into image patches and vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
dynamically learns local/global dependencies between packets. [14] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in
We propose a novel multi-size patch division mechanism Proc. 23rd Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp. (NDSS), Feb. 2016,
 pp. 1–15.
to further comprehensively learn the hidden features and [15] T. V. Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
resolve the multi-layer encryption, highly obfuscated payloads, on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.
random routing, and traffic pattern uncertainty problems. In (NDSS), 2020.
LIU et al.: SRViT: ROBUST ONLINE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION BASED ON ViT 5499

[16] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust [38] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted net-
 IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, work traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
 Jan. 2018. pp. 439–454.
[17] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware [39] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
 in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2023, pp. 6203–6220.
 Aug. 2017, pp. 1723–1732. [40] M. Korczynski and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to classify
[18] Y. Hou, S. G. Teo, Z. Chen, M. Wu, C.-K. Kwoh, and T. Truong-Huu, encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM - IEEE Conf. Comput.
 “Handling labeled data insufficiency: Semi-supervised learning with Commun., Apr. 2014, pp. 781–789.
 self-training mixup decision tree for classification of network attacking [41] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of
 traffic,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Aug. 1, encrypted traffic with second-order Markov chains and application
 2022, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2022.3195534. attribute bigrams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 12, no. 8,
[19] A. Lichy, O. Bader, R. Dubin, A. Dvir, and C. Hajaj, “When a RF pp. 1830–1843, Aug. 2017.
 beats a CNN and GRU, together—A comparison of deep learning and [42] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, M. Wang, and F. Li, “Certificate-aware
 classical machine learning approaches for encrypted malware traffic encrypted traffic classification using second-order Markov chain,” in
 classification,” Comput. Secur., vol. 124, Jan. 2023. Proc. IEEE/ACM 24th Int. Symp. Quality Service (IWQoS), Jun. 2016,
[20] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence pp. 1–10.
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Com- [43] Y. Fu, H. Xiong, X. Lu, J. Yang, and C. Chen, “Service usage
 put. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. classification with encrypted internet traffic in mobile messaging
[21] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme apps,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 2851–2864,
 of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient Nov. 2016.
 management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. [44] R. Schuster, V. Shmatikov, and E. Tromer, “Beauty and the
 107974. burst: Remote identification of encrypted video streams,” in Proc.
[22] X. Xiao, W. Xiao, R. Li, X. Luo, H. Zheng, and S. Xia, 26th USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur. 17), Aug. 2017,
 “EBSNN: Extended byte segment neural network for network traffic pp. 1357–1374.
 classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 5, [45] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decenpp. 3521–3538, Sep. 2022. tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
[23] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recur- graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 rent neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 Dependable Secure Comput., early access, Feb. 28, 2023, doi: 10.1109/ [46] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classifi-
 TDSC.2023.3245411. cation with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet
[24] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting: Meas. Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654.
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in [47] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto, based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
 ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943. vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614.
[25] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari Siavoshani, R. Shirali Hossein Zade, and [48] Z. Diao et al., “DMSTG: Dynamic multiview spatio-temporal networks
 M. Saberian, “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traf- for traffic forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 6,
 fic classification using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 6865–6880, Jun. 2024.
 pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020. [49] X. Xiao et al., “RBLJAN: Robust byte-label joint attention network for
 network traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput.,
[26] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
 vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1–18, May 2025.
 filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc.
 [50] S. Sengupta, N. Ganguly, P. De, and S. Chakraborty, “Exploiting
 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., Jul. 2020, pp. 397–405.
 diversity in Android TLS implementations for mobile app traf-
[27] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 fic classification,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf., May 2019,
 Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
 pp. 1657–1668.
[28] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [51] Y. Hong, Q. Li, Y. Yang, and M. Shen, “Graph based encrypted
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers malicious traffic detection with hybrid analysis of multi-view features,”
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Inf. Sci., vol. 644, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 119229.
 Secur. Privacy, Apr. 2022, pp. 633–642. [52] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end
[29] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative encrypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural
 pretrained transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513. networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Inform. (ISI), Jul. 2017,
[30] R. Zhao et al., “A novel self-supervised framework based on masked pp. 43–48.
 autoencoder for traffic classification,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, [53] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 no. 3, pp. 1–14, Jun. 2024. classification using convolutional neural network for representation
[31] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
 (ICLR), 2021. [54] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghor-
[32] M. Caron et al., “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
 2021, pp. 9630–9640. pp. 407–414.
[33] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson, “Tor: The second- [55] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorgeneration onion router,” in Proc. 13th USENIX Secur. Symp. (SSYM), bani, “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in
 Aug. 2004, pp. 303–320. Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Feb. 2017,
[34] Y. Qi, L. Xu, B. Yang, Y. Xue, and J. Li, “Packet classification pp. 253–262.
 algorithms: From theory to practice,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Apr. [56] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong,
 2009, pp. 648–656. and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidi-
[35] J. Erman, A. Mahanti, M. Arlitt, and C. Williamson, “Identifying and mensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy,
 discriminating between Web and peer-to-peer traffic in the network Secur. Trust (PST), Aug. 2022, pp. 1–11.
 core,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. World Wide Web, 2007, pp. 883–892. [57] S. Jorgensen et al., “Extensible machine learning for
[36] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service encrypted network traffic application labeling via uncertainty
 mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic quantification,” IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 420–433,
 classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2004, Jan. 2024.
 pp. 135–148. [58] O. Belarbi, T. Spyridopoulos, E. Anthi, O. Rana, P. Carnelli, and
[37] R. Keralapura, A. Nucci, and C.-N. Chuah, “Self-learning peer-to-peer A. Khan, “Gotham dataset 2025: A reproducible large-scale IoT nettraffic classifier,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw., work dataset for intrusion detection and security research,” 2025,
 Aug. 2009, pp. 1–8. arxiv:2502.03134.
5500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Chang Liu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) Xin He (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree
 received the B.E. degree from Nanjing University from the Department of Computer Science and
 of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China, Technology, Nanjing University, China, in 2021.
 in 2022, where she is currently pursuing the Ph.D. He is currently a Lecturer at the School of Comdegree with the School of Computer. Her research puter Science, Nanjing University of Posts and
 interests include machine learning, network security, Telecommunications, China. His research papers
 and traffic analysis. have been published in many prestigious conferences and journals, such as IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE
 ICDCS, IEEE ICWS, IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS
 ON N ETWORKING , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PAR -
 ALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS , and IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON C OMMUNICATIONS. His research interests are in the
 areas of data center networks, SDN, and edge computing. He is a member of
 ACM.
 Lei Han is currently a Professor at the School
 of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and
 Telecommunications. He has created patents which Weibei Fan (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 are authorized by China, U.S., U.K., Japan, South degree in computer science from Soochow Uni-
 Korea, and Germany. He has authored papers versity in 2019. He is currently an Associate
 in research related international conferences and Professor at the School of Computer, Nanjing Unijournals, such as IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON PARAL - versity of Posts and Telecommunications. He has
 LEL AND D ISTRIBUTED S YSTEMS , GLOBECOM, authored papers in research related international
 MOBISYS, and ICCN. His research interests include journals and conferences, such as IEEE T RANSAC -
 computer networks and datacenter systems. TIONS ON C OMPUTERS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
 D EPENDABLE AND S ECURE C OMPUTING, IEEE
 T RANSACTIONS ON PARALLEL AND D ISTRIBUTED
 S YSTEMS, IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON R ELIABIL -
 ITY , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK S CIENCE AND E NGINEERING ,
 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORK AND S ERVICE M ANAGEMENT, IEEE
 Zulong Diao received the Ph.D. degree in soft- T RANSACTIONS ON E MERGING T OPICS IN C OMPUTATIONAL I NTELLI -
 ware engineering from Hunan University, Changsha, GENCE, IEEE Communications Magazine, JPDC, and IEEE ISPA, FUZZ-
 China, in 2019. He is currently an Associate Pro- IEEE, ICPADS, PDCAT. His research interests include data center networks,
 fessor at the School of Computer Science and parallel and distributed systems, and interconnection architectures. He is a
 Engineering, Hunan University of Science and Tech- member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Association for Computing
 nology, Xiangtan, China. His research interests Machinery.
 include machine learning, traffic analysis, and network measurement.
 Fu Xiao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology
 from Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China, in 2007. He is currently a
 Professor and a Ph.D. Supervisor with the School
 of Computer, Nanjing University of Posts and
 Zheng Wu received the Ph.D. degree from Nan- Telecommunications. He has authored papers in
 jing University of Posts and Telecommunications research related international conferences, including
 (NUPT). He is currently a Lecturer with the College INFOCOM, ICC, and IPCCC. He has authored
 of Computer, NUPT. Prior to that, he worked as a IEEE/ACM T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING,
 Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Computer Network IEEE J OURNAL ON S ELECTED A REAS IN C OM -
 Information Center, Chinese Academy of Sciences. MUNICATIONS , IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON M OBILE C OMPUTING , ACM
 His research interests include routing security, net- Transactions on Embedded Computing Systems, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS
 work traffic identification, and anomaly detection. ON V EHICULAR T ECHNOLOGY . His main research interests include computer
 networks. He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Association
 for Computing Machinery.