IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026 6335

 STATGRAPH: Effective In-Vehicle Intrusion Detection
 via Multi-View Statistical Graph Learning
 Kai Wang , Member, IEEE, Qiguang Jiang , Bailing Wang , Member, IEEE, Yulei Wu , Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Hongke Zhang , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—In-vehicle networks (IVNs) face growing threats from equipped with in-vehicle communication networks and variadvanced cyber-attacks, particularly stealthy masquerade attacks ous embedded computing devices, have rapidly proliferated
that mimic legitimate message patterns. This paper proposes STAT- and become a prevailing trend [1]. With the increasing num-
GRAPH, a fine-grained intrusion detection framework based on
multi-view statistical graph learning over the Controller Area ber of intelligent technologies integrated into vehicles, ICVs
Network (CAN) messages within IVNs. STATGRAPH constructs now offer a variety of advanced services and enhanced user
two graphs per detection window: a Timing Correlation Graph experiences, such as autonomous driving, collision avoidance,
(TCG) capturing temporal ID dependencies, and a Coupling Rela- and automated parking assistance. However, these technologies
tionship Graph (CRG) modeling short-term contextual relations. have also introduced new external attack surfaces to in-vehicle
TCG and CRG are further used to generate graph structure encoding payload variations and embedded signal co-occurrence. A networks (IVNs), making them more vulnerable to a growing
lightweight multi-layered Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) range of evolving and sophisticated cyber threats. These threats
is then applied to classify each message, leveraging the expres- jeopardize not only the security of IVNs but also the safety of
sive representations from TCG and CRG. To ensure effectiveness passengers [2].
against diverse attacks, we evaluate STATGRAPH on two real-world Among in-vehicle communication protocols, the Controller
CAN datasets featuring five underexplored masquerade attacks.
Experimental results show that STATGRAPH significantly improves Area Network (CAN) is widely regarded as the de facto standard
detection granularity and outperforms state-of-the-art methods, for communication among Electronic Control Units (ECUs) in
with F1-score gains of 7% and 22%, while maintaining the highest embedded IVN systems [3]. Malicious CAN messages can lead
accuracy. to severe consequences, particularly when they target critical
 Index Terms—Intrusion detection, masquerade attacks, Internet systems such as the brakes, powertrain, or safety controls of
of Vehicles, in-vehicle network, controller area network, multi-view a vehicle [4]. In light of this, recent studies have proposed
statistical graph. various methods to enhance IVN security by detecting intrusions
 on the CAN bus [5], [6], [7]. While encryption and authentication techniques can enhance the security of IVNs [8], they
 I. INTRODUCTION often necessitate modifications to the existing CAN protocol
 S A vital component of vehicle-to-everything (V2X) sys- specifications and communication procedures. Such changes are
A tems, intelligent connected vehicles (ICVs), which are generally considered impractical and cost-prohibitive, given the
 widespread adoption of the CAN protocol in the automotive
 manufacturing industry. As a more feasible alternative, the in-
 Received 25 February 2025; revised 6 November 2025; accepted 17 Novem- trusion detection system (IDS) offers a non-invasive security
ber 2025. Date of publication 24 November 2025; date of current version
6 April 2026. This work was supported in part by TaiShan Scholars under solution by leveraging bypass monitoring mechanisms that do
Grant tsqn202408112, in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China not require any changes to the CAN protocol or ECU hard-
(NSFC) under Grant 62272129, and in part by Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intel- ware. This characteristic makes IDS particularly suitable for
ligence and Content Security, Ministry of Education under Grant RZZN202414.
Recommended for acceptance by C. Wang. (Corresponding authors: Kai Wang; real-world deployment, offering both technical viability and
Bailing Wang.) economic efficiency [9].
 Kai Wang and Qiguang Jiang are with the School of Computer Science As artificial intelligence advances in network traffic identiand Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai 264209, China, and
also with the Shandong Key Laboratory of Industrial Network Security, Weihai fication, IVN intrusion detection has shifted from monitoring
264209, China (e-mail: dr.wangkai@hit.edu.cn; jiangqiguang_971@163.com). the physical characteristics of the ECU to analyzing the charac-
 Bailing Wang is with the Harbin Institute of Technology (Weihai) Qingdao teristics of the CAN data flow, reflecting interactions between
Research Institute, Qingdao 266109, China, and also with the Shandong Key
Laboratory of Industrial Network Security, Weihai 264209, China (e-mail: the ECUs. Mainstream approaches predominantly use deep
wbl@hit.edu.cn). neural networks or graph-based methods, such as Convolutional
 Yulei Wu is with the Faculty of Engineering and the Bristol Digital Fu- Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
tures Institute, University of Bristol, BS8 1QU Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: y.l.wu@
bristol.ac.uk). and graph-based intrusion detection systems [10], [11], [12].
 Hongke Zhang is with the School of Electronic and Information Engineer- However, existing supervised neural network models label all
ing, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: hkzhang@ CAN messages within a data flow as anomalous, regardless of
bjtu.edu.cn).
 Code is available at https://github.com/wangkai-tech23/StatGraph. the number of actual abnormal messages [13]. This leads to
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMC.2025.3636517 coarse-grained detection, where only the overall anomaly of a

 1536-1233 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
6336 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

detection window is identified, without fine-grained recognition
of individual messages [14], [15]. Consequently, the traceability
of detection is lost, making it difficult to locate the exact source
of anomalies [16], [17], [18]. Additionally, current graph-based Fig. 1. CAN frame.
methods primarily focus on simpler attack types [10], [19],
leaving the detection of sophisticated masquerade attacks largely
unexplored [9], [20], [21], [22]. Masquerade attacks are espe- an intrusion detection model can classify each individual
cially stealthy, as they replace legitimate messages while main- CAN message within a detection window, in contrast to
taining transmission timing and interaction patterns, but inject traditional metrics that evaluate performance at the window
malicious payloads. However, most mainstream single-view or segment level.
 r To evaluate the classification ability of STATGRAPH on capgraph-based intrusion detection methods primarily model the
relationships among CAN message IDs and their transmission tured CAN messages of realistic in-vehicle environment,
frequencies. While these approaches are effective for detecting we conduct experiments on an in-vehicle computing platsimple anomalies, they often fail to identify masquerade attacks form (NVIDIA Jetson Nano T206 with ARM architecture)
that modify only the payload, due to their limited ability to and on a personal computer (LENOVO 90VA000JCP),
capture the coupling structure of data flow [11]. respectively. Besides, we select the Car Hacking dataset
 To address the aforementioned issues, we propose STAT- and the ROAD dataset to cover as many types of attacks
GRAPH, an effective in-vehicle intrusion detection approach that as possible, which are both directly generated from real
achieves fine-grained classification through multi-view statisti- vehicles on sale. Notably, to the best of our knowledge, we
cal graph learning. Unlike previous single-view models, STAT- are the first to investigate 5 new types of masquerade attacks
GRAPH adopts a dual-graph learning paradigm that simultane- introduced by the ROAD dataset, which can cause incorrect
ously captures global statistical regularities and local contextual working status of physical components within real vehicles
dependencies. It constructs node feature vectors and adjacency (e.g., wrong speed indicator position by injecting fake
matrices for the Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) by gener- wheel speed values) and bring in severe damage on both
ating two statistical views: the Timing Correlation Graph (TCG) vehicles and passengers.
and the Coupling Relationship Graph (CRG). The TCG models The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
long-range statistical distributions among CAN messages by introduces the related background knowledge. Section III decapturing temporal correlations between different CAN IDs scribes our proposed STATGRAPH. We show the experimental
within detection windows. In contrast, the CRG encodes both setup and results in Section IV followed by the discussion
temporal adjacency and contextual similarity, reflecting the con- in Section V. Section VI summarizes existing representative
tinuity of identical CAN IDs and variations in payload values IVN intrusion detection methods. We conclude the paper in
or signal-level patterns over short time spans. These two graph Section VII.
views are integrated through graph convolutional operations,
which enable multi-view feature propagation and abstraction. II. BACKGROUND
This design results in enriched representations of in-vehicle In this section, we provide a brief introduction to the IVN
communication dynamics and enhances the model’s ability to CAN protocol and adversary types related to our STATGRAPH.
detect complex and subtle anomalies. Additionally, the GCN’s
compatibility with small-scale graphs in streaming contexts,
along with its computational efficiency, makes it well suited A. IVN CAN Details
for IVN intrusion detection scenarios where rapid response is CAN is the current de facto standard for IVN, which is widely
essential. used in the automotive industry to connect different ECUs in
 The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as vehicles and support messaging between ECUs. There are four
follows: types of CAN frames: 1) Data frame; 2) Remote frame; 3) Error
 r We propose STATGRAPH, a multi-view statistical graph frame; 4) Overload frame. Fig. 1 illustrates the format of a CAN
 learning framework for effective intrusion detection in data frame, which is the default mode used for CAN message
 IVNs. By considering both the interactive relationships transmission. CAN data frames support payloads of up to 8 bytes
 among CAN messages and their payload-level contextual and have an 11-bit arbitration ID (CAN ID) that can be extended
 similarities, STATGRAPH accurately captures variations in to 29 bits.
 periodicity, payload content, and signal combinations. This The arbitration ID (CAN ID) plays a dual role in CAN
 enables the detection of a wide range of attacks, including communication: it governs message priority during bus arbitrasophisticated and complex masquerade attacks. tion and simultaneously serves as a semantic identifier. During
 r Current deep learning-based approaches build the model arbitration, the message with the numerically lowest CAN ID
 input with multiple CAN messages, resulting in coarse is granted bus access, while others must defer until the bus is
 recognition and the inability to locate the malicious mes- idle. Beyond arbitration, the CAN ID conveys content-specific
 sage. To accurately quantify the message-level recogni- semantics, as defined by the Original Equipment Manufacturer
 tion accuracy, we introduce a new criterion, Identification (OEM)-provided communication matrix. For instance, in several
 Granularity (IG), which is used to assess how precisely publicly available datasets, ID 0x45D is transmitted by the
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6337

powertrain control module every 0.01s to report gas and brake III. METHODOLOGY
pedal positions, while ID 0x102 from the same module contains
 In this section, we give the system overview of the STATdrivetrain-related information. These IDs exemplify how CAN GRAPH, and then present the details of its key components.
messages are tied to specific modules and functions, with fixed
payload formats and transmission intervals.
 The Data Field (payload) contains up to 8 bytes and typ- A. System Overview
ically encodes multiple physical signals. Each signal is pre- STATGRAPH consists of the following three components, as
cisely defined by the communication matrix, which specifies illustrated in Fig. 2. In contrast to prior works such as [11],
its start bit, length in bits, scaling factor, and valid range. This which rely on a single statistical view of CAN message IDs,
bit-level packing enables compact and efficient transmission, STATGRAPH introduces a multi-view graph construction framewith multiple quantities multiplexed into a single message. work that jointly models global statistical trends and local con-
However, this design also introduces attack surfaces: adversaries textual dependencies. This dual-graph architecture is designed
may tamper with individual bits to subtly alter signal values to capture complementary aspects of in-vehicle communication
while maintaining the overall message frequency and struc- behavior, enabling a richer and more nuanced representation
ture. Such fine-grained manipulations are often undetectable of message dynamics. The TCG captures long-range behavby coarse-grained detection models, highlighting the necessity ioral patterns by aggregating messages with the same CAN
of payload-level analysis. Additionally, the coexistence of var- ID, enabling the detection of anomalies in message periodious transmission patterns (e.g., periodic, event-triggered, or icity and distributional shifts. Complementing this, the CRG
conditional) introduces complex temporal dependencies among preserves message-level granularity and constructs edges based
CAN messages, as discussed in [23]. This structural complexity on temporal adjacency and ID similarity, allowing the model to
motivates the use of graph-based methods that can effectively detect localized irregularities in payload content and inter-signal
model inter-message relationships across time and semantics. consistency. Their integration through graph convolution enables feature propagation across the two graph structures, rather
 than relying on simple feature concatenation. This approach
B. Threat Model
 reinforces the model’s capacity to generalize from complex
 ECUs employ bit-by-bit arbitration and explicit broadcasting communication patterns.
to transmit CAN protocol messages, enabling fast and effi- This architectural design provides a structured foundation that
cient data exchange. An adversary may access the CAN bus encodes three critical dimensions of communication behavior:
through the OBD-II port or exploit the telematics service of periodicity, payload semantics, and signal relationships. These
the OEM via remote network access. Based on the attacker’s aspects are not modeled independently but are jointly embedobjectives, such intrusions are typically classified into three ded in the node features and adjacency structures, equipping
categories. the system with strong inductive biases for fine-grained and
 1) Fabrication Attacks. An adversary compromises an ECU interpretable anomaly detection.
and injects malicious messages with forged IDs and data fields r Global Feature Fusion Module (Section III-B) constructs
into the CAN bus. This is a common and straightforward attack, the TCG and derives statistical behavioral features such as
easily executed. Despite this, all legitimate ECUs remain active, frequency and temporal regularity. These features, together with
transmitting their original data. Fabrication attacks increase the raw payload bytes, are fused into node-level feature vectors
CAN bus traffic, leading to dynamic and distributed changes in that encode long-term communication patterns in IVNs. In the
communication behavior. Examples include Denial of Service TCG, each unique CAN ID within the detection window is
(DoS) attacks, fuzzy attacks, and targeted ID attacks. represented as a node. All messages associated with the same ID
 2) Suspension Attacks. In this type of attack, legitimate ECUs are aggregated to extract global statistical attributes that colleccan be disabled by an adversary. Specifically, the targeted ECU tively reflect the periodicity and distributional characteristics of
is weakly compromised and loses the ability to transmit mes- message transmissions. The resulting rich and structured node
sages, impairing other ECUs that rely on its data to function representations benefit downstream relational modeling in the
properly. As a result, suspension attacks can affect not only the CRG to further capture multiple dimensions of communication
compromised ECU itself but also other receiving ECUs. behavior, including timing consistency, payload semantics, and
 3) Masquerade Attacks. These attacks combine fabrication inter-signal relationships.
and suspension techniques, exhibiting highly sophisticated and r Association Enhancement Module (Section III-C) constealthy behavior patterns. The adversary first disables the ECU structs the CRG to generate adjacency matrices that encode fineintended for replacement, removing it from the CAN network. grained communication dependencies among CAN messages.
A fully compromised ECU then sends spoofed messages with Unlike conventional adjacency constructions that rely solely
the same ID at a realistic frequency, effectively masquerading on message co-occurrence or ID similarity, the CRG models
as the original. In this advanced strategy, only the payload is two complementary relational patterns: temporal adjacency besubtly altered, while the behavioral characteristics of the target tween consecutive messages and semantic consistency among
ECU are preserved. As a result, message conflicts are avoided, messages sharing the same CAN ID. Within each detection
and communication dynamics remain unchanged, causing many window, every individual CAN message is treated as a separate
intrusion detection methods to fail. node. Edges are established either between temporally adjacent
6338 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

Fig. 2. Architecture of STATGRAPH. Global Feature Fusion Module (III-B) generates node feature vectors by constructing TCGs that react to the long-term
distribution of IVN CAN messages. Association enhancement module (III-C) produces adjacency matrixes by constructing CRGs whose edges reflect both
contextual adjacency and intra-message dynamics between adjacent CAN messages or those with the same ID. GCN classification module (III-D) accepts the
generation of streaming graph-structured data from the global feature fusion module and association enhancement module to perform training and detection tasks.

 We define two different types of generated multi-view in the
 following definition.
 Definition 1: We consider two types of graphs: the TCG
 G(V, E), which captures long-term statistical attributes, and the
 CRG Ĝ(V̂ , Ê), which models the topological structure of shortterm message interactions. Here, vi , vj ∈ V and v̂i , v̂j ∈ V̂
 denote nodes, while eij ∈ E ⊆ V × V and êij ∈ Ê ⊆ V̂ × V̂
 represent edges. The values wij and ŵij are the respective
Fig. 3. NVIDIA Jetson Nano T206. weights of edges eij and êij .

messages or between messages that share the same ID. This B. Global Feature Fusion Module
design enables the CRG to encode both temporal continuity and To capture long-term behavioral patterns in in-vehicle com-
ID semantic regularities at the message level, thereby capturing munication, this module constructs the TCG, which abstracts
localized structural patterns that reflect message periodicity, statistical dependencies among CAN IDs by extracting interacpayload semantics, and inter-signal dependencies. These three tion features from continuous data streams. Unlike traditional
dimensions are jointly embedded in the graph topology and serve approaches based mainly on frequency or co-occurrence statisas critical relational cues for detecting fine-grained anomalies tics, the TCG employs directed edges to encode conditional
that may elude traditional statistical aggregation methods. dependencies derived from ID orderings within each detection
 r GCN Classification Module (Section III-D) consumes the window.
graph-structured representations constructed by the Global Fea- • Generation of TCG based on CAN stream
ture Fusion Module and Association Enhancement Module to The CAN flow can be regarded as multivariate time series.
perform message-level classification. The module takes as input Definition 2: (Multivariate Time Series) CAN data is a
the node features derived from the TCG, which reflect global multivariate time series Ψ ∈ RT ×V :
statistical patterns such as frequency and temporal regularity,
together with the adjacency matrices built from the CRG, which Ψ = {ψ1 , ψ2 , . . . , ψt , . . . , ψT } (1)
encode localized contextual and semantic relationships among
CAN messages. This dual-graph input enables the GCN to where ψt = {timestamp, ID, DLC, d1 , . . . , d8 , type} ∈ RV .
jointly model long-term communication behavior and short- V = 12 is the dimension of a recorded data CAN message.
term structural dependencies, equipping it with strong inductive We choose ID = d0 , data field {d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 } ∈ R8 and
bias for detecting both overt and stealthy anomalies. By leverag- label value dl to form φt = {d0 , d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 , dl } ∈ R10 as
ing this architecture, the GCN module facilitates high-resolution input representation for STATGRAPH.
threat detection by leveraging both statistical abstraction and Since recurrent ID patterns reflect the periodicity of CAN
structural semantics, thereby improving classification accuracy messages, we divide IVN CAN traffic into multiple detection
while preserving temporal and message-level interpretability. windows and characterize message distributions within each
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6339

window separately, enabling more efficient data preprocessing Algorithm 1: TCG Building Algorithm.
for STATGRAPH. Require:
 We divide the CAN detection windows as follows: Detection Window List of CAN Messages:
 Definition 3: A series of CAN messages monitored from the CAN W indowList = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wK }, therein wk =
IVN arranged according to the normal communication sequence {φk∗N +1 , φk∗N +2 , . . . , φk∗N +N }.
can be regarded as located within a single detection window. In Ensure:
proposed algorithm, we consider N messages to be a detection CorrelationGraphList[G1 , G2 , . . . , GK ]  Timing
window [11]. N is the detection window size. Let’s assume that Correlation Graph array of CAN bus data;
there are K detection windows in total. wk denotes the matrix 1: CorrelationGraphList ← [ ], IDDictionary ←
consisting of CAN messages within k-th detection window after {}
preprocessing. 2: for wk in CAN W indowList do
 wk = {φk∗N +1 , φk∗N +2 , . . . , φk∗N +N } (2) 3: Initialize Graph;
 4: LastID ← φk∗N +1 [d0 ];
Therein, k ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , K − 1}. 5: IDDictionary[LastID] ← len(IDDictionary)
 After dividing the CAN messages into K detection windows  Create a new key/value pair in the dictionary;
according to Definition 3, our scheme introduces Algorithm 1 to 6: for i in {2, . . . , N } do
track valid transitions between the IDs of consecutive CAN mes- 7: N owID ← φk∗N +i [d0 ];
sages and construct a TCG list based on multivariate time-series 8: if not NowID in IDDictionary.keys() then
data. Specifically, for each set of N messages within a detection 9: IDDictionary[N owID] ←
window, the algorithm treats each distinct CAN ID as a node len(IDDictionary)  Create a new key/value
and builds edges to represent ID-to-ID relationships. For clarity, pair in the dictionary;
Set[IDi ] = {φn | φn [d0 ] = IDi , φn ∈ wk } denotes the set of 10: end if
messages with the same IDi , where IDi is the key for Set[IDi ]. 11: Connect an edge from vIDDictionary[N owID] to
The algorithm iterates over all detection windows (Line 2). For vIDDictionary[LastID]  Create link between two
the k-th window, it collects each unique ID and creates a new graph nodes;
key-value pair when the ID first appears (Lines 4 and 8). Then, 12: LastID ← N owID;
an edge is added between the IDs of two consecutive messages. 13: end for
If the edge already exists, its weight is incremented (Line 11). 14: Append Graph to the CorrelationGraphList;
 In the resulting TCG, each node corresponds to a unique 15: IDDictionary.clear  clear IDDictionary
CAN ID, and directed edges represent long-term statistical 16: end for
dependencies based on co-occurrence patterns observed within
detection windows. Specifically, a directed edge from node IDB
to node IDA is added whenever IDB appears after IDA within transmission patterns. By modeling statistical dependencies in
the same detection window, regardless of how frequently this this manner, the TCG enhances the model’s capacity to recognize
occurs. In other words, the presence of such an edge does not subtle anomalies in message sequences.
imply a minimum frequency threshold, but rather reflects the 
 +1, φn ∈ Set[IDj ], φn+1 ∈ Set[IDi ]
existence of at least one instance of sequential co-occurrence. wi,j ←
 +0, else
Each time IDB follows IDA , the weight of the edge from IDB
to IDA is incremented by one, thus encoding the strength of The algorithm keeps the graph Gk built by the current dethis historical statistical association. This edge orientation does tection window (Line 14) and eventually returns the graphs
not represent a strict physical or chronological order, but instead G1 , . . . , GK for all detection windows.
models a backward statistical dependency: the current behavior • Building feature vector of each node
of a CAN ID is understood in relation to the aggregate patterns After construction of TCG, graph feature vectors can be
of its preceding IDs. Consequently, the edge direction captures generated by statistical attributes of TCG, such as: the number
accumulated historical influence rather than deterministic tem- of edges, the number of nodes, the max weight, the average
poral causality. weight, the max degree, etc. Our proposed method characterizes
 The rationale for this edge orientation is rooted in the assump- feature vector for each CAN message, which could be defined
tion that the behavior of a CAN ID is influenced by the statistical as Xk,n , denoting the node feature of n-th message in k-th
characteristics of its predecessors. To capture this influence in detection window of raw CAN messages, n ∈ {1, 2, . . . , N }.
a graph neural network, where information propagates from Hence, denote node feature matrixes of k-th detection window
neighboring nodes to a target node during aggregation, the as:
edge must be directed from IDB to IDA . This configuration
 Xk , k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K − 1} (3)
allows node IDB to receive contextual information from node
IDA , thereby encoding historical dependencies into the node According to research [11], we choose to extract the node
representations. Such a design is particularly effective in iden- number, edge number, and maximum degree from a single
tifying masquerade attacks, where adversarial messages mimic constructed TCG, and consider them as global features to be
the surface statistics of normal traffic but disrupt underlying appended to the node feature vectors.
6340 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 Hence, node feature is designed accordingly as Xk,n = Algorithm 2. CRG Building Algorithm.
{d0 , d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 , x9 , . . . , x11 } ∈ R12 , where d0 is CAN ID Require:
converted to decimal, d1 , d2 , . . . , d8 mean the data value in data Detection Window List of CAN Messages:
field and x9 , x10 , x11 represent the node number, edge number CAN W indowList = {w1 , w2 , . . . , wK }, therein wk =
and maximum degree of the TCG to which the node belongs, {φk∗N +1 , φk∗N +2 , . . . , φk∗N +N }.
respectively. To test and verify the detection granularity for Ensure:
each CAN message, the node feature Xk,n retains the label RelationshipGraphList[Ĝ1 , Ĝ2 , . . . , ĜK ]  Coupling
in the model training and testing process indicating whether Relationship Graph array of CAN bus data;
it is normal or injected, though it is not a necessary part of the 1: RelationshipGraphList ← [ ], IDSet ← { }
input node feature vector when implemented in the real IDS 2: for wk in CAN W indowList do
environment. 3: Initialize Graph;
 The TCG models the periodic transmission behavior of CAN 4: LastID ← φk∗N +1 [d0 ];
messages based on the timestamps and IDs of consecutive en- 5: IDSet[LastID] ← len(IDSet)  Create a new
tries. By analyzing ID transitions and their recurrence within de- key/value pair in the dictionary;
tection windows, the TCG captures temporal regularities and de- 6: for i in {2, . . . , N } do
tects deviations indicative of anomalous behavior. As legitimate 7: N owID ← φk∗N +i [d0 ];
messages typically exhibit stable timing patterns, disruptions 8: (v̂i−1 , v̂i ) ← 1  Link two neighbor nodes
caused by injected messages can be identified through statistical (Contextual correlation property);
variations such as frequency shifts and entropy fluctuations. For 9: if not NowID in IDSet.keys() then
example, a message with ID 0x45D, normally transmitted every 10: IDSet[N owID] ← [i]  Create a new
10 milliseconds, may display altered periodicity under attack key/value pair in the dictionary;
conditions. 11: else
 In addition, the TCG provides statistical features to construct 12: Append i to the IDSet[N owID];
node feature vectors, which incorporate payload bytes d1 to 13: Link the edges between nodes in
d8 along with temporal statistics, forming a representation that IDSet[N owID]  Connect all nodes with the
captures both content and timing characteristics. This design same ID value (Similarity);
integrates message periodicity, payload content, and signal cor- 14: end if
relations into a unified node feature representation for the first 15: end for
time, yielding a more expressive global view and offering a 16: Append Graph to the CorrelationGraphList;
stable, generalized structural prior for downstream relationship 17: IDSet.clear  clear IDSet
modeling. 18: end for

C. Association Enhancement Module
 This module leverages CRGs to enhance the association and content semantic consistency at the message level, which
between CAN messages that exhibit similarity and short-term facilitates the detection of subtle variations in payload content
dependence. While TCGs capture periodicity and regularity, and embedded signals in each CAN message. In STATGRAPH, the
they cannot detect masquerade attacks, which alter payloads CRG innovatively defines data flow coupling by capturing two
without affecting statistical patterns. Legitimate message pay- essential forms of contextual correlation: temporal adjacency
loads fluctuate but exhibit regularities within the same ECU [24], between consecutive CAN messages and semantic consistency
and CAN messages from different ECUs may share common among messages sharing the same ID. Unlike conventional
patterns, which masquerade attacks disrupt. methods that construct graphs based only on message co-
 CRGs capture these coupling relationships by reinforcing occurrence or ID similarity, the CRG preserves message-level
links between messages based on short-term correlations. Unlike granularity and incorporates both temporal ordering and ID
approaches that rely solely on contextual connections due to relationships into its adjacency structure. This design enables the
the simplicity of the CAN format, CRGs integrate both con- model to retain fine-grained contextual dependencies, allowing
textual correlation and content similarity, providing a more it to detect localized anomalies such as unexpected changes
comprehensive representation of CAN message associations. As in payload values or disrupted signal correlations embedded
illustrated in Fig. 2, the gray links denote similarity relationships in d1 to d8 . The CRG thus offers a structural representation
among groups of CAN IDs, whereas the black links capture the of communication patterns that are sensitive to violations in
contextual correlation between successive CAN messages. temporal continuity, payload integrity, and inter-signal coher-
 Despite substantial efforts to model graph structural infor- ence. To operationalize these relationships, we propose a novel
mation, existing methods remain limited in capturing coupled construction strategy for the CRG’s adjacency matrix, as detailed
relationships [13]. By incorporating both contextual adjacency in Algorithm 2.
(the contextual relevance among two adjacent messages) and From Definition 3, we set the same detection windows as Secintra-message dynamics (the similarity of intra message with the tion III-B. Each CAN message in the k-th detection window is
same ID), the CRG preserves localized communication patterns treated as a node in the CRG, which contains N nodes, and edges
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6341

are constructed to represent short-term relationships between TABLE I
 STRUCTURE AND DIMENSIONS OF ALL LAYERS OF STATGRAPH
messages. A loop is iterated over each detection window (Line
2). In the k-th detection window, we define the nodes with the
same ID as a set denoted Set[IDi ] = {φn |φn [d0 ] = IDi , φn ∈
wk }, which is constructed by counting the messages corresponding to each ID (Lines 5 and 9). Next, the algorithm constructs
edges of CRG Ĝk by searching coupling relationships. For i, j
in {1, 2, . . . , N }, we have
 ⎧
 ⎨1, j = i + 1 or i = j + 1
 êij = 1, φj , φi ∈ Set[IDm ] (4)
 ⎩
 0, else
 The first row in (4) specifies that an edge is created between
nodes representing two consecutive CAN messages (Line 7).
The second row in (4) indicates that nodes sharing the same the TCG with edge-level structures defined by the CRG. The
CAN ID are interconnected (Line 12). The last row of (4) states TCG models long-range communication patterns by aggregating
that edges not satisfying the aforementioned relationships are messages with the same CAN ID, enabling the extraction of
excluded from the graph. global statistical features such as frequency shifts and periodic
 Finally, Algorithm 2 returns undirected graph instances of anomalies. In contrast, the CRG preserves message-level gran-
CRGs for multiple detection windows, whose adjacency matri- ularity and constructs the adjacency matrix by jointly modeling
ces will be used for the classification task in the GCN by learning two types of relational dependencies: temporal adjacency among
generalizable patterns. Therefore, the adjacency matrix of k-th consecutive messages and semantic similarity among messages
detection window as input for next GCN classification module sharing the same CAN ID. This allows the CRG to encode both
can be defined as: the contextual flow and ID structural regularities. As a result,
 Ak , k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K − 1} (5) disruptions in expected message timing, payload consistency,
 or inter-signal correlations can be reflected as abnormal edge
 The CRG captures short-term communication dependencies patterns. By jointly leveraging the statistical aggregation of
by treating each individual CAN message as a node and con- TCG and the localized structural encoding of CRG, the GCN
structing edges based on temporal adjacency and ID similarity. receives a rich representation of communication behavior, which
Edges are constructed to reflect the expected local communica- supports precise and fine-grained classification of each message.
tion flow and semantic regularities. This graph is built directly This unified modeling approach ensures that both global distrifrom message timestamps and CAN IDs, enabling the model butional shifts and localized anomalies are effectively captured.
to represent fine-grained variations in message timing. Subtle The GCN model [25] applies first-order graph convolution to
temporal deviations such as jitter or irregular intervals may jointly model structural information and node attributes.
signal stealthy intrusions and can thus be effectively identified. To formalize the learning process, the multi-layer GCN is
Although the CRG does not explicitly interpret the semantics defined as:
of the payload, it retains payload similarity structures among  
 H (l+1) = σ D̃−1/2 ÃD̃−1/2 H (l) W (l)
messages, including correlations across the eight signal bytes d1
through d8 . This retention allows the model to capture changes where H (l) is the matrix of activations in the l-th layer, W (l)
in contextual consistency and signal co-evolution patterns. For denotes the trainable weight matrix of l-th layer. σ(·) is the
instance, messages with the same ID but exhibiting sudden shifts activation function. Denote number of hidden layer units as h,
in payload distributions or disrupted signal correlations may and l ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , L}. Set the adjacency matrix of input graph
indicate semantic manipulation or low-rate injection attacks. By as A. Ã = A + IM , where M is the size of A and IM is the
preserving message-level granularity and local structural conti- M -dimensional identity matrix, D̃ is degree matrix of Ã and
nuity, the CRG transforms subtle inconsistencies into structural 
 D̃ii = j Ãij . Denoting the node feature matrix of input graph
variations, which can be effectively captured by the downstream
 as X, we can get initial H (0) = X. After multiple experiments,
GCN classifier.
 from the perspective of lightweighting and performance, our
 GCN model consists of an input layer, L hidden layers and a
D. GCN Classification Module
 dense layer, shown in Table I.
 We propose a multi-layer GCN model for classifying attacks In order to improve the training efficiency of the model in
on the in-vehicle CAN bus, trained using graph-structured data coding, we set batchsize=B, which means that we take the node
generated by the Global Feature Fusion and Association En- feature matrixes and the adjacency matrixes corresponding to B
hancement modules, which capture both temporal and contex- consecutive detection windows as once input. Hence, the input
tual dependencies of IVN message streams. node feature matrix X ∈ R(B∗N )×12 is the continuous Xk splice
 Based on this design, the GCN module functions as the core of B and the input adjacency matrix A with size (B ∗ N, B ∗ N )
classifier in STATGRAPH, integrating node-level features from is a diagonal concatenation of B continuous matrixes Ak .
6342 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE II Together, the global and local priors encoded by the TCG and
 HYPERPARAMETERS FOR TRAINING THE STATGRAPH MODEL
 CRG enable joint representation learning that effectively models
 multi-scale behavioral patterns in in-vehicle communication.
 The dual-graph design produces highly expressive inputs for
 GCN-based classification, allowing even shallow architectures
 to achieve strong performance. This efficiency stems from the
 rich feature encoding in the graph representations, reducing the
 need for complex model depth while enabling robust detection
 of stealthy intrusions, such as masquerade attacks that preserve
 surface-level message patterns.
 With the structural and feature information embedded in
the input, the GCN proceeds to node classification, producing IV. EXPERIMENT
abstract representations for each CAN message to enable fine-
 This section presents the implementation of the STATGRAPH
grained detection.
 framework under two computing environments (Section IV-A)
 For k-th detection window, the last dense layer of GCN model
 and introduces the evaluation metrics used to quantify detection
returns output Zk = {Zk,1 , . . . , Zk,N }, where Zk is the set of
 granularity (Section IV-B). Baseline methods for comparison
Zk,n and Zk,n ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , F } is employed to predict the atare described in Section IV-C. The dataset details are provided
tribute labels of the n-th message in the k-th detection window. In
 in Section IV-D, followed by a parameter sensitivity analysis in
the training phase, the cross − entropy loss function compares
 Section IV-E. We evaluate runtime and detection performance in
real label of the n-th message in the k-th detection window to
 Sections IV-F and IV-G, respectively. The fine-grained detection
Zk,n through a sigmoid activation function.
 capability is explored in Section IV-H.
 Besides, L2 regularization is used to restrict the values of
weights to prevent overfitting. Besides, our GCN model is
trained using the Adam optimizer, with a learning rate of 10−3 . A. Environment
In addition, we deploy dropout layers with a rate of 0.005 after As a core technology for vehicle network security, the intrueach GraphConv layer. Moreover, we set the rectified linear sion detection model must offer real-time detection capabilities
unit (ReLU), a widely used nonlinear function, as activation and a low false positive rate, particularly in vehicle environments
function in our model. It introduces nonlinearity and allows with limited computational resources.
the neural network to learn complex relationships in the data. With this in mind, we deploy and evaluate it on the NVIDIA
And hyperparameters for training the STATGRAPH are shown in Jetson Orin Nano platform (as shown in Fig. 3), a widely
Table II. adopted hardware system in both the automotive industry and
 This module fully utilizes node features by fusing statistical academia. This platform supports CAN bus communication,
regularities derived from recurrent ID patterns and association features an ARMv8 Processor rev 1, and integrates a 512-core
relations enhanced by adjacency matrices, thereby enabling NVIDIA Ampere architecture GPU with 8.0 GB of memory.
high-performance, fine-grained detection and classification of With approximately 21 Tera Operations Per Second (TOPS)
multiple attacks. The use of backward edge direction in the of computing power and low energy consumption, the device
TCG is motivated by the GCN message aggregation mechanism, supports inference for medium-sized deep learning models,
where each node aggregates information from its incoming including tasks such as target detection and time-series data
neighbors. By directing edges from the latter ID to the for- analysis, making it well suited for evaluating complex intrumer, the model allows emerging nodes to incorporate historical sion detection algorithms under resource-constrained onboard
contextual features during convolution, facilitating the learning conditions. The software environment includes PyTorch 1.12.1
of temporal correlations among CAN IDs, particularly those with Python 3.8.10.
with fixed or periodic transmission characteristics. By jointly For training, we utilize a more powerful device, the LENOVO
leveraging both the TCG and CRG, the STATGRAPH framework 90VA000JCP with 49 TOPS of computational power, to simulate
captures multiple dimensions of in-vehicle communication dy- a cloud environment and accelerate the training process. It
namics. The TCG constructs node features by aggregating all features a 64-bit Intel Core i7-13700 CPU at 3.6 GHz and a
messages sharing the same CAN ID within a detection win- Geforce RTX 4080 32 GB GPU, with PyTorch 1.13 and Python
dow. This process extracts statistical characteristics such as fre- 3.8 for the STATGRAPH model.
quency, entropy, and inter-arrival time, enabling the encoding of
long-term communication patterns. Directed edges in the TCG B. Evaluation Metrics
represent statistical dependencies among different IDs, allowing
the GCN to aggregate contextual information from historically To evaluate the effectiveness of different methods, this paper
correlated message flows. The CRG, in contrast, defines the adja- adopts a set of standard classification metrics. Accuracy, Precency matrix based on two criteria: temporal adjacency between cision, and Recall can be calculated using the numbers of true
consecutive messages and ID similarity. This graph preserves negatives (TN), true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), and
message-level granularity and captures localized contextual and false positives (FP), defined as follows:
semantic dependencies, including fine-grained timing variations TP + TN
and signal correlations inferred from payload bytes. Accuray = (6)
 TP + TN + FP + FN
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6343

 TP TABLE III
 Precision = (7) OPEN CAN DATASETS
 TP + FP
 TP
 Recall = (8)
 TP + FN
Besides, F1-score is more useful than accuracy in the case of
an unbalanced class distribution. It is the harmonic mean of
precision and recall, calculated as follows:
 2 × Precision × Recall
 F1 − score = (9)
 Precision + Recall
 IG is a fine-grained evaluation metric that quantifies the
message-level recognition accuracy of intrusion detection methods. This metric is particularly necessary because existing
graph-based intrusion detection approaches for IVNs predominantly adopt coarse-grained classification strategies, wherein number of nodes, edges, and maximum degree of grapha single anomaly label is typically assigned to an entire mes- structured data generated from CAN messages over six
sage window or sequence. Such granularity is often insuffi- detection windows.
cient for timely and precise threat localization, especially in r G-IDCS TH_classifier [12]: This graph-based IVN intruscenarios involving stealthy or transient attacks. To address sion detection method performs binary classification based
this limitation, STATGRAPH is, to the best of our knowledge, on thresholds for the number of nodes, edges, and maxithe first graph-based framework specifically designed to enable mum degree of graph-structured data within each detection
fine-grained, message-level intrusion detection. By providing window.
classification results for each individual CAN message, the r G-IDCS ML_classifier [12]: Using the same graph genproposed framework achieves higher temporal resolution and eration process as G-IDCS TH_classifier, this method
improved diagnostic accuracy. The IG metric is introduced to performs multi-class classification tasks using a Random
formally quantify this capability, as it captures evaluation aspects Forest (RF) algorithm on the generated graph-structured
that are overlooked by conventional, window-level performance data within each detection window.
metrics. r EfficientNet [26]: A neural network architecture with a
 Based on the correct identification of the detection window novel compound scaling method that balances network
(that is, the label of the k-th detection window, labelk = the width, depth, and resolution. It performs coarse-grained
predicted value of the k-th detection window, predictk ), IG is multi-classification intrusion detection tasks in resourcecalculated through TI (True Identification), which represents the constrained IVN environments.
number of correctly identified samples per detection window. r MobileNetV3 [27]: A lightweight neural network that uti-
Hence, the IG is defined as follows: lizes efficient depthwise separable convolutions, suitable
 for IVN multi-classification intrusion detection tasks at a
 K
 1 coarse-grained level (window-level classification).
 IG = TIk × Ck (10) r CANet [16]: The first deep learning-based method for IVN
 N
 k=1
 multi-classification intrusion detection, which checks inwhere dividual CAN messages using a tailored network structure
  that fits the signal space of CAN data for each detection
 1, labelk = predictk
 Ck = window.
 0, labelk = predictk r CAN-RF [28]: A fine-grained multi-classification method
It measures how precisely a model can determine the status of based on an integrated learning framework where each deeach individual CAN message within a detection window, thus cision tree is constructed from a random subset of features
enabling a clear distinction between models that perform well of each CAN message.
only at a coarse-grained level and those capable of delivering
 r MultiLayer Perceptron (CAN-MLP) [28]: This model exereliable fine-grained identification. cutes multi-class classification tasks on each CAN message
 using a feedforward neural network structure.
 r Long Short Term Memory (CAN-LSTM) [29]: A popular
C. Compared Methods
 RNN variant that predicts the next CAN ID more effec-
 To ensure a fair comparison, several representative and ad- tively based on previous observations, making it suitable
vanced models are selected for binary and multi-classification for fine-grained multi-classification tasks.
tasks, as well as for coarse-grained and fine-grained levels:
 r Graph-based intrusion detection system (Graph-based
 D. Datasets Details
 IDS) [11]: A coarse-grained, graph-based IVN intrusion
 detection method that uses the median and Chi-squared To the best of our knowledge, seven publicly available CAN
 tests for binary classification tasks. It operates on the datasets with labeled attacks exist (see Table III). We prioritize
6344 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 TABLE IV TABLE V
 THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE CAR HACKING DATASET THE DISTRIBUTION OF REPRESENTATIVE MASQUERADE ATTACKS IN ROAD
 DATASET

datasets involving real attacks on actual vehicles, as simulated
data may lack real-world fidelity. While prior IDS research
has largely focused on fabrication attacks, masquerade attacks
remain underexplored. The Car Hacking dataset, widely used in
IVN intrusion detection research, contains various fabrication
attacks. In contrast, the ROAD dataset offers high fidelity and r Correlated Signal Masquerade Attack: The vehicle reincludes diverse masquerade attacks, with their physical effects ceives four false wheel speed values from injected malivalidated on real vehicles. For example, injecting false wheel cious CAN messages, which disables the accelerator pedal
speed values can trigger critical malfunctions, posing safety and even makes a restart of the automotive electronic and
risks to both the vehicle and passengers. Detailed descriptions electrical systems.
and experimental setups for each dataset are presented in the r Max Engine Coolant Temp Masquerade Attack: The vefollowing subsections. hicle receives an alarm of “engine coolant too high” that
 1) Car Hacking Dataset: It was produced by the Hacking may mislead drivers to operate unnecessarily, due to the
and Countermeasure Research Lab (HCRL) of Korea University, malicious modification of the engine coolant signal value
recording CAN traffic through the OBD-II port of a real vehi- with the maximum (0xFF) by attackers.
cle [13]. It includes one normal dataset and four attack datasets: r Max Speedometer Masquerade Attack: The speedometer
DoS, Fuzzy, spoofing GEAR, and spoofing RPM. The sample incorrectly displays the maximum value (0xFF) due to
distribution of the Car Hacking dataset is presented in Table IV. the injected malicious CAN messages, and may cause the
For detection window integrity, we classify each window based driver to brake urgently.
on its content: a window containing both normal and attack data r Reverse Light Off Masquerade Attack: The reverse lights of
is categorized as an attack window, with labels for both malicious the vehicle are maliciously turned off when in reverse-gear,
and normal frames. A window containing only normal data is which may have danger to pedestrians due to lack of signal
classified as a normal detection window. light alerts.
 To ensure a balanced and non-overlapping dataset division, r Reverse Light On Masquerade Attack: The reverse lights
we first partitioned the normal samples in the normal.csv file of the vehicle are maliciously turned on when in driveby allocating 80% to the training set and the remaining 20% gear, which may mislead the vehicles following behind
to the validation set. For attack samples contained in files such and result in improper operation.
as DoS.csv, Fuzzy.csv, GEAR.csv, and RPM.csv, we assigned The ROAD dataset provides both labeled signals translated
70% to the training set, 20% to the validation set, and the using the CAN-D algorithm [34] and raw, unlabeled data. Since
remaining 10% to test the detection ability of STATGRAPH OEMs of passenger vehicles keep their proprietary CAN signal
on unknown attacks, since they never appeared during model encodings confidential and vary them across models, the CAN-D
training. In addition to these attack samples, the test set also algorithm is not always reliable for translating unknown CAN
includes residual normal samples that were not utilized during signals. The translation process only involves the payload, extraining or validation, i.e., normal instances embedded within the cluding the CAN ID and timestamps.
attack files. This partitioning strategy maintains a representative To address this, we compare the IDs and timestamps of the
distribution of normal and attack behaviors across all stages, translated signals (in CSV format) with those of the raw data (in
which is particularly important given the large volume of normal log files), considering messages with identical IDs and timesmessages in the dataset. It reflects real-world conditions, where tamps as corresponding messages. These are then formatted to
normal traffic dominates even in the presence of attacks, and match the structure of the Car Hacking Dataset.
ensures clear separation between subsets. The same division is
consistently applied across all models to support fair comparison
 E. Parameters Analysis
and reproducibility.
 2) Road Dataset: It includes a variety of CAN attacks col- We evaluate the effects of different parameters that affect
lected from a passenger vehicle [19]. We choose the following the performance of STATGRAPH to find the optimal detection
five advanced masquerade attacks whose sample distribution is window size N , number of hidden layer units h, and batchsize
shown in Table V: B. The experiments are conducted as follows:
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6345

Fig. 4. Performance of STATGRAPH in Different Detection Window Size N . Fig. 6. Performance of STATGRAPH in Different Batchsize B.

Fig. 5. Performance of STATGRAPH in Different Hidden-layer Units h.

 1) Sensitivity to detection window size: Fig. 4 illustrates the
 Fig. 7. Experimental Flowchart of Vehicle-Cloud Detection Architecture.
performance comparison for detection window sizes N ranging
from 25 to 200 (Car Hacking) and 100 to 800 (ROAD). The
results show that the impact of N is dataset-dependent. On the to overfitting. Conversely, overly small dimensions result in
Car Hacking dataset, the detection window size significantly substantial information loss during encoding, severely degrading
influences accuracy due to the simplicity and abrupt nature of GCN performance. A latent space dimension of 32 achieves the
the attacks, where small changes in N can alter the detection best F1-Score on both datasets, enabling STATGRAPH to balance
outcomes noticeably. The highest F1-Score is achieved with training efficiency and accuracy.
N = 50. In contrast, on the ROAD dataset, which contains more 3) Sensitivity to batch size: Fig. 6 compares performance
stealthy and complex attacks mimicking normal behavior, the across batch sizes from 20 to 80 on the Car Hacking dataset
detection performance is relatively stable across a wide range of and from 1 to 20 on the ROAD dataset. The results indicate that
window sizes. This indicates that once N is sufficiently large to both excessively large and small batch sizes degrade intrusion
capture the temporal and statistical patterns, further increases do detection performance. The highest F1-Score is achieved with
not dramatically affect detection. The best F1-Score on ROAD a batch size B of 50 for the Car Hacking dataset and 5 for the
is achieved with N = 400. ROAD dataset, respectively.
 These findings imply that while the model leverages N to
construct both TCG and CRG structures, it maintains superior
 F. Vehicle-Cloud Collaboration Framework
performance when N is reasonably configured to align with the
dataset’s temporal characteristics. In real-world deployment, in-vehicle IDS must operate under
 This robustness can be partly attributed to the structural strict resource constraints while ensuring real-time responsivedesign of STATGRAPH. The TCG captures temporal rhythm ness and high detection accuracy. To meet these challenges, we
changes through edge weight and node degree distributions, adopt a vehicle-cloud collaborative framework that decouples
rather than relying on absolute message indices, while the training and inference, assigning them to the cloud and vehi-
CRG encodes short-term dependencies through local contextual cle sides respectively for improved efficiency and robustness.
relationships. Consequently, even under fluctuating message Specifically, the cloud server performs offline training and optifrequencies, structural anomalies remain detectable. Empirical mization, while the vehicle-side platform (e.g., NVIDIA Jetson
results show that abrupt attacks in the Car Hacking dataset Nano T206) handles real-time inference. As shown in Fig. 7,
exhibit higher sensitivity to N , whereas stealthy attacks in the the interaction between cloud and vehicle is bidirectional and
ROAD dataset benefit from larger windows that accumulate continuous:
sufficient statistical deviations. These results demonstrate that On the cloud side, a centralized platform handles model
the choice of N is closely related to the nature of attacks and training and optimization by aggregating CAN message streams
highlight the importance of proper parameter configuration for from multiple vehicles. It performs preprocessing and iterapractical deployment. tively improves the model through incremental retraining with
 2) Sensitivity to number of hidden layer units h: Fig. 5 new attack patterns, as well as hyperparameter optimization.
compares performance across different latent space dimensions, The trained model is then deployed to vehicle-side devices. In
ranging from 16 to 64. The results reveal that excessively large practice, dataset aggregation, model training, validation, and
dimensions lead to a significant decline in F1-Score, likely due hyperparameter tuning are performed in the cloud, while the
6346 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 Fig. 9. Memory Comparison Evaluation.

 instance, G-IDCS ML_classifier achieves low latency by summarizing 200 CAN messages into a single feature vector per
 window, while CAN-RF detects messages individually with
 minimal processing overhead. Deep learning models such as
 CAN-MLP and CAN-LSTM maintain stable but higher inference times due to their network complexity. Image-based models (e.g., EfficientNet, MobileNetV3, CANet) incur additional
 time costs from raw-to-image transformations. STATGRAPH performs competitively in the cloud but exhibits increased latency
 on edge devices due to time-intensive graph construction and
 preprocessing.
Fig. 8. Running Time Comparison Evaluation. In terms of memory consumption, most models consume
 more resources in cloud environments. However, methods like
 CAN-RF, CAN-MLP, CAN-LSTM, and STATGRAPH show favehicle receives updated model weights, ensuring that detection vorable memory footprints on embedded hardware, making
capabilities evolve as attack scenarios change. them viable for real-world deployment. Notably, STATGRAPH
 On the vehicle side, a lightweight embedded platform (e.g., successfully meets real-time inference requirements under re-
Jetson Nano T206) conducts real-time inference using the source constraints, demonstrating its practical applicability.
cloud-trained model. It monitors incoming CAN messages and To further reduce communication and computation overtriggers alerts upon detecting anomalies. Detection outcomes head, the current implementation deploys the IDS on bypassand runtime metadata are uploaded to the cloud, enabling the monitoring devices connected to the CAN bus rather than dicloud to retrain or fine-tune the model based on evolving attack rectly on ECUs. This design balances detection efficiency with
strategies or environmental changes. It is important to emphasize system safety and scalability.
that the vehicle is responsible solely for inference, while all In summary, our vehicle-cloud collaborative deployment
training is conducted in the cloud. Model updates are performed aligns with real-world in-vehicle environments, allowing STATby periodically transmitting retrained weights from the cloud GRAPH to deliver fine-grained, real-time intrusion detection
to the vehicle, thereby avoiding computational bottlenecks on while leveraging cloud-side computational advantages for
resource-constrained devices. model training and continuous adaptation. This division of labor
 This collaborative architecture balances cloud-side compu- enables high detection accuracy and low latency, while ensurtational power with vehicle-side responsiveness, ensuring scal- ing scalability and deployability under constrained in-vehicle
able, low-latency, and adaptive intrusion detection. As validated resources.
in Figs. 8 and 9, this architecture ensures real-time feasibility:
the cloud handles training and inference efficiently, while the
vehicle-side platform achieves low-latency detection within lim- G. Detection Performance
ited memory resources. These results confirm that centralizing The effectiveness of STATGRAPH is evaluated against state-oftraining in the cloud and deploying lightweight inference on the-art IVN intrusion detection methods. Experimental results
vehicles is a practical and effective strategy. Based on this on in-vehicle equipment demonstrate that STATGRAPH outperdeployment architecture, we conduct performance evaluations forms competing approaches in detecting anomalies across both
of STATGRAPH and several baseline methods in both cloud and datasets.
vehicle environments. Figs. 8 and 9 show the average inference Tables VI and VII report the Accuracy, Precision, Recall,
time and memory usage of each method, respectively. F1-score, and Window Size/Label Number for all evaluated
 The results indicate that cloud devices generally offer methods on the Car Hacking dataset and ROAD dataset. The
lower inference times due to greater computational power. For Window Size/Label Number metric reflects detection granularity
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6347

 TABLE VI
 TEST RESULTS OF EACH METHOD FOR DIFFERENT ATTACKS IN CAR HACKING DATASET

 TABLE VII
 BEST TEST RESULTS OF EACH METHOD FOR DIFFERENT ATTACKS IN ROAD DATASET

by measuring the ratio between the number of messages within challenge due to its stealthy masquerade attacks that preserve
a detection window and the number of classification decisions the statistical properties of normal traffic while subtly altering
produced. Traditional coarse-grained methods assign one label payload values. Despite this, STATGRAPH maintains strong perper window regardless of its size, leading to high ratios (e.g., formance, reaching 97.91% accuracy and 97.46% F1-score.
100/1). In contrast, STATGRAPH performs detection at the mes- This robustness is attributed to the complementary roles of the
sage level, achieving a 1/1 ratio that represents significantly finer TCG and CRG. The TCG captures long-term statistical behavior
granularity. by aggregating messages with the same CAN ID, enabling
 As the nature of binary detection methods, Graph-based detection of anomalies in transmission periodicity. The CRG
IDS [11] and G-IDCS TH_classifier [12] are fail to set consistent complements this by modeling short-term contextual structure:
thresholds for multiple attack categories, and thus we only place it preserves the original temporal sequence of messages and
the results of those multi-classification methods when detecting connects those with similar IDs, making it sensitive to abrupt
the Mixing Fabrication Attack and Mixing Masquerade Attack. changes in payload distributions and inconsistencies among cor-
 On the relatively simpler Car Hacking dataset, STATGRAPH related signals within data field. These two perspectives jointly
achieves near-perfect results, with 99.40% accuracy and 94.03% enhance the model’s ability to identify both global and localized
F1-score. In contrast, the ROAD dataset poses a greater disruptions.
6348 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

 Crucially, the integration of TCG-based timing anomalies TABLE VIII
 TEST RESULTS OF EACH METHOD IN MIX ATTACKS (REAL-TIME DETECTION:
and CRG-reflected payload inconsistencies provides a rich and N = 3, SEMI-REAL-TIME DETECTION: N = 27 AND OFFLINE DETECTION:
interpretable basis for anomaly detection. Variations in message N = 54 )
periodicity, sudden signal deviations, and unexpected changes
in signal correlation patterns all serve as interpretable cues
for distinguishing normal from malicious behavior. Together,
these mechanisms support fine-grained, message-level detection, contributing to both the high accuracy and the practical
explainability of STATGRAPH.
 Furthermore, baseline model generalizability varies considerably. For instance, EfficientNet and MobileNetV3 perform well
on the ROAD dataset but poorly on the Car Hacking dataset,
whereas CAN-RF, CAN-MLP, CAN-LSTM, and CANet exhibit
the opposite trend. In contrast, STATGRAPH consistently achieves
the highest Accuracy and F1-score on both datasets, demonstrating superior adaptability and robustness. The Window Size/Label methods, STATGRAPH consistently achieves higher IG values
Number metric further highlights a key advantage of STATGRAPH and F1-scores across all window sizes on both datasets, demonover existing graph-based approaches. While most methods strating its superior accuracy and robustness in the presence of
operate at the window or segment level, STATGRAPH generates imbalanced data distributions.
predictions for each message individually. This fine-grained
detection enables earlier threat identification and more precise
localization, which is especially valuable in time-sensitive and I. Ablation Experiment
safety-critical IVN environments. Within STATGRAPH, the TCG and CRG are designed to capture distinct structural properties of CAN traffic, grounded in
 different theoretical assumptions. The TCG, proposed in the
H. Fine-Grained Potential Exploration Global Feature Fusion Module, aggregates all messages with
 Previous studies typically labeled an entire segment of consec- the same CAN ID to form node-level statistical features such
utive CAN messages as an attack sample if it contained at least as frequency and entropy. This global representation captures
one injected message, while segments without injections were long-range behavioral patterns across messages sharing the same
labeled as normal [10]. However, aside from a few graph-based ID that is effective for detecting distributional shifts caused by
methods [11], [12], prior work has not provided a clear rationale attacks. In contrast, the CRG, constructed in the Association
for the choice of sample size. Enhancement Module, retains each message as an individual
 To address this gap, we define sample size criteria based on node and connects them based on temporal adjacency and ID
CAN bus transmission rates and latency requirements, referenc- similarity. By preserving both temporal order and message-level
ing application scenarios in Intelligent Connected Vehicles and granularity, the CRG captures fine-grained structural dynamics
Industrial Control Internet. Industrial automation and remote and enables the detection of localized disruptions that may be
driving generally require latency below 10ms . Given a CAN overlooked by aggregated models. This dual-graph architecture
bus speed of 125kbps to 1Mbps and a maximum extended frame allows STATGRAPH to jointly encode global distributional conlength of 150 bits, the bus can transmit at least 8 messages and text and localized temporal structure, offering a comprehensive
on average 34 messages every 10ms at 500kbps. Based on this, representation of communication dependencies in IVNs.
we define three recognition granularity intervals: 0 ∼ 8, 8 ∼ 34, To assess the individual contributions of global feature fusion
and 34 ∼ +∞, to evaluate the performance of coarse-grained and temporal adjacency enhancement, we conduct an ablation
methods across varying levels of granularity. Corresponding study. In the Node ablation setting (excluding the TCG), only
detection window sizes are set to 3, 27, and 54 for comparison. 8-dimensional payload vectors are used as node features, ex-
STATGRAPH is evaluated against prior methods using F1-score cluding the fused global attributes. This allows us to evaluate
and IG under these settings, as reported in Table VIII. Notably, the impact of global feature fusion on node representation. In
STATGRAPH performs detection at the per-message level regard- the Edge ablation setting (excluding the CRG), the adjacency
less of the window size N = (3, 27, 54), yielding stable and matrix generated by the temporal association module is replaced
consistent results across all intervals. with a unit matrix, thereby removing temporal dependencies and
 It is evident that STATGRAPH achieves the highest F1-score enabling assessment of correlation modeling.
and IG values on both datasets. On the Car Hacking dataset, The effectiveness of this design is validated by the ablation
among the remaining models, CANet delivers the best per- results shown in Fig. 10. Although the Edge ablation model
formance when N = 54, suggesting that it relies on a larger achieves slightly higher accuracy and F1-score on the Car
detection window to accumulate sufficient contextual informa- Hacking dataset, it suffers a substantial drop in recall, indicating
tion for effective classification. On the ROAD dataset, where that temporal adjacency is critical for detecting low-frequency
normal data accounts for over 90% of the samples, many models or stealthy attacks. The Node ablation model shows consistent
tend to classify most messages as normal. Compared to other performance degradation across all major metrics, underscoring
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6349

 Moreover, the limitations of supervised models, particularly
 the reliance on labeled data, remain a key challenge. This
 motivates the development of self-supervised and unsupervised
 frameworks that can adapt to evolving threats without annotated
 attack data. The graph-based representation in our framework,
 comprising both the TCG and CRG, provides a structured
 input space well-suited for self-supervised objectives, including contrastive learning, masked signal prediction, and graph
 structure reconstruction. For instance, intrusion detection can
 be performed by applying perturbations to subgraphs and using
Fig. 10. Performance of different ablation components of STATGRAPH on two graph contrastive learning to capture intrinsic features of normal
datasets. behavior, allowing the model to differentiate between benign
 and malicious graphs without ground-truth labels. Extending
the role of global feature fusion in improving node representation STATGRAPH with such self-supervised strategies thus offers a
and detection accuracy. promising direction to enhance robustness in low-label and
 Taken together, these findings confirm that STATGRAPH zero-day attack scenarios.
achieves optimal performance when both temporal correlations Another important direction is addressing data imbalance,
and global contextual features are preserved. In particular, im- which can impair detection under sparse or skewed attack distriprovements in recall and F1-score underscore the model’s ability butions. Future work may incorporate synthetic data generation
to deliver fine-grained and robust intrusion detection in complex or adversarial training strategies to enhance model robustness.
in-vehicle network environments. In addition, improving model interpretability is essential for
 practical deployment. Post-hoc interpretation techniques, such
 as GNNExplainer [35] and Integrated Gradients [36], can be
 V. DISCUSSION employed to identify the node features (derived from the TCG)
 The experimental results demonstrate that STATGRAPH con- or edge structures (captured by the CRG) that contribute most
sistently outperforms existing methods on both the Car Hacking significantly to anomaly classification. These insights can help
dataset and the ROAD dataset when evaluated independently. practitioners assess whether the model’s decisions align with
Although some alternatives achieve satisfactory performance, domain knowledge, thereby increasing trust and enhancing the
such as EfficientNet and MobileNetV3 on the ROAD dataset, diagnostic value of intrusion detection systems in safety-critical
and CANet, G-IDCS ML_classifier, CAN-RF, CAN-MLP, and onboard environments.
CAN-LSTM on the Car Hacking dataset, STATGRAPH achieves
the most robust and consistent results across both datasets.
 VI. RELATED WORK
 While our TCG design shares conceptual similarities
with [11], STATGRAPH introduces key advancements by in- Deep learning-based intrusion detection methods hold significorporating the CRG and enabling fine-grained, message-level cant promise for securing IVNs, but they face critical limitations
classification. In contrast to [11], which relies on window-level in detection granularity and effectiveness against sophisticated
statistical features, STATGRAPH performs per-message detection attacks, which constrain their practical deployment [4], [6],
by fusing global statistical context with local payload and sig- [9], [21], [22]. First, most existing approaches perform coarsenals dynamics. This allows it to capture subtle anomalies (e.g., grained detection, identifying anomalies only at the detection
mixing masquerade attacks) that are often missed by traditional window level rather than at the level of individual CAN mesthreshold-based approaches. sages [14], [15]. This lack of fine-grained resolution undermines
 In addition, STATGRAPH is deployed within a practical their diagnostic reliability and limits timely threat localization.
vehicle-cloud collaborative framework, delivering strong de- Second, as attack strategies evolve, increasingly advanced mastection performance even in the presence of stealthy and low- querade attacks have emerged. These attacks manipulate the
frequency masquerade attacks. These architectural innovations payload content while mimicking the timing and frequency
and deployment strategies represent a substantial and novel of legitimate messages, allowing them to evade detection by
contribution to graph-based intrusion detection for IVNs. existing models that rely primarily on statistical or temporal
 In real in-vehicle environments, message transmission fre- patterns [5], [7], [19].
quencies vary with operating conditions, which may limit the Besides, graph-based intrusion detection methods have
practicality of fixed-window strategies. This limitation is not gained traction in IVN security due to their strong abstracspecific to our work but represents a broader challenge for IDS tion capabilities in modeling interactions among heterogeneous
deployment. As future work, we plan to incorporate adaptive ECUs, effectively capturing the collaborative processes and data
window mechanisms that adjust N dynamically based on real- distribution patterns of the CAN bus. However, most existtime message rates. We also aim to investigate multi-scale win- ing graph-based approaches focus predominantly on detecting
dow modeling, where detection results across different temporal relatively simple types of attacks [11], while the detection of
resolutions are integrated to improve robustness against both advanced and stealthy masquerade attacks remains significantly
bursty and stealthy attacks. underexplored. Methods such as [11], [12], [37], and [38] rely
6350 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MOBILE COMPUTING, VOL. 25, NO. 5, MAY 2026

solely on CAN IDs and overlook the critical need to learn [5] A. Nichelini, C. A. Pozzoli, S. Longari, M. Carminati, and S. Zanero,
payload variation patterns. As a result, they are ineffective “CANova: A hybrid intrusion detection framework based on automatic signal classification for CAN,” Comput. Secur., vol. 128, 2023,
against masquerade attacks that precisely replicate the statis- Art. no. 103166.
tical properties of legitimate messages but subtly manipulate [6] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “TOW-IDS: Intrusion detection
payload thresholds. Furthermore, many graph-based methods system based on three overlapped wavelets for automotive ethernet,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 411–422, 2023.
adopt coarse-grained detection strategies, identifying anomalies [7] M. H. Shahriar, Y. Xiao, P. Moriano, W. Lou, and Y. T. Hou, “CANShield:
only after large message intervals (e.g., every 1200 messages Deep learning-based intrusion detection framework for controller area
in [11] and every 200 in [12]), which fails to satisfy the real- networks at the signal-level,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, no. 24,
 pp. 22111–22127, Dec. 2023.
time responsiveness required in IVN applications. In contrast to [8] Z. Lu, Q. Wang, X. Chen, G. Qu, Y. Lyu, and Z. Liu, “LEAP: A lightweight
most existing single-view models [11], [12], [37], [38], STAT- encryption and authentication protocol for in-vehicle communications,” in
GRAPH introduces a multi-view graph representation that cap- Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Conf., 2019, pp. 1158–1164.
 [9] S. Rajapaksha, H. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, A. Petrovski, G. Madzudzo,
tures diverse relationships among CAN messages. By integrat- and M. Cheah, “AI-based intrusion detection systems for in-vehicle neting different graph perspectives, STATGRAPH is better positioned works: A survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 1–40, Feb. 2023.
to detect subtle and complex intrusion behaviors with higher [10] K. Wang, A. Zhang, H. Sun, and B. Wang, “Analysis of recent deeplearning-based intrusion detection methods for in-vehicle network,” IEEE
fidelity. Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1843–1854, Feb. 2023.
 [11] R. Islam, R. U. D. Refat, S. M. Yerram, and H. Malik, “Graph-based
 intrusion detection system for controller area networks,” IEEE Trans.
 VII. CONCLUSION Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1727–1736, Mar. 2022.
 Intrusion detection based on deep neural networks and graph [12] S. B. Park, H. J. Jo, and D. H. Lee, “G-IDCS: Graph-based intrusion
 detection and classification system for CAN protocol,” IEEE Access,
learning has advanced IVN security, yet improving detection vol. 11, pp. 39213–39227, 2023.
granularity and identifying complex attacks remains challeng- [13] H. M. Song, J. Woo, and H. K. Kim, “In-vehicle network intrusion deing. To address these limitations, we propose STATGRAPH, a tection using deep convolutional neural network,” Veh. Commun., vol. 21,
 no. 100198, pp. 1–13, Jan. 2020.
fine-grained IVN intrusion detection framework that effectively [14] T.-N. Hoang and D. Kim, “Detecting in-vehicle intrusion via semidetects both simple attacks (e.g., fabrication) and sophisticated supervised learning-based convolutional adversarial autoencoders,” Veh.
ones (e.g., masquerade) by leveraging multi-view statistical Commun., vol. 38, 2022, Art. no. 100520.
 [15] A. K. Desta, S. Ohira, I. Arai, and K. Fujikawa, “ID sequence analysis
graph learning on CAN messages. STATGRAPH adopts a dual- for intrusion detection in the CAN bus using long short term memory
graph design in which the TCG captures global temporal and networks,” in Proc. 2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun.
distributional patterns, while the CRG retains local adjacency Workshops, 2020, pp. 1–6.
 [16] M. Hanselmann, T. Strauss, K. Dormann, and H. Ulmer, “CANet: An
and semantic consistency at the message level. Their integration unsupervised intrusion detection system for high dimensional CAN bus
through graph convolution enables cross-graph feature propa- data,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 58194–58205, 2020.
gation, allowing STATGRAPH to effectively capture variations in [17] H. K. Kalutarage, M. O. Al-Kadri, M. Cheah, and G. Madzudzo, “Contextaware anomaly detector for monitoring cyber attacks on automotive CAN
message periodicity, payload content, and signal correlations. bus,” in Proc. 3rd ACM Comput. Sci. Cars Symp., 2019, pp. 1–8.
We further introduce the Identification Granularity (IG) metric [18] M. Jedh, L. B. Othmane, N. Ahmed, and B. Bhargava, “Detection of
to quantify detection resolution, providing a foundation for message injection attacks onto the CAN bus using similarities of successive
 messages-sequence graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16,
future research on fine-grained intrusion detection. Extensive pp. 4133–4146, 2021.
experiments demonstrate that STATGRAPH outperforms tradi- [19] M. E. Verma et al., “A comprehensive guide to CAN IDS data and
tional machine learning models, deep neural networks, and introduction of the road dataset,” PLoS One, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 1–32,
 Jan. 2024.
existing graph-based methods in terms of runtime efficiency, [20] F. Fenzl, R. Rieke, and A. Dominik, “In-vehicle detection of targeted CAN
detection accuracy, and granularity across both the Car Hacking bus attacks,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Availability Rel. Secur., 2021, pp. 1–7.
and ROAD datasets. Future work will explore attack traceability [21] S. Jeong, S. Lee, H. Lee, and H. K. Kim, “X-CANIDS: Signal-aware
 explainable intrusion detection system for controller area network-based
using fine-grained detection and develop unsupervised intrusion in-vehicle network,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 3230–
detection mechanisms to address class imbalance problems in 3246, Mar. 2024.
real-world scenarios. [22] S. Jeong, H. K. Kim, M. L. Han, and B. I. Kwak, “AERO: Automotive
 ethernet real-time observer for anomaly detection in in-vehicle networks,”
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 4651–4662, Mar. 2024.
 REFERENCES [23] G. Xie, L. T. Yang, Y. Yang, H. Luo, R. Li, and M. Alazab, “Threat analysis
 for automotive CAN networks: A GAN model-based intrusion detection
 [1] H. H. Jeong, Y. C. Shen, J. P. Jeong, and T. T. Oh, “A comprehensive technique,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4467–4477,
 survey on vehicular networking for safe and efficient driving in smart Jul. 2021.
 transportation: A focus on systems, protocols, and applications,” Veh. [24] C. Miller and C. Valasek, “Advanced CAN injection techniques for vehicle
 Commun., vol. 31, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 100349. networks,” in Proc. Black Hat USA, 2016, pp. 1–28.
 [2] B. Lampe and W. Meng, “Intrusion detection in the automotive domain: [25] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
 A comprehensive review,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuts., vol. 25, no. 4, convolutional networks,” 2017, arXiv:1609.02907v4.
 pp. 2356–2426, Fourth Quarter 2023. [26] M. Tan and Q. Le, “EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convo-
 [3] X. Zhou, W. Liang, J. She, Z. Yan, and K. I.-K. Wang, “Two-layer federated lutional neural networks,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2019,
 learning with heterogeneous model aggregation for 6G supported Internet pp. 1–10.
 of Vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5308–5317, [27] A. Howard et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
 Jun. 2021. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2019, pp. 1314–1324.
 [4] Y. Xie, G. Zeng, R. Kurachi, F. Xiao, H. Takada, and S. Hu, “Timing anal- [28] T. Moulahi, S. Zidi, A. Alabdulatif, and M. Atiquzzaman, “Comparysis of CAN FD for security-aware automotive cyber-physical systems,” ative performance evaluation of intrusion detection based on machine
 IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 3064–3078, learning in in-vehicle controller area network bus,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
 Jul./Aug. 2023. pp. 99595–99605, 2021.
WANG et al.: STATGRAPH: EFFECTIVE IN-VEHICLE INTRUSION DETECTION VIA MULTI-VIEW STATISTICAL GRAPH LEARNING 6351

[29] I. Berger, R. Rieke, M. Kolomeets, A. Chechulin, and I. Kotenko, “Com- Bailing Wang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 parative study of machine learning methods for in-vehicle intrusion de- degree in computer architecture from the Harbin Intection,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Secur. Privacy Requirements Eng., 2018, stitute of Technology (HIT), China, in 2006. He is a
 pp. 85–101. full professor with the Harbin Institute of Technol-
[30] H. Lee, S. H. Jeong, and H. K. Kim, “OTIDS: A novel intrusion detection ogy (Weihai) Qingdao Research Institute, Qingdao,
 system for in-vehicle network by using remote frame,” in Proc. 15th Annu. China. His research interests include information con-
 Conf. Privacy Secur. Trust, 2017, pp. 57–66. tent security and industrial control network security.
[31] M. L. Han, B. I. Kwak, and H. K. Kim, “Anomaly intrusion detection He has published more than 80 papers in prestigious
 method for vehicular networks based on survival analysis,” Veh. Commun., international journals and been selected for the China
 vol. 14, pp. 52–63, 2018. national talent plan.
[32] E. Seo, H. M. Song, and H. K. Kim, “GIDS: GAN based intrusion detection
 system for in-vehicle network,” in Proc. 16th Annu. Conf. Privacy Secur.
 Trust, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[33] G. Dupont, A. Lekidis, J. I. den Hartog, and S. Etalle, “Automotive
 controller area network (CAN) bus intrusion dataset v2,” 4TU.Centre for
 Research Data, Dept. Math. Comput. Sci., TU Eindhoven, Nov. 2019, doi:
 10.4121/uuid:b74b4928-c377-4585-9432-2004dfa20a5d.
[34] M. E. Verma, R. A. Bridges, J. J. Sosnowski, S. C. Hollifield, and M. D. Yulei Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the BSc
 Iannacone, “CAN-D: A modular four-step pipeline for comprehensively (1st class hons.) degree in computer science and the
 decoding controller area network data,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol, vol. 70, PhD degree in computing and mathematics from the
 no. 10, pp. 9685–9700, Oct. 2021. University of Bradford, United Kingdom. He is an
[35] Z. Ying, D. Bourgeois, J. You, M. Zitnik, and J. Leskovec, “GNNExplainer: associate professor with the Faculty of Engineering
 Generating explanations for graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. and the Bristol Digital Futures Institute, University
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, Art. no. 829. of Bristol, U.K. His research mainly focuses on net-
[36] Y. Wang, T. Zhang, X. Guo, and Z. Shen, “Gradient based feature attribu- work digital twins, native AI networks and systems,
 tion in explainable AI: A technical review,” 2024, arXiv:2403.10415. edge AI, and trustworthy AI. He has published more
[37] H. Zhang, K. Zeng, and S. Lin, “Federated graph neural network for fast than 10 authored/edited monograph books, and more
 anomaly detection in controller area networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics than 150 peer-reviewed research papers in prestigious
 Secur., vol. 18, pp. 1566–1579, 2023. international journals and conferences. He serves as an associate editor of the
[38] R. Islam, M. K. Devnath, M. D. Samad, and S. M. J. A. Kadry, “GGNB: IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management and IEEE Transactions
 Graph-based Gaussian naive Bayes intrusion detection system for CAN on Network Science and Engineering, as well as an editorial board member
 bus,” Veh. Commun., vol. 33, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 100442. of the Computer Networks, Future Generation Computer Systems, and Nature
 Scientific Reports at Nature Portfolio. He is chairing an IEEE Special Interest
 Group (SIG) on Ethical AI for future networks and digital infrastructure. He is
 Kai Wang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD degree a senior member of the ACM.
 in communication and information systems from Beijing Jiaotong University, China, in 2014. He is a full
 professor with the School of Computer Science and
 Technology, Weihai and with the Faculty of Computing, Harbin, Harbin Institute of Technology, China.
 His research interests include trustworthy AI and
 network intrusion detection. He has published more
 than 40 papers in prestigious international journals, Hongke Zhang (Fellow, IEEE) received the PhD deincluding the IEEE Transactions on Services Comput- gree in communication and information system from
 ing, IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation the University of Electronic Science and Technology
Systems, ACM Transactions on Internet Technology, ACM Transactions on of China, Chengdu, China, in 1992. He is currently a
Intelligent Systems and Technology, etc. From 2017 to 2019, he was a postdoc professor with the School of Electronic and Informaresearcher in computer science and technology with Tsinghua University, China. tion Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Bei-
He is a member of the ACM, and a senior member of the China Computer jing, China, where he currently directs the National
Federation (CCF). Engineering Center of China on Mobile Specialized
 Network. His current research interests include architecture and protocol design for the future Internet
 and specialized networks. He currently serves as an
 Qiguang Jiang received the master’s degree in com- associate editor of the IEEE Transactions on Network and Service Management
 puter science and technology from the Harbin In- and IEEE Internet of Things Journal. He is an academician of China Engineering
 stitute of Technology (HIT), China. Her research Academy.
 interests include intelligent and efficient in-vehicle
 intrusion detection models.