2300 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 SYNAPS: A Neuro-Symbolic Framework for
 Proactive Security in Consumer Electronics
 Debashis Das , Member, IEEE

 Abstract— Proactive security risk assessment and prediction for adversaries. On the other hand, defenders must grapple
(SRAP) is essential to defend against dynamic and evolving with monitoring and securing a heterogeneous ecosystem of
threats in the modern interconnected consumer electronics resource-constrained endpoints [4]. This rapid evolution underdomain. With the rapid emergence of polymorphic attacks and
complex network behaviors, traditional systems are often insuf- scores the need to move beyond reactive and signature-based
ficient due to their static nature and limited adaptability. Neural defenses toward proactive risk assessment and intelligent threat
systems alone fail to incorporate the domain expertise necessary prediction in consumer electronic environments.
for identifying well-known risk indicators in high-stakes cyber- Traditional security mechanisms for consumer electronic
security contexts. To address these gaps, we propose SYNAPS: devices typically operate reactively [5]. While these defenses
a neuro-symbolic framework for a proactive security model that
fuses data-driven anomaly detection with transparent symbolic can block well-understood malware or repeat attacks, they
reasoning to boost risk scoring and prediction accuracy for struggle against novel device-specific threats, such as zero-day
consumer device security. Our design first trains an LSTM firmware vulnerabilities or obfuscated payloads that do not
autoencoder on benign device telemetry to compute continuous match predefined signatures [6]. To overcome these limitaneural anomaly scores, and a curated set of device-specific tions in the consumer electronics domain, machine learning
symbolic rules generates interpretable risk scores based on
established security indicators. These scores are then blended (ML) techniques have gained traction for automated threat
into a hybrid risk estimate, which feeds into a shallow MLP for detection and anomaly classification [7]. Meanwhile, deep
multiclass threat classification (NS-MLP). To further strengthen neural networks can learn from large volumes of device
SYNAPS against device-targeted evasions, we introduce three telemetry ranging from sensor readings and API call sequences
variants: Gaussian-noise augmentation to mimic polymorphic
 to network traffic and user interaction patterns to identify
attacks (NS-Aug), adversarial training via a lightweight Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to model firmware-level exploits subtle deviations indicative of emerging threats [8]. But, recent
(NS-Adv), and transfer learning to adapt our autoencoder to new studies have further found that consumer devices are uniquely
device models and firmware versions (NS-Trans). Our experi- vulnerable due to their resource-constrained hardware and
ment results indicate that SYNAPS and its enhanced versions diverse vendor-specific firmware [9]. High-profile incidents,
substantially outperform neural-only baselines. NS-Adv achieves
 such as large-scale IoT botnet attacks and exploitation of inse-
93.3% test accuracy with a 12.3% relative improvement over
the neural-only model. Overall, the integration of data-driven cure smart-home hubs, highlight the urgent need for proactive
learning and symbolic reasoning significantly boosts the accuracy defenses [10].
and reliability of threat detection in consumer electronics. To fill this gap, we introduce SYNAPS, a symbolic-neural
 Index Terms— Consumer electronics security, neural-symbolic framework [11] for proactive risk scoring and threat prereasoning, symbolic risk optimization, multiclass threat classifi- diction on consumer electronics devices. SYNAPS fuses a
cation, transfer learning, zero-day resilience. single-step LSTM autoencoder trained on benign telemetry
 (API calls, sensor readings, network flows), which generates
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 continuous neural anomaly scores, with an expert-driven rule

C YBER threats in consumer electronic devices are becoming increasingly advanced, adaptive, and stealthy [1].
Attackers now use AI tools to probe firmware vulnerabiliengine that produces symbolic risk signals. These streams
 are combined into a hybrid risk estimate and, together with
 select raw telemetry features, fed into a shallow MLP classifier
ties, automate exploitation of smart-home hubs and employ (NS-MLP) for multiclass threat detection [12]. The standout
zero-day exploits or compromised insider credentials to persist advantage of SYNAPS is that it delivers high-accuracy, realundetected on devices [2]. Meanwhile, the proliferation of time threat detection on resource-constrained devices. Overall,
smart wearable health monitors, voice-activated assistants, and the contributions of this paper are as follows:
connected appliances has expanded the consumer electronics • We design a trustworthy neuro-symbolic framework
attack surface [3]. Each new device and its accompanying that combines temporal deep learning with interpretable
cloud or mobile companion app provides fresh entry points rule-based reasoning for on-device threat detection and
 Received 27 August 2025; revised 22 October 2025; accepted 6 December risk scoring.
2025. Date of publication 9 December 2025; date of current version 25 March • We develop a hybrid scoring mechanism that combines
2026. the reconstruction error from unsupervised LSTM autoen-
 The author is with the Department of CS and DS, Meharry Medical College,
Nashville, TN 37208 USA (e-mail: debashis.das@ieee.org). coders with symbolic scores derived from expert-crafted
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2025.3642082 rules to ensure cross-device consistency.
 1558-4127 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
DAS: SYNAPS: A NS FRAMEWORK FOR PROACTIVE SECURITY IN CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 2301

 • We improve model robustness through three targeted Algorithm 1 Neural Anomaly Detection
 techniques: (i) NS-Aug: Gaussian noise injection to Input : Time-series dataset X ∈ RTmax ×d , window
 enhance generalization; (ii) NS-Adv: GAN-based gener- length T , false-alarm rate αFA
 ation of adversarial telemetry traces for resilient learning; Output: Reconstruction-error threshold τ , anomaly
 and (iii) NS-Trans: transfer learning to adapt to firmware scores Sanom [t] ∀t
 environments.
 • We present an extensive empirical evaluation of SYNAPS 1 Initialize LSTM-AE parameters θ;
 and its variants on a multi-device telemetry dataset. 2 for epoch ← 1 to Nepochs do
 • We analyze the latency and memory usage of all 3 Sample minibatch of windows {xt−T +1:t } from
 variants on Mac-based hardware for real-time resource- nominal X ;
 constrained environments. 4 Compute reconstruction x̂t−T +1:t = f θ (xt−T +1:t );
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 5 Update θ to minimize ∥x − x̂∥2 ;
we review prior work on anomaly detection, symbolic rea- 6 Initialize list Etrain ← [];
soning, and neuro-symbolic security systems. Section III 7 for t ← T, . . . , Tmax do
introduces our SYNAPS architecture in detail. In Section IV, 8 x̂t ← f θ (xt−T +1:t );
we describe our experimental setup, datasets, and evaluation 9 et ← ∥xt − x̂t ∥22 ;
metrics, then present and analyze performance results across 10 append et to Etrain ;
all SYNAPS variants. Finally, Section V concludes with a
 11 τ ← the (1 − αFA ) quantile of Etrain ;
summary of findings and outlines future enhancements.
 12 for t ← T, . . . , Tmax do
 II. R ELATED W ORKS 13 x̂t ← f θ (xt−T +1:t );
 14 Sanom [t] ← ∥xt − x̂t ∥22 ;
 Recent advances in cybersecurity have sparked growing
interest in neuro-symbolic AI, as detailed in Table I, which 15 return τ, Sanom
seeks to integrate neural networks with the reasoning and
interpretability of symbolic systems [13]. This approach is
increasingly recognized as a promising solution to address the
 detection, another study [14] presented a system that merges
limitations of purely neural or symbolic models in complex
 deep anomaly detection with rule-based symbolic reasoning.
threat areas.
 This work balances data-driven adaptability with transparent
 To improve network intrusion detection systems (NIDS),
 rule logic. For proactive threat modeling, Lei et al. [19] devel-
Almadhor et al. [13] introduced a framework that fuses deep
 oped the ADAPT framework, which integrates game-theoretic
learning with symbolic reasoning. Their system achieved
 reasoning with neuro-symbolic agents.
better detection accuracy and maintained human-interpretable
 Finally, a recent study in [23] explored the role of
outcomes. Kalutharage et al. [14] explored the use of reinneuro-symbolic AI in incident response and analyst decision
forcement learning in combination with symbolic reasoning
 support. Through initial case studies, the authors demonfor cyber defense. Their system was designed to generstrated how symbolic knowledge can be embedded into neural
ate timely and explainable responses to evolving threats
 pipelines to bridge the gap between theoretical AI capabilities
using symbolic knowledge to guide the learning proand operational cybersecurity needs. Many existing approaches
cess. In the domain of explainable AI for privacy and
 focus on narrow applications such as static intrusion detection
threat modeling, Piplai et al. [15] proposed a neuro-symbolic
 or policy enforcement, with limited adaptability to evolving
framework that integrates knowledge graphs with neural
 threats and polymorphic attack patterns. These gaps motivate
learning. Their work addresses the crucial challenge of
 the development of our proposed system, which aims to deliver
explainability in cybersecurity using structured domain knowla robust approach to threat detection in consumer electronics
edge. Similarly, Himmelhuber et al. [16] demonstrated how
 security systems.
sub-symbolic models could be enhanced through symbolic
overlays. Their approach focuses on the explanation of cyberattacks for a more intuitive and traceable detection process. III. P ROPOSED M ETHODOLOGY
 In the context of cloud-based intrusion detection, a recent
study [22] applied neuro-symbolic methods to enable real-time The proposed SYNAPS is designed with a dual-pipeline
threat detection and monitoring. The model proved effective neuro-symbolic architecture that unifies data-driven learning
in cloud-native environments. Bertrand Van Ouytsel et al. [17] with expert-defined reasoning for proactive cybersecurity. The
introduced an approach combining symbolic system call system processes incoming device telemetry through two
analysis with federated learning. It enables collaborative parallel paths: (1) a neural anomaly detection pipeline, where
malware identification without sharing raw data. However, an LSTM autoencoder models normal behavioral patterns and
Jagatheesaperumal et al. [18] proposed a neuro-symbolic per- produces a continuous anomaly score, and (2) a symbolic
ception framework to enhance situational awareness and reasoning pipeline, where a curated set of human-defined securesilience. Deep perceptual models with formal symbolic rity rules computes risk indicators based on policy violations.
constraints ensure safe and reliable operation in adversarial These two risk signals are fused into a hybrid risk score that
environments. In efforts to support real-time cyber threat balances contextual adaptability with explainable logic.
2302 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARATIVE S UMMARY OF N EURO -S YMBOLIC C YBERSECURITY A PPROACHES

 After minimizing this loss, the network learns benign operating patterns. The hidden state h i from the LSTM captures
 temporal context and is projected into a probabilistic neural
 anomaly score:
 h i = LSTM(xi−T :i ), f N N (xi ) = σ (W h i + b) (2)
 where W and b are learnable parameters and σ (·) is a sigmoid
 activation mapping the score to [0, 1].
 3) Symbolic Component and Fusion (NS-Only): After
 deriving the neural anomaly scores, the outputs are passed
Fig. 1. The risk assessment module in SYNAPS. to the symbolic reasoning module, which interprets them
 alongside predefined security rules to produce an explainable
 risk estimate. This module g S R (xi ) evaluates expert-defined
A. Risk Score Generation security rules and computes a normalized symbolic risk score.
 This component of the SYNAPS is depicted in Fig. 1, which Each rule ri has a severity weight wi normalized such that
 i wi = 1. The final hybrid risk estimate integrates neural
 P
provides context-aware cybersecurity risk assessments. The
neuro-symbolic (NS) design fuses data-driven learning with and symbolic evidence as follows:
expert-defined rules. The neural network captures nonlinear
 R(xi ) = α f N N (xi ) + (1 − α) g S R (xi ) (3)
patterns and contextual anomalies from device telemetry, and
the symbolic reasoning layer enforces domain-specific policies where α controls the contribution of the neural component and
derived from expert knowledge. (1−α) the symbolic one. The NS-Only model terminates here
 1) Model Initialization: First, we define the input data as and uses R(xi ) as a continuous risk level for binary assessment
a sequence of feature vectors: X = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xn }, xi ∈ (benign vs. malicious).
Rd where each xi is a multidimensional feature set extracted 4) Extension to Multiclass Threat Prediction (NS-MLP): To
from system behavior such as login timestamps, activities, file move beyond binary decisions, the NS-MLP variant uses the
accesses, and network flows. fused NS representation as input to a shallow MLP. The neural
 2) Neural Component: Once the input feature sequences hidden state h i , symbolic activations g S R (xi ), and hybrid risk
are defined, they are passed into the neural module, which score R(xi ) are concatenated into:
learns to model temporal dependencies and behavioral patterns
that simple rule-based systems cannot capture. We employ an zi = [ h i ∥ g S R (xi ) ∥ R(xi ) ] (4)
LSTM-based autoencoder [24], where the encoder compresses The vector zi is then passed through a lightweight MLP
a sliding window of past observations (xi−T :i ) into a latent classifier:
vector z i , and the decoder reconstructs the sequence x̂i−T :i :
 ŷi = Softmax W2 ReLU(W1 zi + b1 ) + b2
 
 i
 (5)
 1 X 2
 Lrec (xi−T :i ) = x j − x̂ j 2 (1) This extension differentiates among multiple attack types to
 T +1
 j=i−T transform fused risk estimates into fine-grained threat labels.
DAS: SYNAPS: A NS FRAMEWORK FOR PROACTIVE SECURITY IN CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 2303

 Algorithm 2 Symbolic Risk Weight Optimization
 Input : Set of symbolic rules {ri } with base weights wi
 and observed violation rates vi
 Output: Updated risk weights w̃i
1 foreach rule ri do
2 Compute adjusted weight: w̃i = wi · (1 + λvi );
3 Normalize weights: w̃i = w̃i / j w̃ j ;
 P

4 return {w̃i }

 5) Hyperparameter Selection: Once the architecture is
 Fig. 2. Overview of the SYNAPS threat prediction pipeline.
established, the main hyperparameters are optimized to balance accuracy in the NS-MLP model. To optimize the
LSTM window size T , we computed autocorrelations of each
 matrix score. TPR j , FPR j be empirical rates on validation
time-series feature and conducted a validation grid search
 and Cfp , Cfn > 0 the costs. We define a utility-aligned weight
T ∈ {5, 10, 20, 30, 50} by selecting T = 10 for the best
 w j ∝ I j · α TPR j − β FPR jP, α = Cfn , β = Cfp and
 
reconstruction-error AUC. In g S R (·), rule weights wi were
fine-tuned by ±10% on validation data to maximize symcalibrate the proportionality by j w j = 1. Thresholds τ j
 are selected by maximizing Youden’s J = TPR − FPR subject
bolic score. The fusion weight α was optimized over α ∈
 to FPR ≤ θfpr (operating constraint). To avoid redundant rules,
{0.0, 0.1, . . . , 1.0}, with α = 0.7 giving the highest validation
accuracy. Finally, the binary decision output is obtained by we solve a sparse selection [25] as given below:
thresholding R(xi ) at τ : X
 min E ℓ(y, w j δ̃ j ) + λ1 ∥w∥1 + λ2 overlap (w)
  
 (9)
 w≥0
 1, if R(xi ) ≥ τ,
 (
 j
 ŷi = (6)
 0, otherwise. where ℓ is logistic loss on labeled incidents y ∈ {0, 1} and
 overlap penalizes jointly active highly correlated rules. With
 time decay d(1) the score is:
B. Symbolic Logic Layer
 m |W t |−1
 After tuning the key hyperparameters, SYNAPS proceeds to X X
the symbolic reasoning layer, which applies explicit rules to gSR (xi , t) = wj d(1) δ̃ j (xi , t − 1)
 j=1 1=0
derive policy-aligned risk scores. The symbolic layer computes
 gSR
a risk score based on rule violations. Each rule represents a g̃SR = P ∈ [0, 1]. (10)
 j wj
 P
specific security policy or behavioral constraint, such as login 1 d(1)
limits or access restrictions. Symbolic rules {r j }mj=1 originate We evaluate each rule r j by removing it and measuring the
from three sources: (i) domain and compliance policies, (ii) change in AUROC and F1 for incident detection. We also test
incident post-mortems and near-miss reports, and (iii) pat- how sensitive the risk score g̃SR is to ±10% adjustments in
terns surfaced by the neural component (LSTM-AE) through its weights w j and thresholds τ j , and we verify that the score
reconstruction error and attention on features. A candidate is well-calibrated to the observed risk. Each alert also reports
rule r j is admitted only if it satisfies coverage (flags ≥ θcov which rules were triggered, their individual contributions w j ·
fraction of historical incidents) and specificity (false-positive δ̃ j , and the corresponding time window.
rate ≤ θfpr ) on a validation set. Each rule is specified as a
temporal predicate ϕ j over a sliding window Wt :
 C. Threat Prediction Pipeline
 δ j (xi , t) ∈ {0, 1}, δ j (xi , t) = ⊮ ϕ j (xi,[t−|Wt |+1:t] )
  
 (7)
 To extend beyond basic anomaly detection, SYNAPS incor-
To handle uncertainty, we also define a soft indicator porates a threat prediction and simulation pipeline, as shown in
δ̃ j (xi , t) = σ (s j (xi , t) − τ j )/γ j with logistic σ (·), score Fig. 2. It advances the NS model by adding layers for synthetic
s j (·), threshold τ j , and temperature γ j . Recent violations are attack generation, vulnerability prioritization, and adversarial
emphasized via time decay d(1) = exp(−λ1). For sequence training.
xi , the LSTM autoencoder produces per-timestep error et = 1) Synthetic Attack Generation (NS-Aug): A key limitation
∥xt − x̂t ∥2 and latent embeddings z t . Rules may depend on of device-level security datasets is the lack of diversity in
(et , z t ), which is linked to learned anomalies and context with advanced or stealthy attack samples. To mitigate this, the
explicit constraints: NS-Aug variant introduces a synthetic attack generation mech-
ϕspike : K1 k=0
 P K −1
 ⊮[ et−k > τe ] ≥ ρ, ϕcontext : z t ∈ Crestricted , anism that expands the training data using domain-aware
 transformations. Known attack traces xreal are perturbed to
 (8)
 create realistic variants:
 Each rule weight w j reflects impact and reliability. Let
 xsynthetic = T xreal , θ θ ∼ U(θmin , θmax )
 
I j be the operational impact (0–1), estimated with a risk (11)
2304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

where T is a transformation function (e.g., feature masking) baseline profiling over a historical window of T time steps. For
parameterized by θ. These additional synthetic samples diver- each feature, the mean and variance are computed as follows:
sify the model’s training distribution and reduce overfitting for T
better generalization to unseen attack patterns. 1 X
 µt = xi (18)
 2) Adversarial Training (NS-Adv): While synthetic aug- T
 i=1
mentation enhances diversity, it does not guarantee robustness
against deliberately crafted evasions. To counter this, the However, systems naturally exhibit variation, so the framework
NS-Adv variant employs adversarial learning using a Gen- also calculates the variance σt2 to measure typical fluctuations:
erative Adversarial Network (GAN) [26]. The generator G T
 1 X
produces perturbed attack examples designed to fool the dis- σt2 = (xi − µt )2 (19)
criminator D, which learns to distinguish real from synthetic T
 i=1
inputs:
 and deviations from the baseline are flagged when:
min max V (D, G) = Ex∼ preal log D(x) + Ez∼ pz log 1 − D(G(z))
    
 G D
 |x − µt | > k · σt (20)
 (12) Here x is the newly observed value, µt is the previously
 computed baseline mean, and k is a tunable threshold param-
This min-max training process hardens the classifier by exposeter that controls the system’s sensitivity. A high threshold
ing it to evasive attack patterns for improving resilience to
 k = 3 flags only extreme outliers, and smaller values (1.5–2)
zero-day and adversarial scenarios.
 capture subtle deviations relevant to insider or firmware-level
 3) Critical Vulnerability Identification: To focus learning
 threats. Finally, to ensure model portability across heterogeand reasoning on the most severe threats, SYNAPS incorneous devices and firmware versions, SYNAPS incorporates
porates a vulnerability prioritization mechanism that adjusts
 a cross-device transfer learning module (NS-Trans) described
symbolic rule weights based on empirical exploit data. Each
 in the following section.
vulnerability vi is scored by its observed frequency impact:
 5) Cross-Device Transfer Learning Module (NS-Trans): To
 Scorevuln (vi ) = freq(vi ) × impact(vi ) (13) enable reliable transfer across devices operating under different firmware versions, NS-Trans relies on a shared telemetry
 ] vuln (vi ) = Scorevuln (vi ) schema rather than identical raw data [27]. All participating
 Score (14)
 max j Scorevuln (v j ) devices record standardized behavioral indicators to ensure
 that each input sample xi lies within a common feature space
The normalized score widetildeScorevuln ∈ [0, 1] dynam- Rd , where each dimension corresponds to a semantically
ically scales each symbolic rule weight. These normalized consistent measurement. During transfer, the pretrained source
priorities then modulate our symbolic rule weights w j : model f source (x) is augmented by a lightweight correction term
 1 f (x; θ1 ), parameterized by θ1 and fine-tuned using a small
 ] vuln (vr j )
 w j ← w j × 1 + Score
 
 (15) set of labeled target-domain samples (xi , yi )i=1
 N
 . The objective
 minimizes a regularized empirical loss to adapt the model with
Rules tied to high-risk vulnerabilities have proportion- minimal parameter updates, as given below:
ally greater influence in the overall risk computation.
 N
Each symbolic rule is represented as a pair: Ri = 1 X  
(conditioni , severityi ), where severityi ∈ {1, 2, 3}. where θ1
 ∗
 = arg min L yi , f source (xi ) + 1 f (xi ; θ1 ) + λ∥θ1 ∥22
 θ1 N
 i=1
conditioni defines a security policy and severity severityi
quantifies its criticality. The aggregated symbolic score for a (21)
device instance is then normalized as follows: Here, L denotes the loss function and λ controls the strength
 n
 X of L∈ regularization to limit the correction magnitude. In our
 Sraw = ai · severityi (16) implementation, λ = 0.01 provided stable adaptation and
 i=1 prevented overfitting. The correction layer 1 f (x; θ1 ) is realized as a single dense layer stacked over frozen intermediate
where ai ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether the rule i is triggered
 representations from the LSTM encoder. Once trained, the
(1) or not (0). And, n is the total number of symbolic
 adapted model is obtained as stated below:
rules defined for that device class. This score reflects the
cumulative symbolic risk before normalization. To map raw f target (x) = f source (x) + 1 f (x; θ1
 ∗
 ) (22)
symbolic scores, we perform min-max normalization based
on the maximum possible symbolic score: In practice, the correction function can be expressed as a
 simple affine transformation:
 n
 Sraw
 1 f (x; θ1 ) = W1 φ(x) + b1
 X
 Ssym = , where Smax = severityi (17) (23)
 Smax
 i=1
 where φ(x) is the fixed feature representation extracted from
 4) Anomaly Detection and Threat Classification (NS-MLP): f source , and W1 , b1 are learnable adaptation parameters. This
To model normal operational behavior, SYNAPS performs strategy enables cross-device generalization with minimal
DAS: SYNAPS: A NS FRAMEWORK FOR PROACTIVE SECURITY IN CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 2305

Fig. 3. Model score behaviors observed with a window size T = 10, hidden dimension H = 128, batch size = 64, and learning rate = 10−3 . (a) Reconstruction
loss convergence. (b) Neural-score classification accuracy. (c) Distribution of symbolic rule-based scores across varying severity levels. (d) Combined hybrid
risk scores α = 0.7.

 TABLE II C. Model Behavior and Anomaly Differentiation
 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP AND T OOLS
 As illustrated in Fig. 3, the anomaly detection components
 of SYNAPS effectively separate normal and malicious device
 behaviors. The LSTM autoencoder quickly learns compact
 representations of benign telemetry patterns, and the symbolic
 rule engine provides policy-driven risk signals. When fused,
 the combined scores produce an amplified separation between
 benign and attack distributions so that the NS fusion enhances
 anomaly discrimination and robustness on edge devices.

 D. Threat Prediction Metrics Across Models
 As part of the experimental evaluation, we benchmarked all
retraining cost and ensures compatibility across firmware ver- SYNAPS variants against pure neural and symbolic baselines
sions, which makes NS-Trans suitable for resource-constrained to assess predictive robustness and adaptability under realistic
IoT environments. IoT conditions. The results (Fig. 4) show that SYNAPS consistently outperforms both standalone components across all key
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
 metrics. In particular, NS-Adv achieves the highest accuracy,
 We examine each component of SYNAPS: risk scoring, F1 score, and ROC-AUC, as summarized in Table III. NS varianomaly detection, and threat prediction by comparing Neural- ants such as NS-Aug, NS-MLP, and NS-Trans also yield
Only, Symbolic-Only, NS-Only, and NS variants (NS-MLP, significant gains and enhance threat prediction in resource-
NS-Aug, NS-Adv, and NS-Trans). constrained environments.

A. Environment Setup
 E. Class Imbalance Mitigation
 The experimental setup and tools are summarized in
Table II. The symbolic rules were implemented in Python as Telemetry-based threat detection often suffers from severe
a custom logic engine. Each experiment is repeated five times class imbalance [30], where benign samples dominate, and
with different random seeds, and the mean values of accuracy, certain attack types appear rarely. To address the class imbalprecision, recall, F1-score, and ROC-AUC are reported. The ance inherent in telemetry-based threat detection, we apply
experiments are fully reproducible, and performance compar- strategies at both the anomaly detection (LSTM autoencoder)
isons across all SYNAPS variants are fair and consistent. Our and classification (NS-MLP) stages. On the other hand, the
experiment code is available on the GitHub repository [29]. NS-MLP classifier is responsible for multiclass threat prediction that directly addresses class imbalance using a weighted
 cross-entropy loss function.
B. Data Loading and Preprocessing
 The UNSW-NB15 dataset [28] is used to evaluate the
proposed SYNAPS. The dataset covers ten traffic classes: F. Symbolic Score Analysis
one normal class and nine attack categories. The testing set To demonstrate the discriminative power of the symbolic
contains 82,332 samples, and the training set includes 175,341 risk component, we analyzed two representative telemesamples. Before training, all records are cleaned by removing try logs: one benign and one malicious. In the benign
identifier fields, categorical variables are one-hot encoded, example (Listing 1), the device executed standard API
and all numeric features are scaled to the [0,1] range using calls (open_socket, read_config, send_data) and
min–max normalization. The dataset is then divided into 70% accessed only a secure port. The symbolic rule engine
training, 20% validation, and 10% test subsets using stratified matched no rules with a raw symbolic score of Sraw =
sampling to preserve class distribution. 0, and consequently a normalized symbolic risk score of
2306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ACROSS M ODELS AND VARIANTS

Fig. 4. Test set evaluation across SYNAPS variants: (a) threat prediction accuracy for each model, (b) heatmap of test-set metrics, (c) ROC-AUC curves for
each variant, and (d) Precision-Recall curves with average precision for each variant.

Fig. 5. Training metrics for all SYNAPS variants: (a) training accuracy, (b) training loss, (c) training precision, (d) training F1 score, (e) training recall, and
(f) overall training performance comparison across variants.

 contains suspicious API calls, abnormal port activity, and rule
 matches that correspond to critical threat patterns. In contrast, the attack example includes unauthorized flash memory
 access (access_flash, write_flash) of system logs
 (disable_logging), and use of insecure network ports.
 Three symbolic rules were fired, with severities of 3, 2, and 3,
 respectively, with a raw score of Sraw = (1·3)+(1·2)+(1·3) =
 Listing 1: No anomalies and symbolic risk contribution is 0.
 8. The maximumPpossible symbolic score for this device
 n
 type is Smax = i=1 severityi = 21. And the normalized
 symbolic risk score becomes Ssym = SSmaxraw 8
 = 21 ≈ 0.381 (from
 equation 17). This non-zero value illustrates that the symbolic
Ssym = 0.0. Listing 2 illustrates a device report in which module contributes a meaningful and explainable component
several high-severity security rules are triggered. The log to the overall risk assessment.
DAS: SYNAPS: A NS FRAMEWORK FOR PROACTIVE SECURITY IN CONSUMER ELECTRONICS 2307

Fig. 6. Validation metrics for all SYNAPS variants: (a) validation accuracy, (b) validation loss, (c) validation precision, (d) validation F1 score, (e) validation
recall, and (f) overall validation performance comparison across variants.

 TABLE IV
 O N -D EVICE I NFERENCE L ATENCY AND M EMORY U SAGE

 At present, the experiments are based mainly on the UNSW-
 Listing 2: Multiple high-severity rules fired.
 NB15 dataset, which may not capture the full variety of
 consumer devices or real-world network conditions. The sym-
G. Training, Validation, and Test Performance Across Models bolic rules depend on established expert knowledge, which
 may overlook evolving attack patterns and adaptive adver-
 Table III reports detailed metrics for each model on training, saries to exploit unrecognized vulnerabilities. The system’s
validation, and test splits. Across all phases, neural-only and real-time efficiency, energy consumption, and uncertainty
symbolic-only models lag behind the hybrid variants. NS- calibration have not been comprehensively evaluated on
MLP already outperforms both baselines. NS-Adv achieves resource-constrained devices. In addition, privacy and rigorous
the best overall results, with a test accuracy of 93.3% and threat-model verification need more scrutiny before extensive
ROC-AUC of 0.971, with a clear benefit from its adversarial implementation. In the future, we plan to extend SYNAPS with
robustness training. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 compare training and multi-dataset validation for continuous adaptation and humanvalidation metrics for all variants. On the other hand, NS-Adv in-the-loop rule updates using knowledge graphs. We will add
and NS-Aug converge faster and maintain higher precision and stronger adversarial testing and uncertainty-aware thresholds
recall curves than the other models. The lightweight NS-MLP to improve trust and resilience. To support practical use, future
variant also shows stable learning behavior. The latency and work will also include lightweight model compression for
memory consumption results of various SYNAPS variants are edge devices and federated learning for secure collaboration
summarized in Table IV. Furthermore, the NS-Adv model to ensure consistent protection across device types.
achieves a balanced trade-off between inference speed and
accuracy, with a mean latency of 0.6192 ms and a standard V. C ONCLUSION
deviation of 0.0545 ms.
 In this work, we introduced SYNAPS, a hybrid system
 that combines neural networks and symbolic rules to detect
H. Future Work and Limitations and predict security threats. The proposed proactive approach
 The proposed SYNAPS shows strong performance, but understands complex patterns and provides explainable deciit still has some limitations and areas for improvement. sions. We also improved the system resilience using variant
2308 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

mechanisms, like data augmentation, adversarial training, and [16] A. Himmelhuber, D. Dold, S. Grimm, S. Zillner, and T. Runkler, “Detectransfer learning, to make it more robust and accurate. Our tion, explanation and filtering of cyber attacks combining symbolic and
 sub-symbolic methods,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Ser. Comput. Intell. (SSCI),
experiment shows that the advanced versions of SYNAPS Dec. 2022, pp. 381–388.
perform much better than models that use purely neural or [17] C.-H. Bertrand Van Ouytsel, K. H. T. Dam, and A. Legay, “Symbolic
symbolic baselines. The variant models achieved very high analysis meets federated learning to enhance malware identifier,” in
 Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Availability, Rel. Secur., Aug. 2022, pp. 1–10.
accuracy and recall in detecting both common and hidden [18] S. K. Jagatheesaperumal, S. Ali, A. Alotaibi, K. Muhammad,
attacks. Overall, SYNAPS shows that combining neural intel- V. H. C. De Albuquerque, and M. Guizani, “Generative AI-enhanced
ligence with symbolic reasoning can lead to more accurate and neuro-symbolic quantum architectures for secure communications and
 networking,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 36–43, Sep. 2025.
explainable security systems for consumer electronic devices.
 [19] H. Lei, Y. Ge, and Q. Zhu, “ADAPT: A game-theoretic and neuro-
For future work, we plan to extend SYNAPS toward real-time symbolic framework for automated distributed adaptive penetration
threat monitoring to enable on-the-fly defense against evolving testing,” in Proc. MILCOM-IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM),
adversarial behaviors. Oct. 2024, pp. 7–12.
 [20] A. M. Abdallah, A. S. R. O. Alkaabi, G. B. N. D. Alameri, S. H. Rafique,
 N. S. Musa, and T. Murugan, “Cloud network anomaly detection using
 machine and deep learning techniques—Recent research advancements,”
 R EFERENCES IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 56749–56773, 2024.
 [21] R. Jablaoui and N. Liouane, “Network security based combined CNN-
 RNN models for IoT intrusion detection system,” Peer-Peer Netw. Appl.,
 [1] D. Das, P. Chatterjee, S. Banerjee, U. Ghosh, and M. S. Al-Numay, vol. 18, no. 3, p. 129, May 2025.
 “Blockchain-enabled federated learning for security and privacy in [22] S. Nalluri, M. M. Malyala, H. Kandagiri, and K. K. Kandagiri, “NSCTI:
 consumer electronics devices,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, A hybrid neuro-symbolic framework for AI-driven predictive cyber
 no. 1, pp. 2262–2270, Feb. 2025. threat intelligence,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput. Modelling, Sim-
 [2] P. Chatterjee, D. Das, D. B. Rawat, U. Ghosh, S. Banerjee, and ulation Optim. (ICCMSO), Jun. 2025, pp. 14–21.
 M. S. Al-Numay, “Digital twins and blockchain fusion for security [23] G. Grov, J. Halvorsen, M. W. Eckhoff, B. J. Hansen, M. Eian, and
 in metaverse-driven consumer supply chains,” IEEE Trans. Consum. V. Mavroeidis, “On the use of neurosymbolic AI for defending against
 Electron., vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 5688–5697, Aug. 2024. cyber attacks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural-Symbolic Learn. Reasoning,
 [3] S. Qin et al., “A partially labeled anomaly data detection approach based 2024, pp. 119–140.
 on prioritized deep reinforcement learning for consumer electronics [24] G. Wen, J. Qin, X. Fu, and W. Yu, “DLSTM: Distributed long shortsecurity,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 6452–6462, term memory neural networks for the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans.
 Nov. 2024. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 111–120, Jan. 2022.
 [4] B. R. Maddireddy and B. R. Maddireddy, “Cybersecurity threat land- [25] R. Jiao, B. Xue, and M. Zhang, “Sparse learning-based feature selection
 scape: Predictive modelling using advanced ai algorithms,” Int. J. Adv. in classification: A multi-objective perspective,” IEEE Trans. Emerg.
 Eng. Technol. Innov., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 270–285, 2022. Topics Comput. Intell., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2767–2781, Aug. 2025.
 [5] R. Dong, B. Cui, Y. Sun, and J. Yang, “BTIDEC: A novel detection [26] Y. Zheng, Z. Li, X. Xu, and Q. Zhao, “Dynamic defenses in cyber
 scheme for CPU security of consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Con- security: Techniques, methods and challenges,” Digit. Commun. Netw.,
 sum. Electron., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 4515–4523, Feb. 2024. vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 422–435, Aug. 2022.
 [6] S. Ul Haq, Y. Singh, A. Sharma, R. Gupta, and D. Gupta, “A survey [27] A. Hosna, E. Merry, J. Gyalmo, Z. Alom, Z. Aung, and M. A. Azim,
 on IoT & embedded device firmware security: Architecture, extraction “Transfer learning: A friendly introduction,” J. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 1,
 techniques, and vulnerability analysis frameworks,” Discover Internet p. 102, Oct. 2022.
 Things, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 17, Oct. 2023. [28] UNSW_NB15. Accessed: Mar. 4, 2025. [Online]. Available:
 [7] Y. Nasser and M. Nassar, “Toward hardware-assisted malware detection https://research.unsw.edu.au/projects/unsw-nb15-dataset
 utilizing explainable machine learning: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, [29] D. Das. (2025). Neuro-symbolic-threat-detection. [Online]. Available:
 pp. 131273–131288, 2023. https://github.com/debashis2124/neuro-symbolic-threat-detection.git
 [8] Y. K. Sharma, D. S. Tomar, R. K. Pateriya, and S. Solanki, “GNSTAM: [30] N. Naz et al., “Ensemble learning-based IDS for sensors teleme-
 Integrating graph networks with spatial and temporal signature analy- try data in IoT networks,” Math. Biosci. Eng., vol. 19, no. 10,
 sis for enhanced Android malware detection,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 10550–10580, 2022.
 pp. 81326–81346, 2025.
 [9] J. Yu, A. V. Shvetsov, and S. Hamood Alsamhi, “Leveraging machine
 learning for cybersecurity resilience in Industry 4.0: Challenges and
 future directions,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 159579–159596, 2024.
[10] P. Huang, E. Gönültaş, M. Arnold, K. P. Srinath, J. Hoydis, and
 C. Studer, “Attacking and defending deep-learning-based off-device
 wireless positioning systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23,
 no. 8, pp. 8883–8895, Aug. 2024.
[11] B. P. Bhuyan, A. Ramdane-Chérif, R. Tomar, and T. P. Singh, “Neurosymbolic artificial intelligence: A survey,” Neural Comput. Appl.,
 vol. 36, no. 21, pp. 12809–12844, 2024. Debashis Das (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D.
 degree in computer science and engineering from
[12] B. Li et al., “LogiCity: Advancing neuro-symbolic AI with abstract the University of Kalyani, India, in 2023. He is cururban simulation,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, rently with the Department of Computer Science and
 pp. 69840–69864. Data Science, School of Applied Computational Sci-
[13] A. Almadhor, S. Alsubai, A. A. Hejaili, Z. Klai, B. Bouallegue, and ences, Meharry Medical College. He has more than
 U. Kovac, “Designing a neuro-symbolic dual-model architecture for 50 publications in various peer-reviewed journals
 explainable and resilient intrusion detection in IoT networks,” Sci. Rep., and conferences and has over 1050 citations, with
 vol. 15, no. 1, p. 42786, Nov. 2025. an H-index of 19 and an i10-index of 33 by Google
[14] C. S. Kalutharage, X. Liu, and C. Chrysoulas, “Neurosymbolic learning Scholar. He is a reviewer for various peer-reviewed
 and domain knowledge-driven explainable AI for enhanced IoT network journals of IEEE T RANSACTIONS, (Elsevier and
 attack detection and response,” Comput. Secur., vol. 151, Apr. 2025, Springer). His research interests include cybersecurity, blockchain technology,
 Art. no. 104318. and artificial intelligence. He has served as an invited TPC Member or
[15] A. Piplai, A. Kotal, S. Mohseni, M. Gaur, S. Mittal, and A. Joshi, the Chair for numerous international conferences, including CICBA, BCCA,
 “Knowledge-enhanced neurosymbolic artificial intelligence for cyber- CCGRID, ICDCN, IEEE STP-CPS, ICSPIS, ISORC, and IoST. He was
 security and privacy,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 43–48, recognized by Stanford University and Elsevier as among the world’s top
 Sep. 2023. 2 percent of scientists in 2025.