IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026 11

 System Log Anomaly Detection With
 Noise-Contrastive Learning and
 Pattern Feature
 Pengcheng Luo, Dengke Deng, Mingfeng Xie , Genke Yang , Jian Chu,
 Boon-Hee Soong , Senior Member, IEEE, and Chau Yuen , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—System logs play a critical role in identifying secu- adopt increasingly advanced techniques, the effectiveness of
rity threats such as network attacks, unauthorized access, and traditional security systems in protecting digital assets is being
system vulnerabilities. Recent research has focused on extract- significantly undermined [1], [2]. System logs provide detailed
ing sequences of security-related events from large-scale log data
and applying deep learning methods for anomaly detection. These records of service activities, system states, user operations, and
methods achieve anomaly detection by designing an auxiliary train- external access events [3], [4], making them a valuable resource
ing task that predicts the next event. However, the inconsistency for security analysis. Analyzing these logs plays a vital role
between the task of event prediction and the goal of anomaly in identifying malicious activities, abnormal behaviors, and
detection limits their performance. In this paper, we introduce a potential system vulnerabilities.
noise-contrastive learning approach that introduces synthetic noise
as a training signal, enabling the model to directly discriminate be- In a typical enterprise information technology (IT) environtween normal and anomalous samples. Our approach also includes ment, a Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)
an ensemble model, STrees, and a novel feature engineering method system processes a substantial volume of logs generated by
named pattern feature. By modeling the relationships among events Host-based Intrusion Detection Systems (HIDS) and Networkunder normal conditions, these methods allow the model to capture based Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) [5]. The SIEM ancontextual dependencies in log event sequences, thereby improving
its ability to detect potential anomalies. Specifically, using the alyzes these logs to detect potential anomalies within the netpattern feature improves anomaly-class recall by at least 7.3% work service and servers, determining whether alerts should be
compared to using event sequences as input. Experimental results generated [6]. Specifically, upon receiving the logs, the SIEM
demonstrate that our model improves anomaly-class recall by at parses the data, extracts events sequentially based on predefined
least 5.3% over advanced log anomaly detection methods while templates, and constructs corresponding event sequences. Subachieving more accurate detection in most comparisons across
datasets. These results highlight the effectiveness of our approach sequently, anomaly detection models are applied to the event
in learning discriminative decision boundaries between normal and sequences to identify anomalies. The system log analysis workanomalous event sequence patterns. flow is depicted in Fig. 1.
 Index Terms—System log, anomaly detection, contrastive learn- The accuracy and robustness of this workflow are inherently
ing, synthetic data, machine learning. dependent on the structure and consistency of the underlying
 I. INTRODUCTION system log data. System logs are generated by the printing
 instructions in the source code of the network service programs.
A. Background and Motivation
 These logs convey the program’s runtime status and document
 ITH the growing complexity of cyber threats, cyberse-
W curity has become a critical global concern. As attackers
 user operations [7], [8]. A system log comprises a series of
 ordered log statements, each of which asserts the occurrence
 of specific events within the system [9]. These log statements
 Received 23 January 2025; revised 8 June 2025; accepted 10 June 2025.
Date of publication 16 June 2025; date of current version 21 November 2025. are grouped based on certain criteria, such as unique identifiers
This work supported in part by the National Key Research and Development (UUIDs) or time windows. Such groupings are referred to as “log
Program of China under Grant 2020YFB1711200, in part by China Scholarship segments.” Each log statement within a log segment represents
Council Program under Project 202406230244, and in part by the Ministry of
Education of Singapore under Grant RG62/22. Recommended for acceptance at least one event, such as “user login successful.” By parsing
by Prof. Yuanwei Liu. (Corresponding authors: Genke Yang; Chau Yuen.) the statements within a log segment, the corresponding event
 Pengcheng Luo, Dengke Deng, Genke Yang, and Jian Chu are with Ningbo sequence can be extracted.
Artificial Intelligence Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Ningbo 315012,
China, and also with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong Anomaly detection aims to model the normal behavior of a
University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: luopeng69131@sjtu.edu.cn; pok- system by analyzing event sequences collected during its regier123@sjtu.edu.cn; gkyang@sjtu.edu.cn; chujian@niii.com). ular operation [10]. Subsequent significant deviations from the
 Mingfeng Xie is with the College of Electronic and Information Engineering,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 210016, China learned patterns are identified as anomalies [11]. For instance,
(e-mail: xiemf1997@nuaa.edu.cn). in a network security service context, a normal event sequence
 Boon-Hee Soong and Chau Yuen are with the School of Electrical and might include actions such as “host boot successful,” followed
Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798
(e-mail: ebhsoong@ntu.edu.sg; yuenchau@gmail.com). by “security policies loaded,” “firewall rules updated,” and “net-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSE.2025.3579809 work traffic monitoring initiated.” If an event sequence contains
 2327-4697 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 1. The system log processing workflow.

“host boot successful” and “network traffic monitoring initiated” to directly learn to determine whether an event sequence
but omits critical intermediate steps, such as “security policies contains anomalies, thereby avoiding inconsistencies between
loaded” or “firewall rules updated,” it could be identified as event prediction training and the anomaly detection task. We
anomalous. Such anomalies may signal potential configuration propose pattern features, which model inter-event relationships
errors, tampering with security policies, or unauthorized system and indicate the potential anomaly status of each event in a log
access [12]. sequence, thereby enhancing the model’s ability to detect con-
 Deep learning (DL) has become a powerful tool for textual anomalies. Additionally, we utilize an ensemble machine
anomaly detection, offering substantial improvements over learning (ML) model based on decision trees. It makes the model
classical methods through its strong representation learn- more CPU-friendly. The key contributions of our research are
ing capabilities. DL has driven the development of general- as follows:
purpose deep anomaly detection (DeepAD) techniques, such r We propose the NCL method, which formulates log
as DeepSVDD [13] and Deep Isolation Forest (DIF) [14]. In anomaly detection as a binary classification task by inparallel, DL has also enabled significant progress in log anomaly troducing synthetic noise as negative samples, enabling the
detection, leading to the development of log-structured deep model to perform direct anomaly detection without relying
learning models (LogDeep). These methods typically leverage on auxiliary prediction tasks.
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [13], [15], [16], r We introduce STrees, an ensemble learning model based
[17] to predict the next event in a log event sequence. If the on decision trees, and a feature engineering method called
predicted event deviates from the actual one, an anomaly is pattern feature. These methods effectively capture contexflagged, indicating potential abnormal behavior in the system. tual dependencies in event sequences, enabling the model
 Despite these advancements, system log anomaly detection to learn discriminative decision boundaries.
still faces several key challenges. Firstly, existing methods [18], r We conduct extensive testing across various real-world
[19] train anomaly detection models by designing an intermedi- system log datasets, including HDFS, BGL, and Hadoop,
ate event prediction task, which leads to inconsistency between to evaluate the performance of our model. Experimental
the task of event prediction and the ultimate goal of anomaly results demonstrate that for anomaly detection tasks, our
detection. Secondly, they fail to fully leverage contextual depen- model achieves more accurate detection in most comdencies and model inter-event relationships to effectively detect parisons against LogDeep methods and exhibits more
anomalies within event sequences [16], [17]. Lastly, existing balanced detection performance compared to DeepAD
DL-based anomaly detection methods are not CPU-friendly, methods.
and the high computational cost of GPU inference makes them
unsuitable for practical use in enterprise network departments.
 C. Organizations
B. Contributions The paper is structured as follows: Section II reviews the
 To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose the literature on anomaly detection in system logs. In Section III, we
Noise-Contrastive Learning (NCL) method. It enables the model introduce our proposed pattern feature, the NCL approach, and
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 13

 2) Contextual Embedding and Transformer-Based Methods:
 Recent approaches employ contextual embeddings and Transformer [22] architectures to capture richer dependencies. Log-
 BERT [18] adopts a Bidirectional Encoder Representations
 from Transformers (BERT)-style encoder [23] with masked
 event prediction and self-supervised volume minimization for
 training. LAnoBERT [19] further refines this approach by customizing loss functions per log key and improves detection
Fig. 2. Limitation of next-event prediction methods in detecting contextual accuracy via more structured training. Additionally, Zhang
anomalies. et al. [24] propose an attention-based bidirectional LSTM
 that learns discriminative features across log sequences. These
 models offer better generalization and leverage long-range
 dependencies, but often depend on auxiliary training tasks,
the STrees model. Section IV assesses our model’s performance
 which may not be directly aligned with anomaly detection
on real-world system log datasets. Finally, Section V concludes
 objectives.
the research and outlines avenues for future work.
 However, despite these advancements in capturing context,
 many of these LogDeep methods still commonly rely on an
 II. RELATED WORK intermediate auxiliary prediction task (e.g., next event predic-
 System log anomaly detection plays a critical role in maintain- tion, masked event prediction) to train the anomaly detection
ing the reliability, security, and operational efficiency of com- models. While this pre-training or self-supervision can help
puting systems. Recent years have witnessed a proliferation of in learning robust log representations, the anomaly detection
DL-based methods for this task. These methods can be broadly capability itself is often an indirect outcome of optimizing for
divided into two categories: (i) log-structured deep learning these proxy tasks. This indirect approach may not always be the
anomaly detection approaches, which explicitly utilize the se- most direct or optimal way to learn discriminative features that
mantic and sequential event of log data; and (ii) general-purpose specifically distinguish anomalous log sequences from normal
deep anomaly detection algorithms, which are originating from ones.
other domains such as vision or tabular anomaly detection.
 B. DeepAD: General-Purpose Deep Anomaly Detection
A. LogDeep: Log-Structured Deep Learning Anomaly Algorithms
Detection Methods
 DeepAD methods are domain-agnostic algorithms originally
 LogDeep methods are specifically engineered to handle the developed for anomaly detection in vision, medical, or tabular
unique characteristics of system logs, typically involving stages data. Although not tailored to log data, DeepAD methods offer
like log parsing, event sequence construction, and anomaly strong representation learning capabilities. In particular, their
detection. These approaches aim to learn the patterns of normal self-supervised learning paradigms show promising potential
log sequences and detect anomalies as deviations from these for adaptation to log anomaly detection tasks. Representative
learned patterns. Typical training objectives include next-event DeepAD techniques can be categorized into the following three
prediction and masked event modeling. groups.
 1) Next Event Prediction-Based Methods: DeepLog [20] in- 1) Representation-Based One-Class Models: DeepSVDD
troduced a universal DL framework. It first employs a log [13] extends the classical Support Vector Data Description
parser [21] to extract log keys from unstructured logs, which are (SVDD) [25] framework by training a neural network to map
then treated as events. These events are formed into chronologi- normal samples into a compact hypersphere in latent space.
cal sequences, and an LSTM network is trained to model normal Anomalies are identified by their deviation from this center.
event sequences by predicting the next log event. Anomalies However, the model depends on high-quality feature represenare flagged when the actual log event deviates significantly tations and does not capture temporal dependencies, which are
from the LSTM’s prediction. Building on this framework, Meng crucial in sequential data like system logs.
et al. [17] proposed LogAnomaly, which enhances semantic 2) Transformation-Based Self-Supervised Methods:
representation through template2vec and jointly models both Transformation-based self-supervised methods offer an alsequential dependencies and statistical patterns in event occur- ternative perspective on learning discriminative representations
rences, enabling more comprehensive anomaly detection. While without labeled anomalies. GOAD [26] applies random
effective in capturing sequential regularities, a key limitation of affine transformations and trains models to classify them,
these event prediction-based methods lies in their inherent focus enabling unsupervised detection of out-of-distribution samples.
on forecasting, which can make it challenging to identify subtle NeuTraL [27] jointly learns transformations and representations
or contextual anomalies embedded within an event sequence, as to better distinguish normal and anomalous instances. These
opposed to those occurring as unexpected next events. Fig. 2 pro- methods are robust and flexible but assume spatial structure or
vides an example of a contextual anomaly that escapes detection visual patterns in the data, which may not transfer effectively to
under the next-event prediction paradigm. text-based log sequences.
14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE I
 COMPARISON BETWEEN LOGDEEP AND DEEPAD METHODS

 TABLE II
 A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF TECHNIQUES AND LIMITATIONS IN UNSUPERVISED ANOMALY DETECTION METHODS

 3) Forest-Based Ensemble Methods: Forest-based approa- and contextual structural properties of log data. A key research
ches such as DIF [14] enhance the traditional Isolation Forest gap remains in developing models that simultaneously capture
(IF) [28] by integrating random deep representation learning and contextual dependencies and support direct anomaly detection.
downstream scoring mechanisms. DIF demonstrates superior Our work addresses this gap by proposing a discriminative,
performance on high-dimensional and non-linearly separable context-aware anomaly detection model that directly identifies
data and maintains scalability. However, it does not model anomalies within log event sequences, without relying on auxtemporal or semantic dependencies in log sequences. iliary prediction tasks. This approach enhances generalization
 Although DeepAD models are not designed specifically while retaining the advantages of log-specific structural modelfor log data, some of their core ideas have been adopted in ing. Table II presents a comparative overview of representative
LogDeep approaches [18], [19]. For instance, LogBERT inte- methods, highlighting their key technical characteristics and
grates a hypersphere volume minimization objective inspired by inherent limitations.
DeepSVDD [13], adapting it to a self-supervised learning setting
for modeling normal log sequences. However, the DeepAD III. PROPOSED LOG ANOMALY DETECTION FRAMEWORK
methods generally lack the ability to exploit the contextual
dependencies inherent in log data, which may lead to suboptimal Given an event sequence x = (k1 , k2 , . . ., kn ) extracted from
performance in log-specific scenarios. system logs, the goal of the log anomaly detection task is to
 obtain a model g that can identify whether the event sequence x is
C. Summary and Research Gaps an anomalous sample. Each event sequence x is associated with
 a ground-truth label y ∈ {0, 1}, where 0 denotes an anomaly
 Table I presents a comprehensive comparison between the and 1 denotes a normal case. The model g aims to predict the
LogDeep and the DeepAD methods. LogDeep methods ben- label ŷ:
efit from tight coupling with log semantics but suffer from
over-reliance on preprocessing and indirect training objectives. ŷ = g(x), (1)
DeepAD methods offer flexible and theoretically grounded
alternatives, but they often lack integration with the temporal where ŷ ∈ {0, 1} is the predicted label.
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 15

 In the case of log data, the structured and procedural nature
 of system logs enables a cost-effective strategy for synthesizing
 surrogate anomaly samples. Normal log sequences are typically
 generated through a series of well-defined and repeatable operational routines executed by system programs. When extraneous
 noise events are injected into these sequences, they interrupt the
 expected control flow, and the resulting deviations can simulate abnormal behavior. Although such synthetic disturbances
 do not exactly replicate real anomalies, they provide effective
 negative training samples for discriminative models. By learning
 to distinguish these noise-injected sequences from normal ones,
 the models are able to identify boundaries between normal and
 abnormal patterns. This approach allows the model to generalize to subtle deviations, even when real anomaly labels are
 unavailable.
 To formalize this idea within a principled learning framework,
Fig. 3. Proposed anomaly detection model pipeline.
 we draw inspiration from Noise-Contrastive Estimation [33] and
 propose the Noise-Contrastive Learning (NCL) method for log
 anomaly detection. In the NCL framework, three distinct distributions are considered. The first, denoted by pr (x), represents
 the distribution of normal data. The second distribution, pa (x),
 corresponds to genuine anomalous data. The third, q(x), is a
 noise distribution introduced to provide negative samples for
 contrastive learning. Unlike true anomalies, which are rare and
 often ill-defined, the noise distribution is artificially constructed
 to supply negative samples in place of real anomalies. These
 noise samples, combined with normal samples, are used to train
 the anomaly detection classifier to establish a discriminative
 decision boundary. To determine whether a given sample x is a
 or non-normal, a discriminator gθ is introduced.
 The objective of the NCL framework is to optimize the
 parameter θ by training the discriminator gθ to distinguish
Fig. 4. Noise-contrastive learning framework.
 between normal and non-normal samples. Here, yn ∈ {1, 0}
 represents whether a sample x is a normal or noise sample.
 The posterior probability that sample x comes from the normal
 To detect anomalies in event sequences, we propose a log
 data distribution is:
anomaly detection framework centered on two key ideas: direct anomaly detection training and the modeling of contex- p(yn = 1 | x) = gθ (x). (2)
tual dependencies. First, we introduce the NCL method, which
formulates anomaly detection as a binary classification task In contrast, the posterior probability that sample x comes from
by constructing synthetic noise samples as negative examples, the noise distribution is: p(yn = 0|x) = 1 − p(yn = 1|x).
removing the need for auxiliary prediction objectives. Then, to Sampling I samples, x1 , x2 , . . ., xI , from the normal distriimprove the model’s ability to capture inter-event relationships bution pr (x), assigning their labels as 1. Then sampling KI
and contextual dependencies, we propose STrees, a decision samples, x1 , x2 , . . ., xKI , from the noise distribution q(x),
tree-based ensemble model, together with a novel input feature assigning their labels as 0. The number of noise samples is K
termed pattern feature. These components together enable ef- times the number of normal samples. The objective of NCL is
fective learning of discriminative boundaries in feature space. to distinguish between normal and noise samples, which is a
The overall architecture of our proposed solution is illustrated binary classification problem. The loss function of NCL is:
  I
in Fig. 3. 1 
 L(θ) = − log p(yn = 1 | xi )
 I(K + 1) i=1
A. Noise-Contrastive Learning
 KI
 
 Anomaly detection is inherently challenging due to the rarity 
 
and diversity of anomalies, which makes them difficult to define + log p(yn = 0 | xi ) . (3)
 i=1
and collect. This challenge is particularly pronounced in log
event anomaly detection, where labeled anomalous sequences The generation of noise samples is shown in Algorithm 1,
are scarce and often ill-defined. As a result, most models are which aims to provide negative samples for NCL training. The
trained exclusively on normal samples. function random_noise(x,e) randomly selects e events from x
16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 1: Generation of Noise Sample Dataset.
 1: Input: Normal sequence dataset
 Dnormal = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 , the number of noise
 events e
 2: Initialize noise dataset Dnoise to ∅
 3: for each x in Dnormal do
 4: for k = 1 to K do
 5: xnoise = random_noise(x, e)
 6: Dnoise = Dnoise ∪ {xnoise }
 7: end for
 8: end for Fig. 5. Tight (left) and loose (right) decision boundaries of the anomaly
 9: Output: Noise dataset Dnoise detection classifier trained by NCL.

 may reduce false alarms, but it might also lower the model
and replaces them with new events drawn from the entire event
 sensitivity to less obvious anomalies. The effect of different
vocabulary of the logs. The parameter e, representing the number
 numbers of noise events on the decision boundary is shown in
of events replaced, is a key hyperparameter that controls the
 Fig. 5.
similarity between noise samples and normal samples. This
 To summarize, the parameter e affects the model’s sensitivity
similarity influences the tightness of the decision boundary
 to anomalies by shaping the decision boundary. Smaller values
learned by the anomaly detection classifier.
 of e improve detection of subtle anomalies but may increase
 After incorporating noise data as negative samples, we confalse alarms, while larger values reduce false alarms at the risk
struct a dataset by combining them with normal event sequences.
 of missing less obvious anomalies. Thus, tuning e provides a
This dataset is then used to train an anomaly detection classifier,
 practical way to balance false positives and false negatives. The
optimized using the binary cross-entropy loss defined in (3).
 value of e is determined through experimental evaluation.
This allows the model to directly determine whether an event
sequence is normal or anomalous. The complete NCL training
process is shown in Fig. 4. B. STrees: An Ensemble Model Based on Decision Trees
 During NCL training, the anomaly detection classifier is We propose STrees, a fully tree-based ensemble model intrained on normal samples labeled as positive and synthesized spired by the Gradient Boosting Decision Tree (GBDT) +
noise samples labeled as negative, without access to real anoma- Logistic Regression (LR) framework [34], which effectively
lous data. The goal of NCL is to drive the classifier to learn captures feature interactions and supports large-scale classia decision boundary that effectively separates normal patterns fication. STrees integrates Feature Representation Decision
from artificially introduced perturbations. Intuitively, this can Trees (FRDT) as a feature extractor and Extremely Randombe understood as learning a boundary in the feature space that ized Trees (ExTree) [35] as the final classifier. By adopting a
tightly “encloses” the region of normal sample distributions, fully tree-based architecture, STrees efficiently leverages CPU
thereby distinguishing normal samples from both the noise computation while capturing inter-event relationships within
samples outside the boundary and unseen real anomalies. The event sequences. Compared to Random Forests [36] and XGuse of random replacement to generate noise samples simulates Boost [37], STrees separates feature representation and classidisturbances in normal sequences. These disturbances force the fication, enabling more robust modeling on high-dimensional,
model to learn and recognize the inherent patterns of normal sparse features with stronger noise tolerance and reduced risk of
sequences, thus forming a well-defined and discriminative clas- overfitting.
sification boundary. To build STrees, we first apply FRDT to transform input
 The number of noise events, e, determines how similar the data into high-dimensional sparse feature representations. These
noise samples are to normal samples. This similarity, in turn, features are then used to train an ExTree classifier. The steps for
affects the tightness of the learned decision boundary. When e training and prediction with STrees are presented in Algorithm 2.
is small, the noise samples differ only slightly from the normal Specifically, lines 5-10 correspond to the feature extraction by
ones. To distinguish between them, the classifier must learn a FRDT, while lines 12-13 represent the training of the ExTree
tighter decision boundary that closely conforms to the distribu- classifier. Lines 15-18 illustrate how the trained STrees model
tion of normal samples. This tighter boundary makes the model is used for prediction on new samples.
more sensitive to subtle deviations, which theoretically improves The FRDT model contains multiple decision trees, and each
the detection of minor anomalies that do not deviate significantly decision tree is similar to a filter in a Convolutional Neural
from normal patterns. When e is large, the noise samples differ Network (CNN). For training the FRDT model, the Light Grasignificantly from the normal ones. The classifier can then learn dient Boosting Machine (LightGBM) algorithm [38] is chosen
a relatively looser decision boundary, which is farther from the as the training algorithm. In the training process, the decision
distribution of normal samples. Such a looser boundary allows tree at iteration t sequentially corrects the mistakes of their
for greater tolerance of variations within normal samples and predecessors by focusing on the residual errors indicated by
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 17

 Algorithm 2: STrees: Training and Prediction. Algorithm 3: Gradient Boosting Decision Tree Algorithm.
 1: Input: Training dataset D = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 1: Input: Training data D = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 , the number
 2: Step 1: Train FRDT Model of boosting rounds T , learning rate η, loss function l,
 3: Train FRDT model using Algorithm 3 regularization parameters λ and γ
 4: Step 2: Feature Transformation Using FRDT 2: Initialize model with a constant value ω:
 Model f0 (x) = arg minω i l(yi , ω)
 5: for each sample xi in the training dataset D do 3: for t = 1 to T do
 6: for each tree Ft in the FRDT model fT do 4: Compute gradients and hessians:
 7: st = get_leaf _index(Ft , xi ) 5: for each xi in D do
 8: end for 6: gti = ∂ŷi l(yi , ft−1 (xi ))
 9: xi = (s1 , s2 , . . . , sn ) 7: hti = ∂ŷ2i l(yi , ft−1 (xi ))
 10: end for 8: end for  
 11: The transformed dataset is D = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 . 9: Set Gt = Ii=1 gti , Ht = Ii=1 hti
 12: Step 3: Train ExTree Model 10: Construct a tree Ft by recursively partitioning the
 13: Use the transformed dataset D to train an ExTree data D to maximize the gain in objective:
 G2 G2 (GL +GR )2
 model. gain = 12 HLL+λ + 12 HRR+λ − 12 H L +HR +λ
 − γ,
 14: Step 4: Prediction 11: Update the model: ft (x) = ft−1 (x) + η · Ft (x)
 15: for each new sample xnew do 12: end for
 16: Transform xnew using the trained FRDT model to get 13: Output: Trained FRDT model fT (x)
 xnew .
 17: Use the trained ExTree model to predict the label of
 xnew .
 normal behavior [17], [18], [20]. Building on this idea, we
 18: end for
 propose a feature engineering method, termed pattern feature,
 19: Output: Trained STrees model FRDT+Extree
 to model contextual dependencies in log event sequences. By
 explicitly indicating localized contextual deviations, pattern
negative gradients. This stepwise refinement aims to reduce features provide a compact and informative representation for
prediction errors in each iteration, thus improving the overall downstream anomaly detection tasks.
fitting ability of the model [39]. The negative gradient for the The pattern feature method produces a binary vector that
i-th sample, xi , in the t-th round is defined as follows: highlights potential anomalies at each position within an event
   sequence by leveraging a trained pattern model. To construct this
 ∂L (yi , f (xi ))) vector, each event in the input sequence is sequentially masked,
 rti = − , (4)
 ∂f (xi ) f (x)=ft−1 (x) and the model is tasked with predicting the masked event based
 on its surrounding context. If the predicted event matches the
where ft−1 (x) is the FRDT model after the t − 1 th round of
 original event, the corresponding feature value is assigned 1,
the iteration. The training process of the FRDT is presented in
 indicating consistency with the learned normal behavior. Con-
Algorithm 3. The sum of the gradients and hessians of the left
 versely, if the prediction fails to match the actual event, the
subtree and the right subtree is GL , GR , HL , and HR .
 feature value is set to 0, suggesting a potential anomaly. Once
 In the second stage of the STrees model, we employ Exall events have been processed, the resulting binary values are
Tree [35] as the final classifier. The first-stage model FRDT
 assembled in their original sequence order to form the final
outputs the indices of the leaf nodes into which each sample
 pattern feature vector. The generation process of the pattern
falls across the ensemble of base decision trees. These infeature is illustrated in Fig. 6, and the training procedure for
dices form a sparse and high-dimensional feature representathe pattern model is described in Algorithm 4.
tion. Previous research has demonstrated that ExTree is suited
 The symbol I(•) is the indicator function, if • is true then
for high-dimensional data, offering both strong predictive perthe result is 1, otherwise 0. The function mask(x, j) creates a
formance and computational efficiency [40]. Unlike standard
 vector by masking j-th event of the sequence x. Lines 3-7 of the
decision trees, ExTree does not seek the optimal split threshold
 algorithm describe the preparation of the training dataset for the
for each feature. Instead, it randomly selects thresholds for
 pattern model fm , which is an STree model. In line 2, the duplievaluation. This approach significantly reduces computational
 cate sequence samples are removed from the dataset. It allows
cost due to its inherent randomness and acts as an effective
 the pattern model to focus on learning sequence patterns during
form of regularization. It substantially lowers model variance
 training without being overly influenced by sample distribution.
and mitigates overfitting, particularly in the context of complex
 In line 5, the masked sequence mask(x, j) is incorporated as a
and nonlinearly separable datasets.
 feature and the event kj as a label, both of which are appended to
 the dataset D designated for the training of the pattern model.
C. Pattern Feature and Fusion Feature
 Lines 10-15 delineate the process of generating pattern features
 Previous studies have shown that anomalies can be effectively for all samples within the dataset. For each sample, a pattern
detected by identifying deviations from modeled patterns of feature vector z = (z1 , z2 , . . . , zn ) is generated.
18 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 Algorithm 5: Log Anomaly Detection Model Training.
 1: Input: Training normal sequence dataset
 Dnormal = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 , sample size J ≤ I, number
 of noise events e, and ratio K of noise samples to
 normal samples
 2: Train the pattern model fm using Dnormal and
 Algorithm 4
 3: Randomly choose J samples from Dnormal to
 
 construct a subset Dnormal for training the detection
 model.
 4: Generate KI noise samples to form Dnoise from
 
 Dnormal using Algorithm 1 with e noise events
 
 5: Merge Dnormal (as positive samples) and Dnoise (as
 negative samples) to form the training dataset Dtrain
 6: Generate pattern feature dataset Rtrain based on
Fig. 6. Generation of the pattern feature based on masked event prediction. Dtrain using fm and Algorithm 4
 7: Concatenate sequence features Dtrain and pattern
 features Rtrain to form the fusion feature dataset
 Algorithm 4: Pattern Model and Pattern Feature. 
 Dtrain :
 1: Input: Training sequence dataset D = {(xi , yi )}Ii=1 , 
 the length of event sequence n Dtrain = Dtrain ⊕ Rtrain
 2: Let D = ∅, Du = remove_duplicate(D) 8: 
 Train the log anomaly detection model gθ on Dtrain
 3: for x in Du do using STrees and the NCL loss defined in (3)
 4: for j = 1, 2, . . . , n do 9: Output: Trained log anomaly detection model gθ
 5: D = D ∪ (mask(x, j), kj )
 6: end for
 7: end for
 within normal sequences and help the classifier identify devi-
 8: Train pattern model fm using mask dataset D
 ations more effectively. These features are concatenated with
 9: R=∅
 the original event sequence features to form the fusion feature,
 10: for x in D do
 as defined in (5). The fusion feature serves as the input to the
 11: for j = 1, 2, . . . , n do
 STrees classifier, which is trained by the NCL method to learn
 12: zj = I(fm (mask(x, j)) == kj )
 a discriminative decision boundary. The complete training pro-
 13: end for
 cedure of the proposed log anomaly detection model is outlined
 14: R = R ∪ (z1 , z2 , . . . , zn )
 in Algorithm 5.
 15: end for
 16: Output: Pattern feature dataset R, trained pattern
 model fm IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
 A. Experimental Settings
 In the experiments, we used four real-world system log
 Integrating pattern features with original sequence features
 datasets: HDFS [41], BGL [42], OpenStack [20], [43], and
allows the anomaly detection model to retain complementary
 Hadoop [44]. The details for each dataset are as follows.
information from both sources, enabling it to learn more com-
 HDFS: The dataset was generated by executing Hadoopprehensive representations and improve its ability to distinguish
 based map-reduce tasks across over 200 nodes on Amazon’s
between normal and anomalous samples. This combined feature
 EC2 platform, with labeling conducted by experts in the Hadoop
is referred to as the fusion feature, as described in (5),
 domain. Out of a total of 111,979,954 log entries compiled,
 xf uze = x ⊕ z, (5) approximately 2.9% were classified as anomaly samples, encompassing incidents like “write exceptions” [41].
where ⊕ denotes vector concatenation. BGL: The BGL dataset comprised 4,747,963 logs. Every log
 within the BGL dataset has been manually categorized as either
 anomalous or normal, with 348,460 logs identified as anoma-
D. Log Anomaly Detection Model lous. This dataset was produced by the Blue Gene/L supercom-
 To construct the anomaly detection model, we leverage both puter, which featured 128,000 processors and was situated at the
the pattern feature and the NCL method. Noise samples are Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) [42].
generated following Algorithm 1, where normal sequences are OpenStack: An OpenStack experiment, utilizing the Mitaka
labeled as 1 and noise sequences as 0. Pattern feature vectors are version, was conducted on CloudLab, comprising one control
generated using Algorithm 4, which mark potential anomalies node, one network node, and eight compute nodes. From a
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 19

 TABLE III anomaly-class recall are as follows:
 EVENT SEQUENCE STATISTICS FOR SYSTEM LOG DATASETS
 TP
 Normal-class recall = , (6)
 TP + FN
 TN
 Anomaly-class recall = , (7)
 TN + FP
 where:
 r True Positive (TP) is the number of normal samples correctly classified as normal (positive class);
 r False Negative (FN) is the number of normal samples
total of 1,335,318 log entries gathered, approximately 7% were misclassified as anomaly (negative class);
identified as abnormal. A script was continuously operated to r True Negative (TN) is the number of anomaly samples
perform virtual machine (VM)-related activities, such as cre- correctly classified as anomaly (negative class);
ation and deletion of VMs, stopping and starting, pausing and r False Positive (FP) is the number of anomaly samples
unpausing, as well as suspending and resuming [20], [43]. misclassified as normal (positive class).
 Hadoop: The dataset originated from a 46-core Hadoop cluster on five i7-3770 CPU, 16 GB RAM machines, featuring
 C. Model Comparison on Log Anomaly Detection
logs from WordCount and PageRank applications. It included
scenarios of normal operations and intentional failures like ma- To evaluate the anomaly detection capability of our proposed
chine shutdown, network disconnection, and disk full to simulate model, we compared it with LogDeep and DeepAD methods. All
real-world anomalies [44]. models were evaluated using normal-class and anomaly-class
 We employ the LogParser tool [21], [45] to preprocess the recall as the metrics. In our proposed model, fusion features
raw log data into log event sequences. Specifically, following were used as input features, and the number of synthesized
the same preprocessing pipeline as DeepLog [20], we utilize noise events was set to 2, 2, and 1 for the HDFS, BGL, and
the Drain algorithm [46] to extract log templates and map Hadoop datasets, respectively. The evaluation results are shown
raw textual logs into sequences of discrete event IDs, thereby in Table IV.
forming standardized event sequences. Subsequently, a sliding On the HDFS dataset, our model demonstrates at least a 0.97%
window mechanism is applied to segment the event sequences, improvement in normal-class recall and a 14.48% improvement
with the window size set to 10 [20]. Sequences with lengths in anomaly-class recall compared to LogDeep methods. Among
shorter than 10 are discarded. all DeepAD approaches, the ICL method achieves the highest
 The number of training and testing samples for each log recall for both normal and anomaly classes. However, while ICL
dataset is listed in Table III. Identical event sequences may occur surpasses our model by 5.74% in normal-class recall, it exhibits
in both normal and anomalous samples, potentially leading to a 23.32% lower recall in detecting anomalies.
label inconsistencies that hinder model learning. To address On the BGL dataset, our model achieves a superior perforthis, we retain such sequences from the normal set and remove mance in normal-class recall compared to all LogDeep methods,
their duplicates from the anomalous set, ensuring that each while also exhibiting at least a 5.3% improvement in anomalytraining sequence has a unique and consistent label. During class recall. Although DeepAD methods surpass our model by
model training, only normal samples are used, while the test 3% to 5% in the normal-class recall, its anomaly-class recall is
sets contain both normal and anomalous samples for evaluating at least 45% lower.
anomaly detection performance. On the Hadoop dataset, our method achieves at least 9.29%
 The ratio K of noise samples to normal samples is 1. The higher anomaly-class recall compared to LogDeep methods,
sample size J in Algorithm 5 for training the log anomaly while surpassing all methods except AE-IForest in normal-class
detection model is set to 1000. In STrees, FRDT and Ex- recall. The AE-IForest model has a 6.51% higher normal-class
Tree are implemented using the LightGBM library [38] and recall compared to our model, but it has a 10.79% lower
the ExtraTreesClassifier from the Scikit-learn library [47] in anomaly-class recall. Although the anomaly-class recall of all
Python, respectively. Both models use 100 trees. The learning DeepAD methods exceeds 90%, the highest among them is
rate for FRDT is set to 0.01, while for ExTree, the parameter 4.15% higher than our model. However, its highest normal-class
max_f eatures is set to 0.1 and the criterion is set to “entropy”. recall is 53.19%, which is 29.68% lower than our model.
 In the comparative analysis, we observed a significant bias
 in the performance of DeepAD methods when dealing with
B. Evaluation Metrics different datasets. Specifically, the DeepAD methods tend to
 The anomaly detection task is a binary classification problem. prioritize the recognition of the normal class on the HDFS
Due to the significant difference in sample sizes between the and BGL datasets, while it leans towards the anomaly class
normal and anomaly classes, we primarily focus on the recall of on the Hadoop dataset. This preference results in achieving
the normal class and the anomaly class. In this paper, we treat higher detection recall in its preferred class, while the detection
the normal class as the positive class, and the anomaly class performance in the opposite class is significantly poorer. In
as the negative class. The definitions of normal-class recall and contrast, LogDeep methods consistently exhibit a bias towards
20 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

 TABLE IV
 RECALL OF ANOMALY DETECTION MODELS ON HDFS, BGL, AND HADOOP

 TABLE V
 ACCURACY AND F1 SCORE OF 1-STEP PREDICTION

the normal class, leading to higher recall for the normal class predictive experiment focusing on both short-term and long-term
compared to the anomaly class. sequence modeling. Specifically, we evaluated the model using
 When evaluating our method, the results indicate that our two types of next-event prediction tasks: 1-step and N-step
model achieves higher normal-class and anomaly-class recall prediction, which measure its ability to understand event correcompared to the LogDeep methods on the HDFS and BGL lations across varying temporal spans. In this experiment, STrees
datasets. On the Hadoop dataset, our model achieves the highest was used as the prediction model, with only event sequence as
recall in the anomaly class compared to the LogDeep methods. input features. To ensure the model learns only the typical system
Compared to DeepAD methods, the maximum recall gap for our behavior, both training and testing were conducted exclusively
model in the preferred class does not exceed 6%. However, for on normal log sequences across all four datasets: HDFS, BGL,
the non-preferred class, our model achieves a recall that is at OpenStack, and Hadoop. The evaluation results are presented in
least 23% higher. These experimental results demonstrate that Table V and Fig. 7.
our model exhibits superior performance compared to LogDeep For the 1-step prediction task, the STrees model demonstrated
methods on most datasets, and a more balanced detection capa- its ability to accurately predict immediate future events. Across
bility compared to the DeepAD methods. the four datasets, we observe minimal performance differences
 among the models in LogDeep methods. This suggests that
 the model performance on these datasets may have approached
D. Evaluation of STrees for Learning Log Event Sequence an upper bound in terms of prediction accuracy. The STrees
Context model achieves the highest prediction accuracy and F1 scores,
 To evaluate STrees’ ability to capture contextual patterns demonstrating its excellent capability in event prediction tasks.
and event relationships in log event sequences, we designed a Compared to LogDeep methods, the STrees model shows an
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 21

Fig. 7. Accuracy of N-step prediction.

Fig. 8. Recall performance of three features on different datasets.

accuracy improvement ranging from 0.3% to 2.7% across all comparing three different feature configurations: sequence feadatasets. tures (Seq), pattern features (Pattern), and fusion features (Fuze)
 For the N-step prediction task, we evaluated the robustness on the recall performance of the models. The sequence feature
of the STrees model in long-term event predictions, assessing refers to directly using the event sequence as input features.
its performance as the prediction horizon increased. From step The pattern feature is derived from the event sequence based on
1 to step 5, the accuracy of the STrees model decreases by Algorithm 4. The fusion feature is obtained by concatenating
24.4%, 28.3%, and 23.7% on the HDFS, BGL, and Hadoop the event sequence and pattern features, as defined in (5). The
datasets, respectively. This decline is expected, as errors in the number of noise events e is set to 1. The experimental results
prefix of the generated event sequence may propagate and cause are presented in Fig. 8.
subsequent predictions to deviate from the true distribution. The experiment shows that sequence features excel in detect-
Among the compared models, STrees consistently achieves the ing normal samples, while pattern features are more effective for
highest prediction accuracy across all steps. As the prediction anomalous samples. For example, on the BGL dataset, pattern
step increases, the accuracy gap between models also gradually features show a decrease of 23.7% in normal-class recall comwidens. These experimental results demonstrate that the long- pared to sequence features. On the Hadoop dataset, sequence
term prediction ability of the models significantly decreases features have a 56.9% lower normal-class recall compared to patwith an increase in the number of predicted event steps, and tern features. Despite achieving high recall for specific classes,
the performance differences between the models also slightly i.e., normal or anomaly class, both sequence features and pattern
increase accordingly. features perform poorly in identifying the opposite class.
 Overall, the results from both short-term and long-term pre- Fusion features effectively alleviate the tendency of sequence
diction tasks demonstrate STrees’ strong ability to capture features and pattern features to lean towards a specific class
contextual dependencies and event relationships in log event in anomaly detection tasks. Experimental results on the HDFS
sequences, leading to superior predictive performance across dataset demonstrate that the normal-class recall of the fusion
various scenarios. feature is slightly lower than that of the sequence feature by
 4.3%, but it achieves the highest anomaly-class recall. On the
 BGL dataset, fusion features outperform single features not only
E. Assessing the Impact of the Pattern Feature on Model in the normal class but also in the anomaly class, demonstrating
Recall Performance their superior overall performance. On the Hadoop dataset, the
 To evaluate the impact of pattern features on the perfor- normal-class recall of fusion features is 3.3% lower than using
mance of anomaly detection models, we conducted experiments sequence features, and it is 6.6% higher than that of pattern
22 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

Fig. 9. Impact of the number of noise events on recall performance across different datasets.

features. In the anomaly class, it is 55.3% higher than sequence TABLE VI
 COMPARISON OF INFERENCE TIME ON 500,000 LOG SEQUENCES
features, and only 1.6% lower than pattern features.
 These experimental results indicate that pattern features effectively enhance the model’s ability to identify anomaly class
samples. However, pattern features may also degrade the performance on normal-class samples. In contrast, fusion features
mitigate the tendency of sequence features and pattern features
to lean towards a specific class in anomaly detection tasks
by integrating sequence and pattern features. Fusion features
not only improve the model’s ability to identify anomaly class Specifically, smaller e leads to higher sensitivity, enabling the
samples but also maintain robust identification performance for detection of subtle anomalies but at the expense of increased
normal class samples. false alarms; conversely, larger e leads to lower sensitivity, reducing false alarms while potentially missing milder anomalies.

F. Assessing the Impact of Noise Events on Model Recall
 G. Computational Efficiency Evaluation
Performance
 To assess the computational cost during inference, we mea-
 We explored the impact of varying the number of noise events
 sured the time required for various models to perform predictions
e on the anomaly detection model performance. The experiment
 on a large, representative test set. The test set consisted of
utilized sequence features, pattern features, and fusion features.
 500,000 pre-processed log sequences. All experiments were
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 9.
 conducted on a server equipped with a 64-core Intel(R) Xeon(R)
 We observe that increasing the number of noise events leads to
 Gold 6242 CPU. For each model, we recorded the total time
a gradual decrease in anomaly-class recall and a corresponding
 taken to process the entire data and computed the average inferincrease in normal-class recall across all three feature types.
 ence time per log sequence. We focus on inference efficiency
When the number of noise events is small and noisy samrather than training cost, as model inference directly affects
ples closely resemble normal samples, the anomaly detection
 system throughput during deployment, while training is perclassifier requires greater discriminative capacity to distinguish
 formed offline and has limited impact on runtime performance.
between them, resulting in a tighter decision boundary. Conse-
 This comparison includes our proposed STrees model alongside
quently, the model becomes highly sensitive to slight deviations
 DeepLog, LogBERT, and LogAnomaly. The inference time
from the normal class, which improves its ability to detect
 results are shown in Table VI.
anomalies but also increases the risk of misclassifying borderline
 STrees is at least 18.3% faster than DeepLog and LogBERT.
normal instances. This results in a relatively higher anomaly-
 It achieves the lowest total processing time on 500,000 samples,
class recall and a lower normal-class recall. As the number
 resulting in the fastest average inference time per sample. These
of noise events increases, the separation between noisy and
 results highlight the superior computational efficiency of STrees
normal samples becomes more distinct, enabling the anomaly
 during CPU-based inference.
detection classifier to adopt a looser decision boundary. This
looser decision boundary improves the recall for the normal class
 V. CONCLUSION
while reducing the recall for the anomaly class.
 Overall, the number of noise events functions as a sensitivity In this paper, we propose the NCL method for log anomaly
parameter that influences the model’s preference toward de- detection. Unlike previous approaches that rely on event predictecting either subtle or severe anomalies. This parameter also tion as an intermediate training task, NCL directly determines
affects the trade-off between false positives and false negatives. whether a log event sequence is anomalous. This design avoids
LUO et al.: SYSTEM LOG ANOMALY DETECTION WITH NOISE-CONTRASTIVE LEARNING AND PATTERN FEATURE 23

the objective mismatch introduced by the auxiliary prediction [11] X. Ma and W. Shi, “AESMOTE: Adversarial reinforcement learning with
task. We also introduce the STrees model and the pattern feature, SMOTE for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 8, no. 2,
 pp. 943–956, Apr.–Jun. 2021.
both of which effectively model contextual dependencies within [12] J. Qi et al., “LogEncoder: Log-based contrastive representation learning
log event sequences. Specifically, the pattern feature highlights for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2,
potentially anomalous events, which helps the model better pp. 1378–1391, Jun. 2023.
 [13] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
identify anomaly-class samples. Experimental results show that Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
our approach outperforms LogDeep methods in most com- [14] H. Xu, G. Pang, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “Deep isolation forest for
parisons while maintaining a more balanced recall compared anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 35, no. 12,
 pp. 12591–12604, Dec. 2023.
to DeepAD methods. These findings suggest that the model [15] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection with deep learncan establish more robust decision boundaries for anomaly ing: How far are we?,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 2022,
detection. pp. 1356–1367.
 [16] T. Van Ede et al., “DEEPCASE: Semi-supervised contextual analysis
 In future work, we aim to enhance STrees along two techni- of security events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy (SP), 2022,
cal directions. First, we will investigate knowledge distillation pp. 522–539.
to compress the ensemble into a compact student model that [17] W. Meng et al., “Loganomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
 quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
maintains accuracy while significantly reducing inference costs. Intell., 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
Second, we plan to apply ensemble pruning to eliminate redun- [18] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via
dant components, thereby improving computational efficiency BERT,” in Proc. 2021 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8.
 [19] Y. Lee, J. Kim, and P. Kang, “LanoBERT: System log anomaly detection
and reducing memory usage. Furthermore, to extend our model based on BERT masked language model,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 146,
to longer event sequences, we will explore dimensionality reduc- 2023, Art. no. 110689.
tion techniques such as principal component analysis and feature [20] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly detection
 and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM
selection methods. While these techniques are promising for SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017, pp. 1285–1298.
improving scalability, effectively representing long sequences [21] P. He, J. Zhu, S. He, J. Li, and M. R. Lyu, “An evaluation study on log
requires deeper analysis to capture underlying patterns and parsing and its use in log mining,” in Proc. 46th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int.
 Conf. Dependable Syst. Netw., 2016, pp. 654–661.
event dependencies. These efforts are expected to improve the [22] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf.
scalability of our model for large-scale log anomaly detection Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010.
without compromising performance. [23] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 conf. North Amer. chapter assoc. computat. linguistics: human language
 technologies, vol. 1, pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
 REFERENCES [24] X. Zhang et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on unstable log
 data,” in Proc. 27th ACM Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp.
 [1] Y. Liu, Y. Gu, X. Shen, Q. Liao, and Q. Yu, “MSCA: An unsupervised Found. Softw. Eng., 2019, pp. 807–817.
 anomaly detection system for network security in backbone network,” [25] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn.,
 IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 223–238, Jan./Feb. 2023. vol. 54, pp. 45–66, 2004.
 [2] S. Xu, Y. Qian, and R. Q. Hu, “Data-driven edge intelligence for robust [26] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection for
 network anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 3, general data,” 8th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, ICLR 2020, 2020.
 pp. 1481–1492, Jul.–Sep. 2020. [27] C. Qiu, T. Pfrommer, M. Kloft, S. Mandt, and M. Rudolph, “Neural
 [3] C.-J. Chew, W.-B. Lee, T.-H. Chen, I.-C. Lin, and J.-S. Lee, “Log preser- transformation learning for deep anomaly detection beyond images,” in
 vation in custody dual blockchain with energy regime and obfuscation Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, pp. 8703–8714.
 shuffle,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3495–3511, [28] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th IEEE
 Jul./Aug. 2024. Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 [4] Z. Lian, P. Shi, C. P. Lim, I. J. Rudas, and R. K. Agarwal, “Hybrid [29] T. Shenkar and L. Wolf, “Anomaly detection for tabular data with internal
 stealthy attacks on stochastic event-based remote estimation under packet contrastive learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 dropouts,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 5829–5838, 2022.
 Nov./Dec. 2024. [30] B. Liu, D. Wang, K. Lin, P.-N. Tan, and J. Zhou, “RCA: A deep collabo-
 [5] Z. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “Event-based fault detection rative autoencoder approach for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Conf. Artif.
 for networked switched systems subject to hybrid attacks,” IEEE Trans. Intell., NIH Public Access, 2021, pp. 1505–1511.
 Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2937–2950, May/Jun. 2024. [31] H. Wang, G. Pang, C. Shen, and C. Ma, “Unsupervised representation
 [6] Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, L. Zou, H. Dong, and X. Yi, “Neural-network-based learning by predicting random distances,” IJCAI Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
 secure state estimation under energy-constrained denial-of-service attacks: Intell., pp. 2950–2956, 2019, arXiv:1912.12186.
 An encoding-decoding scheme,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, [32] G. Pang, L. Cao, L. Chen, and H. Liu, “Learning representations of
 no. 4, pp. 2002–2015, Jul./Aug. 2023. ultrahigh-dimensional data for random distance-based outlier detection,”
 [7] S. Gao, H. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Huang, and H. Yan, “Data-driven injec- in Proc. 24th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2018,
 tion attack strategy for linear cyber-physical systems: An input-output pp. 2041–2050.
 data-based approach,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, no. 6, [33] M. Gutmann and A. Hyvärinen, “Noise-contrastive estimation: A new
 pp. 4082–4095, Nov./Dec. 2023. estimation principle for unnormalized statistical models,” in Proc. 13th
 [8] W. Zhan, Z. Miao, Y. Chen, Z.-G. Wu, and Y. Wang, “Event-triggered Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist., 2010, pp. 297–304.
 finite-time formation control for networked nonholonomic mobile robots [34] X. He et al., “Practical lessons from predicting clicks on ads at Facebook,”
 under denial-of-service attacks,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 10, in Proc. 8th Int. Workshop Data Mining Online Advertising, 2014, pp. 1–9.
 no. 6, pp. 3754–3766, Nov./Dec. 2023. [35] P. Geurts, D. Ernst, and L. Wehenkel, “Extremely randomized trees,”
 [9] C. Almodovar, F. Sabrina, S. Karimi, and S. Azad, “LogFiT: Log anomaly Mach. Learn., vol. 63, pp. 3–42, 2006.
 detection using fine-tuned language models,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service [36] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Mach. Learn., vol. 45, pp. 5–32, 2001.
 Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1715–1723, Apr. 2024. [37] T. Chen and C. Guestrin, “XGBoost: A scalable tree boosting system,” in
[10] Z. Wu, H. Li, Y. Qian, Y. Hua, and H. Gan, “Poison-resilient anomaly Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2016,
 detection: Mitigating poisoning attacks in semi-supervised encrypted pp. 785–794.
 traffic anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 5, [38] G. Ke et al., “LightGBM: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision
 pp. 4744–4757, Sep./Oct. 2024. tree,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 3149–3157.
24 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 13, 2026

[39] J. H. Friedman, “Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting Genke Yang received the B.S. degree in mathematics
 machine,” Ann. Statist., vol. 29, pp. 1189–1232, 2001. from Shanxi University, Taiyuan, China, in 1984,
[40] A. Dempster, D. F. Schmidt, and G. I. Webb, “QUANT: A minimalist in- the M.S. degree in mathematics from Xinan Normal
 terval method for time series classification,” Data Mining Knowl. Discov., University, China, in 1987, and the Ph.D. degree in
 vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 2377–2402, 2024. systems engineering from Xi’an Jiaotong University,
[41] W. Xu, L. Huang, A. Fox, D. Patterson, and M. I. Jordan, “Detecting large- Xi’an, China, in 1998. He is currently a Full Professor
 scale system problems by mining console logs,” in Proc. ACM SIGOPS with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao
 22nd Symp. Operating Syst. Princ., 2009, pp. 117–132. Tong University, Shanghai, China. His research in-
[42] A. Oliner and J. Stearley, “What supercomputers say: A study of five terests include industrial control system security and
 system logs,” in Proc. 37th Annu. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Dependable Syst. industrial process control.
 Netw., 2007, pp. 575–584.
[43] S. He, J. Zhu, P. He, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection of system
 log datasets towards automated log analytics,” 2023 IEEE 34th Int. Symp.
 Softw. Rel. Eng. (ISSRE), 2020, pp. 355–366.
[44] Q. Lin, H. Zhang, J.-G. Lou, Y. Zhang, and X. Chen, “Log clustering based
 problem identification for online service systems,” in Proc. 38th Int. Conf.
 Softw. Eng. Companion, 2016, pp. 102–111.
[45] J. Zhu et al., “Tools and benchmarks for automated log parsing,” in Jian Chu received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. de-
 Proc. IEEE/ACM 41st Int. Conf. Softw. Eng.: Softw. Eng. Pract., 2019, grees from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China,
 pp. 121–130. in 1982, 1984, and 1989, respectively, and the
[46] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing Ph.D. degree from Joint Education Program, Zheapproach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2017, jiang University, Hangzhou, China, and Kyoto Unipp. 33–40. versity, Kyoto, Japan. He is currently a Full Professor
[47] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-Learn: Machine learning in python,” J. Mach. with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao
 Learn. Res., vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011. Tong University, Shanghai, China. His research inter-
[48] Y. Shen, E. Mariconti, P. A. Vervier, and G. Stringhini, “Tiresias: Predicting ests include cyber system control, advanced process
 security events through deep learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. control, and industrial control system security.
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 592–605.
[49] A. Farzad and T. A. Gulliver, “Unsupervised log message anomaly detection,” ICT Exp., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 229–237, 2020.

 Pengcheng Luo received the B.S. degree in mechanical engineering and automation from the East China Boon-Hee Soong (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, the B.Eng. (with Hons.) degree in electrical and elec-
 China, in 2018, the M.S. degree in mechanical engi- tronic engineering from the University of Auckland,
 neering from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in Auckland, New Zealand. in 1984, and the Ph.D.
 2021. Since 2022, he has been working toward Ph.D. degree in telecommunication from the University
 degree with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia, in 1990.
 China. His research interests include modelling and From 1999 to 2000, he was a Visiting Research Fellow
 analyzing of network communication with machine with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Enlearning techniques. gineering, Imperial College, London, U.K., under the
 Commonwealth Fellowship Award. He is currently
 an Associate Professor with the School of Electrical
 and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

 Dengke Deng received the B.S. degree from Harbin
 Engineering University, Harbin, China, in 2022. He
 is currently working toward the M.S. degree with
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. His Chau Yuen (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng. and
 research interests include control system security and Ph.D. degrees from Nanyang Technological Univernatural language processing. sity, Singapore, in 2000 and 2004, respectively. In
 2005, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Lucent
 Technologies Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ,
 USA. From 2006 to 2010, he was with the Institute
 for Infocomm Research, Singapore. From 2010 to
 2023, he was with the Engineering Product Development Pillar, Singapore University of Technology
 Mingfeng Xie received the B.S. degree in electronic and Design. Since 2023, he has been with the School
 information engineering from the Nanjing Univer- of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang
 sity of Information Science and Technology, Nan- Technological University, as an Associate Professor. He is currently a Distinjing, China, in 2019. He is currently working to- guished Lecturer of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society, a top 2% Scientist
 ward the Ph.D. degree with the College of Electronic by Stanford University.
 and Information Engineering, Nanjing University of
 Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing. His research
 interests include near-field communications, cell-free
 massive MIMO, and performance analysis in wireless
 communications.