IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026 4433

 Take Attention as Gate: An Associative Recurrent
 Network-Based Intrusion Detection Method for
 Industrial Control Network
 Ziyi Liu , Dengpan Ye , Member, IEEE, Changsong Yang , Yong Ding, Yueling Liu, Long Tang ,
 and Chuanxi Chen

 Abstract—The Industrial Control Network (ICN), which is I. I NTRODUCTION
characterized by real-time responsiveness and reliability, plays
a key role in increasing production speed, ensuring efficient processing, and managing industrial processes. Despite tremendous
advantages, ICN inevitably struggles with some challenges, such
 W ITH the rapid development and integration of industrial
 informatization and automation, the Industrial Control
 System (ICS) has been widely applied, connecting numeras malicious user intrusion and hacker attacks. To detect mali- ous industrial infrastructures and devices through Industrial
cious intrusions in ICN, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) have Control Network (ICN) [1]. Generally, ICN is characterized
been deployed. However, network traffic in ICN often exhibits by real-time responsiveness and reliability, which plays a
significant temporal periodicity, and computational resources
are limited on edge nodes and infrastructure gateway devices. key role in production acceleration and production process
These characteristics pose significant challenges to the design and management. Recently, due to the widespread adoption of
performance of IDS. To properly solve these problems, we design 5G wireless networks [2], [3] and artificial intelligence, ICN
a new intrusion detection method for ICN. Specifically, we first has been widely used in natural gas pipeline systems, power
design a novel neural network model called Associative Recurrent transmission systems, industrial power generation systems, etc.
Network (ARN), which can properly handle the relationship
between previous hidden state and current input. Then, we As a result, both governments and enterprises have attached
construct a novel intrusion detection method based on the ARN, growing importance to the security and stability of ICN.
which avoids gating conflicts in traditional Recurrent Neural Despite tremendous advantages, ICN inevitably struggles
Network (RNN), effectively captures the temporal characteristics with some security and technical challenges, such as network
of ICN traffic, and maintains slightly higher computational security protection. In the ICN, there are a large number of disoverhead than GRU, thus demonstrating good adaptability to
industrial control networks. Subsequently, through theoretical tributed industrial infrastructures and devices [4]. However, the
analysis of computational complexity, we demonstrate that the security of ICN physical isolation is broken due to the fusion
proposed method achieves high computational efficiency, compa- and development of information technology [5], thus bringing
rable to mainstream RNN methods and superior to Transformer a series of new security problems. Meanwhile, ICN might be
methods. Finally, we implement a prototype system to evaluate frequently invaded by malicious users and hackers, which not
detection accuracy. Experimental results show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the industrial control only causes damage to ICN but also poses a threat to the entire
systems datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional net- ICS. Therefore, the security protection of ICN is particularly
work dataset (UNSW-NB15), with average accuracies of 98.93%, important. However, most of the traditional network security
95.57%, and 98.27%, respectively. defense methods, such as firewalls and vulnerability scanning,
 Index Terms—Network security, industrial control network, can only achieve passive defense.
intrusion detection, associative recurrent network. To achieve active defense in the ICN, intrusion detection [6] technologies have been widely applied. Intrusion
 detection is a typical active defense technology that aims to
 Received 28 October 2025; revised 28 January 2026 and 30 March 2026; detect network intrusions by analyzing network traffic data,
accepted 24 April 2026. Date of current version 6 May 2026. This research
was supported by New Generation Artificial Intelligence-National Science and such as user behavior data, behavior logs and audit data.
Technology Major Project (2025ZD0123603), the National Natural Science By deploying intrusion detection systems, network security
Foundation of China NSFC (No.62472325 and No.62562021) and the Hubei managers can monitor the entire ICN without affecting the
Provincial Key R&D Program, China (Grant No.2025BAB021). The associate
editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication network performance, thereby providing ICN devices and
was F. Paganelli. (Corresponding author: Dengpan Ye.) systems with real-time security protection. Therefore, intru-
 Ziyi Liu, Dengpan Ye, Long Tang, and Chuanxi Chen are with the Key Lab- sion detection attracts lots of attention, and has produced a
oratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry
of Education, School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan Univer- large number of theoretical and engineering results. Roughly,
sity, Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: ziyi liu@whu.edu.cn; yedp@whu.edu.cn; the existing intrusion detection methods can be divided into
l tang@whu.edu.cn; chencx@whu.edu.cn). three categories: statistics-analysis-based intrusion detection,
 Changsong Yang, Yong Ding, and Yueling Liu are with the Computer
Science and Information Security, Guilin University of Electronic Technol- time-series-based intrusion detection and deep-learning-based
ogy, Guilin 541004, China, and also with Guangxi Engineering Research intrusion detection.
Center of Industrial Internet Security and Blockchain, Guilin University of Although plenty of intrusion detection methods have been
Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China (e-mail: csyang@guet.edu.cn;
stone dingy@guet.edu.cn; ylliu@guet.edu.cn). proposed, there are still some internal deficiencies when they
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2026.3688982 are directly applied to the ICN. Unlike traditional enterprise
 1932-4537 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

network traffic, which typically exhibits diverse characteristics slightly higher than that of GRU, thereby balancing gatingand a wide variety of protocols [7], the traffic generated by conflict mitigation with computational efficiency. Benefiting
ICN exhibits significant differences in communication struc- from these two design aspects, ARN can effectively detect
ture, protocol characteristics, and security constraints. Specif- traffic in resource-constrained ICN environments, providing
ically, ICN communications are typically based on industrial a new solution that combines performance and practicality
protocols such as Modbus, DNP3, and IEC-104, and are char- for ICN intrusion detection. It also offers new insights for
acterized by strong periodicity and clear protocol semantics subsequent ICN intrusion detection research.
[8]. Moreover, ICNs often operate in critical infrastructure
such as electrical networks, transportation, and petrochemicals, A. Contributions
placing higher real-time requirements and stricter computing In this paper, we investigate a fundamental but challenging
resource constraints on intrusion detection security mecha- issue, i.e., how to improve the performance of intrusion
nisms [9]. These differences make it difficult for traditional detection in the ICN. Specifically, we design a novel RNN
intrusion detection methods to be directly applied to the actual model, namely, Associative Recurrent Network (ARN). Then,
ICN environment. In particular, the strong periodicity of ICN we adopt ARN to propose a new intrusion detection method
traffic places higher demands on the temporal learning capabil- for ICN. Therefore, the main contributions of this paper can
ities of the detection model, requiring the model to effectively be summarized as the following three folds.
capture and characterize periodic behavior. However, existing • We design a new recurrent neural network called ARN
intrusion detection methods still face the following limita- for intrusion detection in industrial control networks,
tions: On the one hand, traditional statistics-analysis-based which does not rely on gating units for effective temporal
intrusion detection methods require substantial computational learning. Compared with other types of RNN models,
overhead when handling large-scale data, while time-series- ARN eliminates the conflict risk between gated units
based intrusion detection methods (excluding deep learning and can better characterize the long-term and short-term
methods) mainly focus on temporal dependencies within the dependencies of data.
data and often overlook the integration of other relevant • We design a Single Attention (S-ATT) mechanism to
features for comprehensive analysis. On the other hand, deep retain important historical information in the ARN.
learning-based recurrent neural networks [10] (such as Gated S-ATT uses the attention mechanism to directly learn
Recurrent Unit [11] and Long Short-Term Memory [12]) have the correlation between the previous hidden state and the
demonstrated a certain ability to model temporal structures current input, allowing ARN to abandon the traditional
and have been applied in ICN scenarios. However, when gated unit structure and more reasonably preserve previintegrating previous hidden state with current input, these ous hidden state.
models often suffer from information competition between • We compare the ARN method with mainstream RNN and
gating mechanisms-commonly referred to as gating conflicts- Transformer methods in terms of theoretical computawhich can degrade overall performance [13], [14]. Although tional complexity. The results show that ARN achieves
Transformer models exhibit superior temporal modeling capa- the same time complexity as mainstream RNN methbilities and can capture the periodic patterns inherent in ICN ods while outperforming Transformers. Furthermore, we
traffic, their complex architecture and high computational develop a prototype system and conduct simulations to
overhead have, to some extent, hindered their widespread evaluate its performance. Experimental results demonadoption on resource-constrained edge nodes and gateway strate that our method achieves accuracy of 98.93%,
devices within ICN environments. Therefore, designing an 95.57%, and 98.27% on the ICS-ADD, SWaT, and
intrusion detection approach that balances effective temporal UNSW-NB15 datasets, respectively.
learning capabilities with low computational overhead has
become a critical challenge in the security protection of ICN. B. Organization
 To address the aforementioned challenges, we propose The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section III,
a novel network structure called the Associative Recurrent we provide a detailed introduction to GRU and Single Atten-
Network (ARN). ARN is designed to achieve efficient repre- tion (S-ATT). Subsequently, in Section IV and Section V,
sentation learning of ICN traffic with computational resource we present the structure of ARN and design an ARN-based
overhead comparable to that of the Gated Recurrent Unit intrusion detection method, respectively. Then, in Section VI,
(GRU), thereby enhancing intrusion detection performance in we provide a theoretical computational complexity comparison
ICN. Considering that ICN traffic often exhibits pronounced of the ARN-based intrusion detection method and GRU-based
temporal periodicity, there is usually a strong correlation intrusion detection method. Next, we develop a prototype
between the previous hidden state and the current input, where implementation for our proposed method and present the
the former provides essential cues for determining whether performance evaluation in Section VII. Finally, we provide
the current data instance is anomalous. In our approach, a brief conclusion in Section VIII.
ARN employs a Single Attention (S-ATT) mechanism to learn
the correlation between previous hidden state and current II. R ELATED W ORK
input, avoiding the gating conflicts that may occur in tradi- Generally, existing intrusion detection methods can be
tional recurrent neural networks. Meanwhile, ARN has low roughly summarized into three categories: statistics-analysismodel complexity, and its computational overhead is only based intrusion detection method [15], time-series-based
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4435

intrusion detection method [16] and deep-learning-based intru- methods are limited by noise interference and the selection of
sion detection method [17]. characteristic signals, resulting in detection deviation.
 Ye et al. [29] adopted Hurst parameter estimation to
A. Statistics-Analysis-Based Intrusion Detection Method design a Fractional Fourier Transform (FRFT)-based intrusion
 Wu et al. [18] proposed an information entropy Intrusion detection method. Meanwhile, they developed a prototype
Detection System (IDS) based on improved sliding win- implementation to test the performance. Experimental results
dow strategy. By improving the optimizing conditions of the showed that their proposed method was not affected by nondecision and sliding window strategy, their method could stationary time series in Hurst estimation. Huang et al. [30]
enhance the IDS accuracy. To detect invisible attacks in ICS, simultaneously extracted time-domain and frequency-domain
Hu et al. [19] represented the ordered content in the residual features from the sensor measurement data required for closedby Permutation Entropy (PE). According to certain rules loop control of ICS, and used these features to establish
presented by sensor measurement values Zhou et al. [20] a hidden Markov model to implement intrusion detection.
proposed an industrial information system attack detection Zhang et al. [31] developed a method for predicting dynamic
scheme based on permutation entropy. Liao et al. [21] designed power system intent that combined attribute selection and
a gray-entropy-based IDS, which could analyze and cluster the clustering with a Dynamic Hidden Markov Model (DHMM) to
traffic gray level. Meanwhile, their designed system had higher capture the evolving nature of cyberattack behavior. However,
intrusion detection accuracy for both known and unknown the Fourier-transform-based detection methods are susceptible
traffic attacks. However, the aforementioned intrusion detec- to boundary effects and the hidden Markov transform is limited
tion methods are limited by entropy and relative uncertainty by the dependence on the previous. Therefore, it is difficult to
measures, resulting in exponential time complexity [22]. When achieve accurate industrial network intrusion detection.
there is a lot of noise in industrial network traffic and the traffic In addition, time-series-based (non-deep learning) intrusion
scale is large, they are difficult to detect attack traffic. detection methods typically focus on temporal dependencies
 Liang et al. [23] divided the data weighted distance and in data, while rarely incorporating other data features for
safety factor of each node in the network according to the comprehensive analysis. This limitation significantly restricts
priority threshold of data attribute characteristics, and designed their applicability in intrusion detection.
an ICN intrusion detection method based on multi-feature
data clustering optimization model. Zhang et al. [25] combined traffic Similarity metrics with Density-Based Spatial C. Deep-Learning-Based Intrusion Detection Method
Clustering of Applications with Noise (SDBSCAN) methods Li et al. [32] used a multi-Convolutional Neural Network
to construct a new network intrusion detection framework. (multi-CNN) fusion method to perform intrusion detection
Mittal et al. [24] implemented a new clustering method using on industrial IoT traffic. Abdelaty et al. [33] constructed a
a new variant of the gravitational search algorithm and used deep learning anomaly detection in ICS using a 2-branch
it for detection in the industrial Internet of Things (IoT). Deep Neural Network (DNN). Their method learned the
However, clustering algorithms usually require a lot of com- changes in the behavior of ICS through a few data samples
putational overhead and memory usage overhead when facing and gradient updates, thus effectively improving the accularge-scale data. Therefore, when facing large-scale industrial racy and robustness of intrusion detection. Yang et al. [34]
network data, clustering-algorithm-based intrusion detection combined Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) and Back Propagation
methods are difficult to meet the defense needs of the industry. Neural Network (BPNN) to present a new IDS. In their
 In summary, we can see that statistics-analysis-based intru- proposed method, LM was utilized to optimize the weights
sion detection methods require many mathematical calcula- of BPNN, thus improving accuracy. Sood et al. [35] proposed
tions and analyses, resulting in a heavy computational burden. a two-stage IDS, which could achieve data dimensionality
Meanwhile, while processing high-dimensional and irregular- reduction, and was compatible with the ETSI-NFV standard
ity data, the accuracy of the above methods is insufficient. 5G architecture. Experimental results showed that their method
 has higher accuracy in traffic detection. However, these deep
B. Time-Series-Based Intrusion Detection Method learning methods fail to leverage the temporal sequences of
 Bozdal et al. [26] presented a wavelet-based ingress method network traffic, limiting their ability to detect time-sensitive
for the Controller Area Network (CAN). By analyzing changes attacks.
in network traffic data, their proposed method could precisely Jadidi et al. [36] proposed a two-stage causal anomaly
determine attack patterns. To describe the intrusion attacks, detection method for ICS. It first performed attack detection
Miao et al. [27] studied attack signals in ICS intrusions. using an LSTM-based classifier, and then analyzed causal
Through frequency-domain analysis of network traffic, they relationships among ICS logs to diagnose the potential future
proposed linear and nonlinear attack signal estimators (LASE impact of attacks. Xu et al. [37] utilized GRU, MuLtiand NASE) and analyzed the impact of frequency-domain layer Perceptron (MLP) and softmax layer to design a new
attack signals on LASE performance. Fouladi et al. [28] IDS. To address the curse of dimensionality and the tradeadopted frequency-based discrete wavelet transform and dis- off between low false alarm rate and high detection rate,
crete Fourier transform to design a naive Bayesian classifier, Mushtaq et al. [38] proposed a two-stage detection model, AEwhich could exactly distinguish attack traffic data from nor- LSTM, which first performed feature dimensionality reduction
mal traffic data. However, the above wavelet-based detection using an AutoEncoder (AE) and then conducted classification
4436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF R ELATED R ESEARCH ON I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHODS BASED ON D EEP L EARNING
 AND PARTIALLY N ON -D EEP L EARNING

 TABLE II
 L IST OF I MPORTANT S YMBOL D ESCRIPTIONS . T HE S YMBOLS IN THE TABLE A RE L ISTED IN THE O RDER T HEY A PPEAR IN THE E QUATIONS :
 F IRST F ROM T OP TO B OTTOM IN THE L EFT C OLUMN , T HEN F ROM T OP TO B OTTOM IN THE R IGHT C OLUMN

through an LSTM. Experimental results demonstrated that AE- detection methods, constructed Table I to compare the different
LSTM outperforms AE-BiLSTM and other related methods. methods.
Zhang et al. [39] combined multi-scale periodicity extraction with spatiotemporal Graph Attention Networks (GAT) III. P RELIMINARIES
to address the difficulty of traditional methods in capturing In this section, we introduce some preliminaries for
spatiotemporal correlations and periodicity in system data. developing the new intrusion detection method, including
Ullah [40] developed a Transformer Neural Network (TNN)- GRU and our newly designed S-ATT. The GRU is a type
based intrusion detection system tailored to mitigate the of recurrent neural network that efficiently captures longdetection limitations caused by imbalanced data. However, term dependencies in sequences through gating mechanisms.
most of the RNN-based intrusion detection methods have S-ATT is a single attention mechanism inspired by selfmutual influence between gating units, which makes it dif- attention, which learns the relationship between the previous
ficult to effectively manage the potential connections between hidden state and the current input to construct a supplementary
long-term and short-term dependencies of data, limiting the matrix, thereby enhancing the models ability to retain key
accuracy of intrusion detection. Although Transformer-based information. Moreover, We summarize the important symbols
intrusion detection methods can avoid the problem of gat- used in this paper in Table II.
ing conflicts, their high memory and time overhead during
operation significantly increase the deployment cost in ICS
environments, thereby limiting their practical applicability. A. Gated Recurrent Unit
 In summary, although deep learning-based intrusion detec- Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is an improved model of RNN
tion methods can effectively represent large-scale network that can effectively transmit long-term dependency informatraffic data, there is still an urgent need for a new approach tion. In contrast to Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), which
that can avoid gating conflicts, fully exploit the temporal is equipped with three gate structures, GRU only contains
dependencies of network traffic for representation learning, two gates: the reset gate and the update gate, as illustrated
and maintain memory and computational costs compara- in Figure 1. As a result, GRU requires fewer parameters and
ble to traditional recurrent neural networks (such as GRU), can reduce the risk of overfitting during training. In GRU,
in order to further enhance intrusion detection perfor- the reset gate is utilized to decide the proportion of hidden
mance in ICS environments. To this end, we will conduct state that flows into the current candidate set at the previous.
in-depth research on this issue and propose a new deep- Meanwhile, the update gate has two functions. On the one
learning-based intrusion detection method. We select two hand, it is utilized to control the proportion of the content that
representative methods from statistics-analysis-based intrusion should be discarded at the previous. On the other hand, it can
detection methods, two from time-series-based intrusion detec- also determine the proportion of the content that needs to be
tion methods, and together with deep-learning-based intrusion retained in the current candidate set.
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4437

Fig. 1. The structure of the GRU, where the update gate and reset gate jointly
regulate the preservation and update of hidden states, enabling the model to Fig. 2. The structure of the S-ATT mechanism, which learns the dependency
capture long-term dependencies in sequential data. between the previous hidden state ht−1 and the current input xt to generate
 a supplementary matrix h0t−1 .

 As shown in Figure 1, the related formulas for calculating
GRU are as follows.
 Firstly, Rt and Zt must be initialized according to Formula
(1) and Formula (2) as follows:
 Rt = σ([ht−1 , xt ] · WR ) (1)
 Zt = σ([ht−1 , xt ] · WZ ) (2)
 Secondly, h˜t of GRU is controlled by Rt . Meanwhile, h˜t
can be described by Formula (3) as follows:
 h˜t = tanh(Wh̃ · [xt , Rt × ht−1 ]) (3)
 Finally, GRU updates ht according to Formula (4):
 Fig. 3. The structure of ARN, which utilizes S-ATT to learn dependencies
 ht = Zt × h˜t + (1 − Zt ) × ht−1 (4) between the previous hidden state and the current input, thereby effectively
 capturing the temporal characteristics of the data.
 From the above formulas and Figure 1, we find that the Zt
and the Rt conflict in the retention proportion of the hidden
state in the previous. Specifically, the reset of the current Then, we calculate the correlation between ht−1 and xt ,
hidden state in GRU is provided by the Rt and Zt . The role of and get the corresponding weight matrices ah and ax .
the Rt is to determine the proportion of the previous hidden q1 · k1 q1 · k2
state retained in the current candidate set. However, the Zt ah = √ , ax = √ (8)
can ignore part of the previous hidden state that the Rt has d d
determined to retain. Additionally, the Zt arbitrarily retains ax = sof tmax(ah , ax )
 ah , b
 b (9)
the previous hidden state in the process of resetting the current Finally, we calculate and fuse it into a new supplementary
hidden state. Therefore, there is a certain conflict between the matrix h0t−1 based on the proportion of weights.
Zt and the Rt , making it difficult to effectively manage the
retention relationship between the previous hidden state and h0t−1 = b ax v 2
 ah v 1 + b (10)
the current input.
 IV. A SSOCIATIVE R ECURRENT N ETWORK
B. Single Attention To address the problems of GRU that described in Sec-
 To effectively solve the problem of how to determine the tion III-A, we propose a new RNN method called ARN.
retention relation between the hidden state of the previous and ARN utilizes the S-ATT module to unidirectionally learn
the input of the current, we use the idea of Self-attention [41] the relationship between the previous hidden state and the
to propose a one-way self-attention mechanism solution called current input, thereby constructing a supplementary matrix to
Single Attention (S-ATT). S-ATT can effectively manage the supplement the current input and reset the current hidden state.
retention relationship between the ht−1 and the xt . The The reset current hidden state contains important historical
implementation of the S-ATT module is illustrated in Figure. 2. information unknown to the current input and highlights the
 First, we initialize q n , k n , v n (n= 2) to facilitate subsequent important parts of information in the current input. Therefore,
calculations. ARN can better manage the information retention relationship
 between the previous hidden state and the current input,
 q 1 = W q ht−1 , q 2 = W q xt (5)
 1 k 2 k
 thereby avoiding the gate conflict problem in GRU and
 k = W ht−1 , k = W xt (6) enabling more efficient intrusion detection for ICN traffic. The
 1 v 2 v
 v = W ht−1 , v = W xt (7) overall structure of ARN is illustrated in Figure 3.
4438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 Firstly, we require to initialize xt and ht−1 with W x and
W ht−1 while making xt and ht−1 have the same matrix
dimensions, which is convenient for subsequent correlation
calculation. Then, xt and ht−1 can be initialized as Formula
(11) and Formula (12), respectively.
 xt = W x xt (11)
 ht−1
 ht−1 = W ht−1 (12)
 Secondly, we use cats to concatenate ht−1 and xt together,
and construct the S-ATT input through the activation function
GELU, as shown in Formula (13).
 Fig. 4. The system model. In the ICN, the collected traffic is first preprocessed
 hcat = GELU (cat(ht−1 , xt )) (13) and then fed into the trained ARN intrusion detection model for detection. If
 the traffic is classified as normal, it is allowed to continue flowing within the
 Subsequently, we utilize S-ATT to learn the relationship system; if deemed anomalous, an alert is triggered.
between ht−1 and xt , thus constructing a new supplementary
matrix h0t−1 . The matrix h0t−1 contains part of the important
content in the current input (i.e., the portion of xt that is related B. The Proposed Method
to ht−1 .), and the information in the previous hidden state that
is unknown to the current input, as shown in Formula (14). In this section, we introduce the implementation of ARNh0t−1 = S-ATT(hcat ) (14) based intrusion detection method for ICN in detail.

 Finally, we supplement h0t−1
 to xt to achieve the reset Algorithm 1 ARN-Based Intrusion Detection Method
of ht . The reset ht contains previous hidden state that is
 Require: Raw ICS dataset D, real-time ICS data Xreal , number
unknow in the input xt at the current time and highlight the
 of runs n
important content in the current input, so as to better manage
 Ensure: Detection result S
the retention relationship between previous hidden state and
 Model Training and Evaluation
current input. Then, ht is computed as in (15).
 1: D 0 ← PREPROCESS(D)
 ht = h0t−1 + xt (15) 2: (Xtrain , Xval , Xtest ) ← SPLIT(D 0 )
 3: for i = 1 to n do
 In summary, ARN can effectively learn the highlighted
 4: ARNi ← TRAIN(Xtrain )
important parts of the current content in feature learning by
 5: Ri ← EVALUATE(ARNi , Xval )
constructing a supplementary matrix and fully consider the
 6: end for
impact of the unknown previous hidden state on the current.
 7: ARN ← SELECTBEST({ARNi }n i=1 )
 V. ARN-BASED I NTRUSION D ETECTION M ETHOD 8: R ← EVALUATE(ARN, Xtest )
 Intrusion Detection
 In this section, we utilize ARN to build a new intrusion 0
 9: Xreal ← PREPROCESS(Xreal )
detection method for ICN. 0
 10: S ← ARN(Xreal )
 11: if S is normal then
A. System Model
 12: return pass
 In this paper, we focuses on the development of intrusion 13: else
detection methods for Industrial Control Networks (ICNs). 14: return attack
With the rapid expansion of ICNs, their applications and 15: end if
adoption continue to grow. Notably, ICN network traffic
is characterized by large scale, pronounced periodicity, and
well-defined protocol semantics. Moreover, computational To describe the proposed method more clearly, we first
resources on edge nodes and gateway devices remain limited. define the main symbols and operators used in Algorithm 1.
These characteristics present significant challenges to the Specifically, the training, validation, test, and real-time trafgeneralizability and accuracy of intrusion detection methods. fic datasets are denoted by Xtrain , Xval , Xtest , and Xreal ,
 To address the above problems, we propose a new intrusion respectively. The intrusion detection result is denoted by
detection method, as illustrated in Figure 4. Specifically, a S, the raw ICS dataset is D, and the number of runs is
novel RNN model called ARN is proposed. Compared with denoted by n. In addition, PREPROCESS(·) denotes the
other DNN models, ARN can not only learn and characterize data preprocessing operation, SPLIT(·) denotes the dataset
network traffic data through time series but also better handle partition operation, TRAIN(·) denotes the model training
the retention relationship between previous hidden state data operation, EVALUATE(·) denotes the performance evaluation
and current input. Subsequently, we utilize ARN to build a new operation, and SELECTBEST(·) denotes the model selection
intrusion detection method for ICN. By taking the advantage operation. The corresponding evaluation result is denoted
of ARN, our novel proposed method can greatly enhance the by R. Based on these symbols and operators, the proposed
intrusion detection accuracy. intrusion detection method is described in Algorithm 1.
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4439

 TABLE III For ARN, we assume that the input sequence has a length of
 C OMPARISON OF FLOP S AND T IME C OMPLEXITY OF ARN, T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer dimension
 GRU, LSTM AND T RANSFORMER is H. At each time step, the computational cost mainly comes
 from the linear transformations and the S-ATT module. The
 FLOPs for linear mappings are 2Din H and 2H 2 , respectively.
 Assuming the S-ATT operates on the concatenated vector of h
 and x with sequence length 2, the S-ATT module contributes
 approximately 18H 2 FLOPs. Therefore, the per-step computational cost is 2Din H + 20H 2 . For the entire sequence, the
 As shown in Algorithm 1, the proposed ARN-based intru- total recurrent computation is T · (2Din H + 20H 2 ). It can be
sion detection method consists of two stages: model training seen that the time complexity of ARN is O(T ·(Din H +H 2 )).
and evaluation, and intrusion detection. For GRU, we assume that the input sequence has a length of
 Model training and evaluation, the ICS dataset used for T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer dimension
model training and evaluation is first collected and prepro- is H. The primary computational cost at a single time step
cessed, including feature vectorization and data normalization. arises from matrix multiplication operations, including the
Here, feature vectorization refers to converting categorical computations for the update gate, reset gate, and candidate
fields in network traffic data, such as protocol type, function hidden state. According to the formula for the floating-point
code, and status flag, into fixed-dimensional numerical vectors. operations of matrix multiplication, the computational cost at
The processed data are then divided into the training set Xtrain , a single time step can be expressed as 6Din H + 6H 2 . For
validation set Xval , and test set Xtest . After that, the training set the forward pass over the entire sequence, the total number of
is used to train the intrusion detection model, the validation set FLOPs for GRU is T · (6Din H + 6H 2 ). It can be seen that
is used to assist model selection and hyperparameter tuning, the time complexity of GRU is O(T · (Din H + H 2 )).
and the test set is used to evaluate the final detection perfor- For LSTM, we assume that the input sequence has a length
mance of the trained model. The ARN proposed in this paper of T , the input dimension is Din , and the hidden layer
serves as the core component of the intrusion detection model dimension is H. The main computation at each time step
and is designed to effectively perform intrusion detection on comes from the linear mapping of the four gates (forget gate,
ICN traffic. Specifically, when the current traffic input xt is fed input gate, candidate memory gate, and output gate). The
into ARN, the relationship between the previous hidden state FLOPs for each gate are 2Din H + 2H 2 , and the total FLOPs
ht−1 and the current input xt is learned through the S-ATT for all four gates are 8Din H + 8H 2 . For the entire sequence,
mechanism. In this way, the model can extract the important the total FLOPs are T · (8Din H + 8H 2 ). It can be seen that
information in the current input xt that is closely related to the time complexity of LSTM is O(T · (Din H + H 2 )).
the previous hidden state ht−1 , and combine it with the key For Transformer Encoder with embedding dimension D,
information in the previous hidden state ht−1 that is unknown sequence length T , convolution output channels Cout , and conto the current input xt , thereby forming the supplementary volution kernel size K, the computational cost mainly comes
matrix h0t−1 . By adding the supplementary matrix h0t−1 to from three parts: the multi-head attention module, the conthe current input xt , ARN forms the current hidden state ht , volutional sublayer, and the final fully connected layer. Since
which both highlights the important information in the current the ARN, GRU, and LSTM modules only consider the cominput and incorporates historical information from the previous putational cost of the core model itself and do not include the
hidden state that is unknown to the current input. task-specific fully connected layers used for classification, this
 Intrusion detection, real-time ICS traffic is collected and fully connected part is also excluded from the calculation. The
preprocessed in the same manner as in the model training and FLOPs of the multi-head attention module are 8D2 + 4T 2 D.
evaluation stage, and then fed into the trained ARN model for The FLOPs of the convolutional sublayer are 4KT DCout .
analysis. If the detection result is normal, the communication is Therefore, the total FLOPs of the Transformer core module
allowed to continue; otherwise, the malicious traffic is isolated are 8D2 + 4T 2 D + 4KT DCout . It can be seen that the time
and an alarm is triggered. complexity of Transformer is O(T 2 D + KT DCout + D2 ).
 From the perspective of theoretical computational com-
 VI. C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS plexity, the main computation at each time step of LSTM,
 In this section, we compare the theoretical computational GRU, and ARN comes from the linear mappings between
complexity of the proposed ARN method with those of GRU, the input and the hidden state, with a computational cost of
LSTM, and Transformer, as summarized in Table X. It should O(Din H + H 2 ) per step. For the entire sequence, the total
be noted that the computational complexity of the Transformer computational complexity is O(T ·(Din H+H 2 )), which grows
in this study is calculated based on the Transformer used in the linearly with the sequence length. In contrast, Transformer, in
TNN [40] model, while that of the LSTM is calculated based addition to linear projections O(D2 ), requires multi-head selfon the LSTM used in the ICS-CAD [36] model. The formulas attention computation, which involves pairwise correlations
for computing ARN and GRU can be found in Sections III-A between sequence elements and contributes an additional
and Section IV, respectively, whereas the computation formu- O(T 2 D). Moreover, the convolutional sublayer further adds
las for LSTM [36] and Transformer [40] can be referred to in O(KT DCout ). When the sequence length T is large, the T 2 D
the corresponding literature implementations. term from attention computation quickly dominates over the
4440 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
F EATURES U SED IN THE SWAT DATASET AND UNSW-NB15 DATASET IN THE E XPERIMENT. T HE M EANING OF T HESE F EATURES C AN B E F OUND IN
 THE L ITERATURE C ITED IN THE SWAT DATASET [43] AND THE UNSW-NB15 DATASET [44]

 TABLE V control environments, and on the conventional network dataset
F EATURES U SED IN THE ICS-ADD DATASET AND T HEIR D ESCRIPTIONS UNSW-NB15 to further verify the generalizability of ARN.
 ICS-ADD is a public anomaly detection dataset for industrial control system security research [42]. It records the
 system’s behavior under various simulated attacks (e.g., The
 raw network traffic under DoS, MITM, malware intrusion,
 etc.) After preprocessing, we obtained a total of 23,023
 samples, of which 9,264 were attack samples.
 SWaT is a public security dataset for industrial water
 treatment platforms, built by iTrust, Centre for Research
 in Cyber Security, Singapore University of Technology and
 Design. Reference [43]. We chose the officially labeled “SWaT
T H 2 term of recurrent networks, making the overall compu- Dec 2015” for the experiments. SWaT dataset consists of two
tational cost and time complexity of Transformer significantly labels: “normal” and “attack”, with a total of 449,919 pieces
higher than that of LSTM, GRU, and ARN. In summary, of data, of which 54,621 pieces are attack data.
although ARN has slightly higher per-step computation than UNSW-NB15 is a public conventional network intrusion
LSTM and GRU, its overall time complexity is comparable to detection dataset [45], [44], which contains a total of 2,540,044
theirs, whereas the computational overhead of Transformer is pieces of data, including 300,000 pieces of attack data, with 9
significantly higher than the aforementioned networks. type attacks, i.e., analysis, backdoors, DoS, exploits, fuzzers,
 generic, reconnaissance and shellcode.
 VII. S CHEME I MPLEMENTATION Table IV presents the features used in the SWaT and UNSW-
 In this section, we first explicitly describe the experimental NB15 datasets (52 features for SWaT and 43 features for
environment, datasets and evaluation criteria in detail. Subse- UNSW-NB15), while Table V lists the features extracted from
quently, we provide the experimental results and analysis. the ICS-ADD dataset along with their descriptions (15 features for ICS-ADD). Unlike SWaT and UNSW-NB15, which
 provide official flow-level CSV files with well-documented
A. Experimental Environment, Datasets, and Criteria feature definitions [43], [44], the ICS-ADD dataset is provided
 1) Experimental Environment: In this paper, all of the simu- only in raw PCAP format [42]. Following the official instruclation experiments are carried out on a desktop equipped with tions, we converted these PCAP files into flow-level CSV files
a CUDA12.1 driver, cuDNN8.8.0.1 driver and Windows 10 and provided detailed descriptions for each extracted feature.
operating system. The desktop is equipped with 32 GB main It is worth noting that in our experiments, the UNSW-NB15
memory, an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4070 graphics card and dataset had the IP features as well as the start time (Stime)
a 13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-13600KF CPU that runs and last time (Ltime) features removed. This is because these
at 3.50 GHz. In addition, the experimental results of our features could lead the model to memorize that certain attacks
proposed solution and comparative experiment are obtained occur between specific IPs or during particular time periods,
by running in our experimental environment, the framework resulting in data leakage and negatively affecting the models
used in this experiment is based on pytorch2.1.0. To adapt to generalization ability.
different datasets, distinct optimization strategies are applied: In the simulation experiment, we use an 8:2 ratio for the
for the UNSW-NB15 and ICS-ADD datasets, we use the Adam ICS-ADD dataset to determine the training and test sets. This
optimizer with learning rates of 0.001 and 0.0001, respectively, is because the overall data size of ICS-ADD is relatively
whereas for the SWaT dataset, we use the SGD optimizer with small, and sufficient test data is required to validate the
a learning rate of 0.012. The ARN model is configured with effectiveness of our solution. For the SWaT dataset, we divide
a single-layer network structure and trained for 200 epochs, the selected SWaT data into a training set and a test set
and the best-performing result during training is selected as according to 8:2. This is because the sample distribution of
the final experimental outcome. the SWaT data set is uneven, and we need to include the
 2) Experimental Datasets: In the simulation experiments, corresponding attack data in the test set, so the selected test
we evaluate the proposed ARN method on ICS datasets set has a large amount of data. Meanwhile, due to the large
(ICS-ADD and SWaT) to assess its applicability in industrial amount of UNSW-NB15 data, to facilitate the experiment,
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4441

 TABLE VI
C OMPARISON OF THE E FFECTIVENESS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS ON THE ICS-ADD, SWAT AND UNSW-NB15 DATASETS . ARN A PPLIES A O NE -
 TAILED W ILCOXON S IGNED -R ANK T EST TO E ACH C OMPARATIVE M ETHOD IN THE TABLE . A LL O BTAINED P -VALUES A RE p = 0.03125 < 0.05,
 I NDICATING T HAT THE P ERFORMANCE I MPROVEMENT I S S TATISTICALLY S IGNIFICANT; M OREOVER , S INCE THE p-VALUE I S C OMPUTED
 BASED ON F IVE PAIRED VALIDATION R ESULTS , p = 0.03125 I S THE S MALLEST P -VALUE ATTAINABLE BY THE T EST AT T HIS
 S AMPLE S IZE . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

we randomly and sequentially selected 25% of the UNSW- compare our ARN-based intrusion detection method with the
NB15 dataset as experimental data, with a ratio of 10:1 for SDBSCAN-based intrusion detection method [25], DHMMthe training set and test set. In addition, to ensure the reliability based intrusion detection method [31], GRU-based intrusion
of the experimental results, a cross-validation strategy is detection method [37], AE-LSTM-based intrusion detecadopted during the experiments. Specifically, in each round, tion method [38], DR-AD-based intrusion detection method
10% of normal samples and 10% of abnormal samples are [35], BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection method [46], ICSrandomly selected in chronological order from the training set CAD-based intrusion detection method [36] and TNN-based
to construct the validation set, while the remaining data are intrusion detection method [40].
used for training. For each round, the model is independently
 1) Quantitative Performance: We conduct the effectiveness
trained on a different training subset, with the corresponding
 verification of the proposed detection method based on the
validation set used to assist the training. The optimal model
 ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and conventional network
from each round is then evaluated on the test set, and the final
 datasets (UNSW-NB15), according to the experimental criteria
result is reported as the average performance and standard
 defined in Section VII-A.3. The experimental results are shown
deviation of the five models. This validation strategy is adopted
 in Table VI. It can be seen that the proposed ARN-based
because attack samples in industrial control datasets are often
 intrusion detection method achieves strong performance on
concentrated within specific time intervals. Using conventional
 both ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional
cross-validation methods such as K-fold cross-validation may
 network dataset (UNSW-NB15), significantly outperforming
disrupt the temporal order if the data are shuffled before
 other comparative methods overall.
splitting, or result in training sets containing only a single class
if the data are split sequentially. Both situations hinder the a) On the ICS dataset ICS-ADD: Traditional statisticsproper validation of the models effectiveness. The ICS-ADD, analysis methods such as SDBSCAN and time-series methods
SWaT, and UNSW-NB15 datasets are all publicly available such as DHMM perform relatively poorly on ICS-ADD mainly
and can be obtained through official sources. because many attack stages in ICS-ADD are short, sparse, and
 Finally, the final dataset splits are as follows: the UNSW- stealthy under flow-level representations. Specifically, several
NB15 dataset contains 449,996 training samples, 50,004 attacks (e.g., Modbus scanning) primarily involve protocolvalidation samples, and 50,000 test samples, the SWaT dataset level manipulations and do not necessarily induce pronounced
contains 323,942 training samples, 35,994 validation samples, deviations in flow-level statistics, making them overlap with
and 89,983 test samples, and the ICS-ADD dataset contains highly periodic benign Modbus polling traffic. As a result,
16,644 training samples, 1,850 validation samples, and 4,529 SDBSCAN may absorb attack samples into the dominant
test samples. It should be noted that in the above datasets, flow benign high-density region, and DHMM becomes less disrecords in ICS-ADD, SWaT, and UNSW-NB15 are arranged criminative due to weakened separability of the observation
in chronological order by timestamps. We construct sequence sequence, thus leading to more false negatives and consesamples of length T= 8, i.e., we extract 8 consecutive flow quently lower detection performance.
records from the time-ordered data to form an input sequence, In deep learning solutions, the ARN-based intrusion detecwhich is used as the temporal modeling input to ARN. tion method proposed in this paper achieves good performance
 3) Experimental Datasets: In the simulation experiments, across all evaluation metrics. This is because GRU-based
we use Accuracy, P recision, Recall, and F 1 score as intrusion detection method suffer from gate unit conflicts,
experimental evaluation criteria to confirm the effectiveness making it difficult to effectively capture previous hidden state
of our proposed ARN-based intrusion detection method. We and consequently leading to decreased detection performance.
also use memory usage, detection time, and Floating Point The AE-LSTM-based intrusion detection method first extracts
Operations per Second (FLOPs) as evaluation metrics to test features through an autoencoder and then performs detection
the efficiency of ARN. using an LSTM, its accuracy is affected not only by the quality
 of feature extraction in the AE but also by the gate conflict
 and feature forgetting issues inherent in the LSTM. The DR-
B. Experimental Results and Analysis AD-based intrusion detection method also requires feature
 In this part, we develop a prototype implementation to verify extraction before detection, and its results are influenced by
the effectiveness of our proposed method. Specifically, we the quality of this feature extraction. Moreover, the DR-AD
4442 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

model structure cannot exploit the temporal characteristics of intrusion detection method outperforms some deep learning
network traffic for feature representation and learning, result- methods. This is mainly because SDBSCAN relies on the
ing in relatively lower overall detection metrics. Although the distribution of samples in the feature space, and the high-
BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection method can model tem- dimensional feature space of SWaT allows attack samples to
poral features using a bidirectional structure, its performance form distinguishable clusters. Even when the number of attack
is still affected by the inherent limitations of the LSTM archi- samples is small, statistics-analysis methods are less affected.
tecture. Additionally, since attacks in industrial traffic typically In contrast, deep learning methods trained on imbalanced
follow a unidirectional temporal evolution, bidirectional mod- samples are more susceptible to distribution shifts caused
eling may dilute potential attack features, thereby weakening by a small number of attack samples, leading to unstable
detection effectiveness. The main structure of the ICS-CAD- model fitting. Therefore, on SWaT, statistics-analysis methods
based intrusion detection method is still based on LSTM, and achieve better performance compared to some deep learning
thus it is similarly constrained by gate mechanism issues, methods. The performance analysis of other methods aligns
making it difficult to further improve detection accuracy. For closely with the observations made on the ICS-ADD dataset.
the TNN-based intrusion detection method, although its core is c) On the conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15:
composed of Transformers and can represent industrial control The UNSW-NB15 is a public dataset focused on conventional
traffic features from a global dependency perspective through network traffic. Experimental results on this dataset show
the attention mechanism, in ICN, most anomalies occur only that even when dealing with regular network traffic, our
within a limited time window, manifesting as local changes proposed ARN-based intrusion detection method outperforms
in packet frequency, latency, or control commands. Moreover, other comparative methods. It can also be observed that, in
attack behaviors often exhibit unidirectional temporal evolu- this case, the time-series intrusion detection method based on
tion, so the global attention mechanism of the Transformer DHMM achieves better performance than some deep learning
may introduce redundant dependencies, reducing the mod- approaches. This is mainly because the UNSW-NB15 dataset
els sensitivity to local anomalous features and consequently consists of conventional network traffic, where temporal
affecting detection accuracy. In contrast, the ARN-based intru- dependencies primarily manifest as continuous communicasion detection method effectively alleviates conflicts among tion records within individual sessions, exhibiting locally
gate units and can more reasonably manage the relationship continuous time series characteristics. Such local continuity
between previous hidden state and the retention of current aligns well with the Markov assumption, enabling DHMM to
input, thus more accurately representing the unidirectional more effectively capture state transition patterns and achieve
temporal evolution in traffic. Therefore, compared with other superior detection performance. In contrast, the DR-AD-based
existing methods, the proposed method achieves the best intrusion detection method fails to effectively learn tempointrusion detection performance. ral dependencies, the GRU-based intrusion detection method
 We also observe that the DR-AD-based intrusion detection may be affected by gate conflicts when capturing temporal
method and BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection methods relationships, and the BiDLSTM-based intrusion detection
exhibit relatively high standard deviations on the ICS-ADD method is constrained by the gate conflicts inherent in
dataset. We speculate that this is mainly related to the fact LSTM, and its bidirectional modeling mechanism may dilute
that attack behaviors in ICS-ADD are concentrated within abnormal attack features when learning network data with
specific time periods. In other words, attack samples occur unidirectional temporal characteristics, resulting in a slight
continuously only within certain time windows, and ran- performance degradation. Moreover, the local continuity of
dom cross-validation may allocate part of these periods to the UNSW-NB15 dataset also limits the learning effectiveness
the validation set, resulting in incomplete attack sequences of Transformers. Since Transformers emphasize global dependuring training. such missing samples can be partially com- dencies, modeling locally continuous sequences can introduce
pensated through temporal modeling mechanisms. However, redundant features, thereby reducing the accuracy of TNNthe DR-AD approach fails to effectively capture temporal based intrusion detection method. The performance analysis
dependencies, and since attacks in industrial datasets typically of other methods is largely consistent with our observations
follow a unidirectional temporal evolution, the bidirectional on the ICS-ADD dataset.
modeling of BiLSTM may dilute the attack features.Moreover, Overall, the results show that the ARN-based intrusion
the high expressive capacity of deep learning methods makes detection method achieves strong performance on both industhem sensitive to the division of the training set, leading trial control network traffic and conventional network traffic.
to larger performance fluctuations under different splits and, In particular, the high detection accuracy on the ICS-ADD and
consequently, relatively higher standard deviations. UNSW-NB15 datasets mainly stems from the synergy between
 b) On the ICS dataset SWaT: The SWaT dataset is highly the dataset characteristics and the design of ARN. The ICSimbalanced, which increases the difficulty of distinguishing ADD dataset contains highly periodic industrial traffic, while
between certain normal and abnormal traffic, resulting in the UNSW-NB15 dataset still preserves locally continuous
overall performance of various detection methods being rela- session-level temporal structures under the adopted flow-level
tively close. Nevertheless, according to the evaluation metrics representation. With the aid of the S-ATT mechanism, ARN
described in Section VII-A3, our ARN-based intrusion detec- can explicitly model the relationship between the previous
tion method still achieves the best performance across all hidden state and the current input, thereby more effectively
metrics. We can also be observed that the SDBSCAN-based extracting temporal features from the traffic and identifying
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4443

 TABLE VII segmentation of samples, resulting in significant performance
A BLATION E XPERIMENT OF THE S-ATT M ODULE IN ARN, W HERE fluctuations during cross-validation, particularly exhibiting
 W / O (S-ATT) R EPRESENTS THE M ODEL W ITHOUT THE S-ATT large standard deviations on the ICS dataset ICS-ADD. In
 M ODULE . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD
 contrast, the ARN with the S-ATT module can effectively
 analyze the relationship between the previous hidden state
 and the current input. By constructing a supplementary matrix
 to enhance the current input, it realizes a dynamic reset
 of the hidden state. The reset current hidden state contains
 the important previous hidden state that is unknown in the
 current input and highlights the features in the current input
 that are related to previous hidden state, thereby significantly
 improving the overall performance of the model. In addition,
 TABLE VIII
 based on five paired experimental results, we perform one-
A BLATION S TUDY BY R EMOVING C ERTAIN M ETADATA F EATURES ,
 W HERE W / O (·) D ENOTES R EMOVING THE M ETADATA F EATURES tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between ARN(ours) and
 S PECIFIED IN THE PARENTHESES . T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE w/o(S-ATT), and all p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05), indicating
 E MPHASIZED IN B OLD statistical significance.
 b) w/o(port/service metadata features): Since our experiments adopt a flow-level feature representation, the constructed
 feature set often may contain port/service-related metadata
 features (e.g., Sport/Dport and the Service proxy). These fields
 may become strongly correlated with labels under specific data
 TABLE IX splits, thereby significantly affecting the classifiers decision
H YPERPARAMETER A NALYSIS WAS P ERFORMED ON THE S EQUENCE and introducing the risk of metadata contamination [48]. To
 L ENGTH T. T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD verify that the performance gain of ARN does not mainly
 rely on such port/service fields, we conduct a feature-level
 ablation study by removing these metadata features: specifically, we remove Sport and Dport from the ICS dataset
 ICS-ADD, and remove Sport, Dport, and Service from the
 conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15. Since the SWaT
anomalous deviations, while also avoiding the gating conflict dataset does not contain these port-/service-related features, no
problem commonly found in traditional recurrent models. As corresponding removal experiment is performed on SWaT. As
a result, high detection accuracy is achieved on these two shown in Table VIII, the experimental results show that the
datasets. In contrast, although the SWaT dataset shares certain performance change after removing the above features remains
similarities with ICS-ADD in terms of industrial traffic char- within 0.5%, indicating that ARNs effectiveness primarily
acteristics, its severe class imbalance increases the difficulty stems from its ability to model temporal behavioral patterns
of distinguishing some normal flows from anomalous flows, in traffic rather than exploiting port-/service-related metadata
thereby leading to relatively lower detection accuracy on this features. In addition, based on five paired experimental results,
dataset. we perform one-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between
 2) Ablation Study: In this section, we conduct an ablation ARN using the full feature set (ours) and w/o(port/service
study on S-ATT, the core module of the ARN method, and metadata features), and all p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05),
the port/service metadata features that may lead to data con- indicating statistical significance.
tamination. We also perform a hyperparameter analysis on the c) Hyperparameter analysis: Given that the ICS-ADD
sequence length T. dataset is relatively new and has a fairly balanced sample disa) w/o(S-ATT): The experimental results are shown in tribution, we perform hyperparameter analysis on the sequence
Table VII. It can be seen that when the S-ATT module is length T using the ICS-ADD dataset, and the results are shown
removed, and the previous hidden state is directly added in Table IX. It can be observed that the model performance
to the current input for representation learning, the model exhibits a rise-then-fall trend as T increases: when T= 4, the
performance on all three datasets decreases significantly. This sequence is too short to provide sufficient historical context,
is because the model without the S-ATT module cannot making it difficult to adequately model temporal dependencies
effectively analyze the correlation between the previous hidden and resulting in inferior performance; when T= 8, the model
state and the current input, making it difficult to determine benefits from richer temporal information and achieves the
which previous hidden state should be retained or discarded. best performance; when T is further increased (e.g., T= 12),
As a result, a large amount of redundant previous hidden overly long sequences tend to introduce redundant or irrelevant
state is introduced into the current representation, interfering historical information and may even span transitional states,
with the learning of temporal relationships and leading to a thereby weakening the discriminability of local anomalous
noticeable decrease in detection accuracy. Moreover, since the patterns and leading to performance degradation. These results
model lacks the ability to adaptively adjust the retention degree indicate that a moderate sequence length achieves a betof previous hidden state, it is sensitive to variations in temporal ter balance between sufficient temporal context and noise
4444 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

 TABLE X
 C OMPUTATIONAL C OSTS OF D IFFERENT M ETHODS . T HE T IME C OST I S M EASURED IN S ECONDS (S), THE M EMORY U SAGE I S M EASURED
 IN M EGA B YTES (MB), AND THE FLOP S A RE M EASURED IN M ILLIONS (M). T O E NSURE A FAIR C OMPARISON , W E E VALUATE
 THE C OMPUTATIONAL C OST OF E ACH M ETHOD U NDER THE S AME I DENTICAL PARAMETER S ETTINGS .
 T HE B EST R ESULTS A RE E MPHASIZED IN B OLD

suppression; therefore, we set T= 8 by default. Moreover, models to be deployed in industrial networks. According to
based on five paired experimental results, one-tailed Wilcoxon the experimental results, although our proposed ARN-based
signed-rank tests are performed by taking ARN with T= intrusion detection method exhibits higher FLOPs than GRU,
8(ours) as the reference and comparing it with ARN with T= ICS-CAD, AE-LSTM, and DR-AD, its memory and runtime
4 and T= 12. All p-values are 0.03125(< 0.05), indicating overhead are comparable to these methods, and its memory
statistical significance. consumption is even lower than that of AE-LSTM and DR-
 3) Analysis of Computational Overhead: This section AD on the SWaT and UNSW-NB15 datasets. This is mainly
presents experiments evaluating the computational overhead because AE-LSTM and DR-AD adopt a two-stage structure
of the proposed ARN method and the baseline algorithms in of feature extraction + detection, in which intermediate feathe experimental environment. The evaluation metrics include ture variables must be retained between the two modules,
FLOPs, memory consumption, and runtime, with runtime cov- thereby increasing the overall memory usage. Moreover, since
ering the overhead of preprocessing and model inference for the feature extraction and detection models are independent,
all test data. The results are shown in Table III. Since the main additional feature transmission and tensor loading operations
computational cost of SDBSCAN and DHMM does not come are required during inference, which further increase the total
from large-scale floating-point matrix operations, FLOPs are runtime. This also explains why AE-LSTM exhibits higher
not used as a measure of computational complexity. It can be time overhead than ARN, and why DR-AD, despite having
seen that the SDBSCAN-based intrusion detection method and fewer FLOPs, still shows a runtime similar to that of ARN.
the DHMM-based intrusion detection method consume much The ICS-CAD intrusion detection method, based on LSTM,
less memory than all deep learning models. This is mainly and the GRU-based intrusion detection method both have
because both are lightweight algorithms based on statistical lower theoretical FLOPs than the proposed ARN method,
and probabilistic inference, with very few parameters. In but their actual runtime is close to ARN. From the percontrast, deep learning models need to cache a large number spective of theoretical FLOPs, ARN exhibits slightly higher
of weights and hidden states within the network. In particular, per-step computation than GRU and LSTM, mainly due to
Transformer models must simultaneously process and cache additional linear transformations and attention operations in
the dependencies across all time steps, resulting in higher the S-ATT module on the hidden state and input vectors.
memory requirements. Therefore, the overall memory con- However, in practice, although ARN still processes sequences
sumption of deep learning models is significantly higher than step by step, the matrix multiplications, dot products, and
that of traditional statistics-analysis or time-series algorithms. weighted sums within each time step can be highly parallelized
Additionally, although SDBSCAN has relatively low memory on SIMD or GPU architectures, fully leveraging hardware
overhead, its DBSCAN-based clustering process incurs a high capabilities. In contrast, because the gating mechanism introcomputational cost when handling high-dimensional data [49], duces more gate-related branches and element-wise operations,
causing its runtime on the SWaT dataset to exceed 10 seconds. GRU/LSTM need to perform more matrix multiplications
This is mainly because the efficiency of neighborhood search and nonlinear computations at each time step, which may
in high-dimensional space decreases, leading to a significant increase the accumulated sequence-level latency. Therefore,
increase in the complexity of distance computation and density despite slightly higher theoretical computation, ARNs actual
estimation. The DHMM-based intrusion detection method runtime remains close to that of GRU and LSTM, which
shows the best performance in terms of memory and runtime explains the observed experimental results. In addition, ARN
overhead, reflecting higher computational efficiency, its detec- incurs slightly higher memory usage than GRU and LSTM,
tion performance on the ICS-ADD and SWaT datasets remains primarily because the S-ATT module generates additional
low. Therefore, it is difficult to meet the practical detection intermediate vectors and attention matrices at each time step
requirements in industrial scenarios, making it unsuitable as a to compute attention weights between the hidden state and
mainstream intrusion detection solution. input. In contrast, GRU and LSTM only need to store a small
 In deep learning-based intrusion detection methods, number of hidden states and gate-related matrices per step,
although memory overhead is typically much higher than that resulting in lower memory consumption. We also observed that
of traditional methods such as SDBSCAN and DHMM, the GRUs measured memory usage is slightly higher than LSTM,
decreasing cost of memory allows small-scale deep learning which may be attributed to implementation-dependent caching
LIU et al.: TAKE ATTENTION AS GATE: AN ARN-BASED INTRUSION DETECTION METHOD FOR ICN 4445

and kernel fusion behaviors under our memory measurement time) of the ARN model is approximately 0.203 ms for
setting. ICS-ADD, 0.041 ms for SWaT, and 0.05 ms for UNSW-
 Due to its bidirectional structure, BiDLSTM has the highest NB15. Considering that communication latency in industrial
FLOPs among all compared methods. However, inference time networks is typically within 10 ms [47], and taking queuing
does not necessarily scale strictly linearly with FLOPs. In our effects into account under conservative assumptions (e.g.,
implementation, BiDLSTM performs gate computations step using only 80% of the theoretical throughput to accommodate
by step over time and involves multiple matrix multiplications additional I/O and caching overhead), the ARN model achieves
and activation operations. Its runtime is also influenced by a maximum processing capacity of approximately 3,941 and
factors such as GPU parallel efficiency, operator scheduling 19,512 samples per second on the ICS datasets ICS-ADD and
overhead, and memory bandwidth. Therefore, although its SWaT, respectively. This indicates that ARN can satisfy the
inference time is relatively long, it does not increase propor- real-time requirements of industrial networks. Moreover, on
tionally with FLOPs. For memory consumption, we measure the conventional network dataset UNSW-NB15, ARN achieves
memory usage as the difference between the beginning and the a maximum processing capacity of approximately 16,000
end of the detection phase. Owing to the frameworks memory samples per second, indicating that it also supports efficient
reuse/caching mechanism, the net memory increase may vary online processing in non-industrial network environments.
across models, making the measured memory overhead of
BiDLSTM slightly lower than that of ICS-CAD. VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
 In contrast, the TNN method employs a Transformer archi-
 In the ICN, network traffic data exhibits characteristics of
tecture. Its multi-head self-attention module computes pairwise
 large scale, irregularity, multiple features, temporal correlation
attention among all elements in the sequence at each time
 and high dimensionality, resulting in low accuracy of existing
step, resulting in O(T 2 D) computational complexity and
 intrusion detection methods. In this paper, we focus on designgenerating a large number of intermediate attention matriing an accurate intrusion detection method for ICN. First, we
ces. In addition, the feed-forward sublayers and projection
 design a novel RNN model, namely, ARN. Subsequently, we
operations in multi-head attention introduce additional comadopt ARN to build a novel intrusion detection method for
putation and intermediate activations, significantly increasing
 ICN. By taking the advantage of ARN, our proposed method
both FLOPs and memory consumption. In practice, these
 greatly improves the accuracy of intrusion detection. Finally,
operations not only lengthen the overall inference time but also
 we implement our proposed ARN-based intrusion detection
substantially raise the memory footprint, increasing deploymethod and provide a performance evaluation. Compared to
ment costs in industrial network environments. Given that
 existing intrusion detection methods, our proposed method
industrial intrusion detection often requires real-time or nearachieved accuracy rates of 98.93%, 95.57%, and 98.27% on
real-time response, the high runtime and memory demands
 the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional
of Transformer may limit its practical applicability in such
 network dataset (UNSW-NB15), respectively.
scenarios.
 In practical application, ARN may have the same problem
 In summary, although traditional methods such as SDBas other RNN methods, that is, in the process of character-
SCAN and DHMM have relatively low memory overhead,
 izing and learning previous hidden state, ARN and existing
SDBSCAN exhibits a significant increase in runtime when
 RNN methods will eliminate some previous hidden state that
processing high-dimensional data, and both types of methods
 is irrelevant to the current by calculating the association
show suboptimal detection performance on ICS datasets (ICSbetween previous hidden state and current input. However,
ADD and SWaT), making them inadequate for the demands
 such information may still be highly valuable for future inputs,
of modern industrial traffic detection. Among the compared
 leading to information loss in modeling temporal dependendeep learning methods, although the proposed ARN incurs
 cies. Moreover, network security managers not only expect
slightly higher FLOPs on both the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and
 real-time intrusion detection but also seek to anticipate the
SWaT) and the conventional network dataset (UNSW-NB15),
 network security situation at the next time step, enabling
its inference latency and memory overhead are comparable to
 proactive defensive measures. In this paper, we focus solely
those of GRU and ICS-CAD, and its computational efficiency
 on intrusion detection for ICN, without addressing network
during the inference phase is significantly higher than TNN.
 security situation forecasting. Hence, future work will explore
Moreover, ARN demonstrates noticeably superior detection
 these limitations in the ARN model and investigate predictive
performance compared to other methods, highlighting its high
 security situation assessment for ICN.
applicability and practical value as an industrial intrusion
detection solution.
 R EFERENCES
 To further evaluate the feasibility of deploying the proposed method in practice, we analyze its latency overhead. [1] B. Galloway and G. P. Hancke, “Introduction to industrial control
 networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 860–880,
According to Section VII-A, the number of test samples in 2nd Quart., 2013.
the ICS datasets (ICS-ADD and SWaT) and the conventional [2] T. Cao et al., “Reliable and efficient multimedia service optimization for
network dataset (UNSW-NB15) are 4,529, 89,983, and 50,000, edge computing-based 5G networks: Game theoretic approaches,” IEEE
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1610–1625, Sep. 2020.
respectively. Based on the Time column in Table X, the per- [3] N. Koursioumpas, S. Barmpounakis, I. Stavrakakis, and N. Alonistioti,
flow-sample latency (includes data preprocessing and model “AI-driven, context-aware profiling for 5G and beyond networks,” IEEE
inference time, and we use milliseconds to represent this Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1036–1048, Jun. 2022.
4446 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 23, 2026

[4] D. Ding, Q.-L. Han, Z. Wang, and X. Ge, “A survey on model-based [28] R. F. Fouladi, C. E. Kayatas, and E. Anarim, “Frequency based DDoS
 distributed control and filtering for industrial cyber-physical systems,” attack detection approach using naive Bayes classification,” presented at
 IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 2483–2499, May 2019. the 39th Int. Conf. Telecommun. Signal Process. (TSP), Jun. 2016.
[5] Z. Lv, Y. Han, A. K. Singh, G. Manogaran, and H. Lv, “Trustworthiness [29] X. Ye, J. Lan, and W. Huang, “Network traffic anomaly detection based
 in industrial IoT systems based on artificial intelligence,” IEEE Trans. on self-similarity using FRFT,” presented at the 4th Int. Conf. Softw.
 Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1496–1504, Feb. 2021. Eng. Service Sci., Beijing, China, May 2013.
[6] L. Du, Z. Gu, Y. Wang, L. Wang, and Y. Jia, “A few-shot class- [30] D. Huang, X. Shi, and W.-A. Zhang, “False data injection attack
 incremental learning method for network intrusion detection,” IEEE detection for industrial control systems based on both time- and
 Trans. Netw. Service Manage., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 2389–2401, Apr. 2024. frequency-domain analysis of sensor data,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
[7] J. Chen, Y. Chen, S. Cai, S. Yin, L. Zhao, and Z. Zhang, “An optimized vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 585–595, Jan. 2021.
 feature extraction algorithm for abnormal network traffic detection,” [31] B. Zhang, X. Liu, H. Zheng, and Y. Song, “Hidden Markov model-
 Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 149, pp. 330–342, Dec. 2023. based cyberattack prediction in power systems,” IEEE Trans. Smart
[8] X. Etxezarreta, I. Garitano, M. Iturbe, and U. Zurutuza, “Low delay Grid, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 1694–1705, Mar. 2025.
 network attributes randomization to proactively mitigate reconnaissance [32] Y. Li et al., “Robust detection for network intrusion of industrial IoT
 attacks in industrial control systems,” Wireless Netw., vol. 30, no. 6, based on multi-CNN fusion,” Measurement, vol. 154, Jun. 2020, Art.
 pp. 5077–5091, Aug. 2024. no. 107450.
[9] J.-M. Shao, G.-Q. Zeng, K.-D. Lu, G.-G. Geng, and J. Weng, [33] M. Abdelaty, R. Doriguzzi-Corin, and D. Siracusa, “DAICS: A deep
 “Automated federated learning for intrusion detection of industrial con- learning solution for anomaly detection in industrial control systems,”
 trol systems based on evolutionary neural architecture search,” Comput. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Topics Comput., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1117–1129, Apr.
 Secur., vol. 143, Aug. 2024, Art. no. 103910. 2022.
[10] Q. Wu, Z. Jiang, K. Hong, H. Liu, L. T. Yang, and J. Ding, “Tensor- [34] A. Yang, Y. Zhuansun, C. Liu, J. Li, and C. Zhang, “Design of intrusion
 based recurrent neural network and multi-modal prediction with its detection system for Internet of Things based on improved BP neural
 applications in traffic network management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service network,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 106043–106052, 2019.
 Manage., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 780–792, Mar. 2021. [35] K. Sood, M. R. Nosouhi, D. D. N. Nguyen, F. Jiang, M. Chowdhury, and
[11] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN R. Doss, “Intrusion detection scheme with dimensionality reduction in
 encoder–decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. next generation networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18,
 Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), Sep. 2014. pp. 965–979, 2023.
[12] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural [36] Z. Jadidi, J. Hagemann, and D. Quevedo, “Multi-step attack detection in
 Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, Nov. 1997. industrial control systems using causal analysis,” Comput. Ind., vol. 142,
[13] M. Morchid, “Parsimonious memory unit for recurrent neural networks Sep. 2022, Art. no. 103741.
 with application to natural language processing,” Neurocomputing, [37] C. Xu, J. Shen, X. Du, and F. Zhang, “An intrusion detection system
 vol. 314, pp. 48–64, Nov. 2018. using a deep neural network with gated recurrent units,” IEEE Access,
[14] H. Fanta, Z. Shao, and L. Ma, “Forget the forget gate: Esti- vol. 6, pp. 48697–48707, 2018.
 mating anomalies in videos using self-contained long short-term [38] E. Mushtaq et al., “A two-stage intrusion detection system with automemory networks,” presented at the 7th Comput. Graph. Int. Conf., encoder and LSTMs,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 121, Sep. 2022, Art. no.
 Oct. 2020. 108768.
[15] J. Aitchison, “The statistical analysis of compositional data,” J. Roy. [39] D. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Bu, J. Yu, and L. Yang, “PdGAT-ID: An
 Stat. Society: Ser. B (Methodol.), vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 139–160, 1982. intrusion detection method for industrial control systems based on
[16] Y. Zou et al., “Complex network approaches to nonlinear time series periodic extraction and spatiotemporal graph attention,” Comput. Secur.,
 analysis,” Phys. Rep., vol. 787, pp. 1–97, Sep. 2019. vol. 149, Feb. 2025, Art. no. 104210.
[17] S. Dong, P. Wang, and K. Abbas, “A survey on deep learning and its [40] S. Ullah et al., “TNN-IDS: Transformer neural network-based intrusion
 applications,” Comput. Sci. Rev., vol. 40, Jul. 2021, Art. no. 100379. detection system for MQTT-enabled IoT networks,” Comput. Netw.,
[18] W. Wu et al., “Sliding window optimized information entropy analysis vol. 237, Dec. 2023, Art. no. 110072.
 method for intrusion detection on in-vehicle networks,” IEEE Access, [41] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural
 vol. 6, pp. 45233–45245, 2018. Inform. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 2017.
[19] Y. Hu et al., “Detecting stealthy attacks on industrial control systems [42] G. B. Gaggero, A. Armellin, G. Portomauro, and M. Marchese,
 using a permutation entropy-based method,” Future Gener. Comput. “Industrial control system-anomaly detection dataset (ICS-ADD) for
 Syst., vol. 108, pp. 1230–1240, Sep. 2020. cyber-physical security monitoring in smart industry environments,”
[20] M. Zhou, Z. Zhang, and L. Xie, “Permutation entropy based detec- IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 64140–64149, 2024.
 tion scheme of replay attacks in industrial cyber-physical systems,” [43] J. Goh et al., “A dataset to support research in the design of secure water
 J. Franklin Inst., vol. 358, no. 7, pp. 4058–4076, May 2021. treatment systems,” presented at the Crit. Inf. Infrastructures Secur.,
[21] D. Liao, R. Zhou, H. Li, M. Zhang, and X. Chen, “GE-IDS: An intrusion Paris, France, 2016.
 detection system based on grayscale and entropy,” Peer-Peer Netw. [44] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “UNSW-NB15: A comprehensive data set
 Appl., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–14, May 2022. for network intrusion detection systems (UNSW-NB15 network data
[22] M. Ahmed, A. Naser Mahmood, and J. Hu, “A survey of net- set),” presented at the Mil. Commun. Inf. Syst. Conf., Canberra, ACT,
 work anomaly detection techniques,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 60, Australia, 2015.
 pp. 19–31, Jan. 2016. [45] N. Moustafa and J. Slay, “The evaluation of network anomaly detection
[23] W. Liang, K.-C. Li, J. Long, X. Kui, and A. Y. Zomaya, “An industrial systems: Statistical analysis of the UNSW-NB15 data set and the
 network intrusion detection algorithm based on multifeature data clus- comparison with the KDD99 data set,” Inf. Secur. Journal: A Global
 tering optimization model,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 16, no. 3, Perspective, vol. 25, nos. 1–3, pp. 18–31, Apr. 2016.
 pp. 2063–2071, Mar. 2020. [46] Y. Imrana, Y. Xiang, L. Ali, and Z. Abdul-Rauf, “A bidirectional LSTM
[24] H. Mittal, A. K. Tripathi, A. C. Pandey, M. D. Alshehri, M. Saraswat, deep learning approach for intrusion detection,” Expert Syst. Appl.,
 and R. Pal, “A new intrusion detection method for cyber–physical system vol. 185, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 115524.
 in emerging industrial IoT,” Comput. Commun., vol. 190, pp. 24–35, [47] K. Das and P. Havinga, “Evaluation of DECT for low latency real-time
 Jun. 2022. industrial control networks,” presented at the IEEE Int. Conf. Sens.,
[25] Z. D. Zhang, H. T. Shen, and S. J. Wei, “Network anomaly detection New Orleans, LA, USA, Jun. 2013.
 based on traffic clustering with group-entropy similarity,” presented at [48] L. D’hooge, M. Verkerken, B. Volckaert, T. Wauters, and F. D. Turck,
 the 9th Int. Symp. Netw., Comput. Commun., Shenzhen, China, 2022. “Establishing the contaminating effect of metadata feature inclusion
[26] M. Bozdal, M. Samie, and I. K. Jennions, “WINDS: A wavelet-based in machine-learned network intrusion detection models,” in Proc. Int.
 intrusion detection system for controller area network (CAN),” IEEE Conf. Detection Intrusions Malware, VulnerabilityAssessment. Cham,
 Access, vol. 9, pp. 58621–58633, 2021. Switzerland: Springer, 2022.
[27] K. Miao, X. Shi, and W.-A. Zhang, “Attack signal estimation for [49] Y. Lv et al., “An efficient and scalable density-based clustering algointrusion detection in industrial control system,” Comput. Secur., vol. 96, rithm for datasets with complex structures,” Neurocomputing, vol. 171,
 Sep. 2020, Art. no. 101926. pp. 9–22, Jan. 2016.