IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 1549

 Time Will Tell: Criss-Cross Transformer for
 Encrypted Traffic Analysis
 Hua Ding , Student Member, IEEE, Lixing Chen , Bo Zhang, Shenghong Li , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Hao Peng , Zhe Qu , Member, IEEE, and Yang Bai , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The widespread adoption of encryption across web- the seen-and-classify scenario, suggesting its potential applicability
based services is compelling both malicious attackers and network to broader domains like social network behavioral analysis.
defenders to tailor their tool repositories to encrypted traffic. For
various security applications in encrypted networks, the analysis Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, encrypted traffic
of encrypted traffic lies as the fundamental basis. Due to the forecasting, time-series transformer, cross-time cross-dimension
inherent concealment of content-related information in encrypted attention.
packets, the dynamics of encrypted traffic emerge as the discernible
variable warranting comprehensive analysis. This paper explores
inherent temporal correlations within the encrypted traffic and
 I. INTRODUCTION
proposes a novel algorithm called Criss-cross Traffic Transformer MIDST escalating cyber threats, encrypted Internet traf-
(CTT), tailored to address unique challenges in encrypted traffic
analysis. CTT distinguishes itself by employing a specialized time
series Transformer that innovatively utilizes patching and criss-
 A fic has become essential for safeguarding sensitive data
 against unauthorized access and interception. As reported in [1],
 over 80% of Firefox services and 95% of Google services are
cross attention module (CAM) to dissect and interpret encrypted
traffic, with the “criss” part mining the long-/short-term temporal
 now encrypted, ensuring the secure transmissions of confidencorrelations across time, and the “cross” part capturing temporal tial information and enhancing user privacy, particularly for
correlations across multiple feature dimensions of encrypted traf- user interactions on social network platforms. On the other
fic. CTT provides a unified framework capable of accommodating hand, traffic encryption is also misused by cybercriminals to
diverse analytical granularities, including packet-level, flow-level, obfuscate malicious activities. Empirical evidence [2] indicates
and packet-to-flow level. Notably, CTT not only encompasses en- that 85% of cyberattacks are conducted via encrypted traffic.
crypted traffic classification but also extends to encrypted traffic For example, encryption is often employed for propagating
forecasting, an area that remains largely underexplored in existing commands and payloads of malware, and is also frequently seen
literature. We evaluate CTT in the context of fingerprinting at- in data exfiltration activities where stolen intellectual property
tacks and malware detection over 5 real-world datasets against 13 is encrypted to evade detection by data loss prevention meabenchmarks. The results indicate that CTT achieves up to 15.56%
performance improvement over SOTA solutions for encrypted trafsures. With the prevalence of encryption on the Internet, both
fic classification. Particularly, CTT demonstrates over 92.5% fore- malicious attackers and network defenders are tailoring their
casting accuracy, which is comparable to SOTA performances in tool repositories to encrypted traffic. From the perspective of
 malicious attackers, novel cyberattacks are emerging specifically designed to target encrypted traffic. For example, web-
 Received 13 August 2025; revised 6 December 2025; accepted 9 February site/application fingerprinting attacks [3] have been developed
2026. Date of publication 13 February 2026; date of current version 10 April
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and
 to compromise user privacy by inferring service usage behavior
Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB3107100, in part by the (e.g., identifying specific social apps) through the analysis of
National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62372297, encrypted traffic. From the perspective of network defenders,
Grant 62303306, and Grant 62302525, in part by China Postdoctoral Science developing sophisticated defense tools to counter cyberattacks
Foundation under Grant 2025M771527, and in part by the Hunan Province with encryption has become imperative. For example, intrusion
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 2024JJ6527. (Corresponding
authors: Lixing Chen; Bo Zhang; Shenghong Li.) detection [4], [5] and malware detection methods [6] are increas-
 Hua Ding, Lixing Chen, and Shenghong Li are with the School of Computer ingly shifting their focus from non-encrypted traffic to encrypted
Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China, and also with traffic.
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Integrated Administration Technologies for In- Upon removing extraneous layers, the majority of the aforeformation Security, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: dinghua623@sjtu.edu.cn;
lxchen@sjtu.edu.cn; shli@sjtu.edu.cn).
 mentioned security applications in encrypted networks essen-
 Bo Zhang is with China Electric Power Research Institute, Beijing 100192, tially pertain to problems of encrypted traffic analysis [7].
China (e-mail: zhangbo6@epri.sgcc.com.cn). Consequently, the efficacy of encrypted traffic analysis serves
 Hao Peng is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang as a critical determinant of encrypted network security. En-
Normal University, Jinhua 321004, China (e-mail: hpeng@zjnu.edu.cn). crypted traffic analysis distinguishes itself from traditional traf-
 Zhe Qu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central
South University, Changsha 410083, China (e-mail: zhe_qu@csu.edu.cn). fic analysis methods [8], [9] by the capability to operate despite
 Yang Bai is with the School of Automation and Intelligent Sensing, Shanghai the concealment of content-related information in encrypted
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: ybai@sjtu.edu.cn). packets. Early studies of encrypted traffic analysis [3] leverage
 Our code is available at https://github.com/Amanda-HuaDing/Criss-cross_ residual plaintext in encrypted traffic to construct fingerprints
Traffic_Transformer.
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
 for analysis. Nevertheless, these approaches demonstrate limited
https://doi.org/10.1109/TSC.2026.3664705, provided by the authors. efficacy in practice due to the sparse availability of plaintext. Tra-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3664705 ditional machine learning (ML) techniques like Support Vector

 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1550 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 1. Overview of criss-cross traffic transformer for encrypted traffic analysis.

Classifier (SVC) and Random Forest have also been employed 1) Criss-cross Traffic Transformer (CTT) for Encrypted Traffic
for encrypted traffic analysis [10], [11], achieving reasonable Analysis: CTT first performs channel-independent patching to
accuracy in traffic classification tasks. However, their heavy segment each feature series of encrypted traffic into overlapping
reliance on handcrafted features restricts their generalization patches. These patches are then fed to the Criss-cross Attention
capabilities. Deep learning (DL) techniques [12], [13], owing to Module (CAM), a pivotal component of CTT. The “criss” part
their exceptional capability of automatic feature extraction, have of CAM identifies short-/long-term temporal correlations within
become the primary focus in encrypted traffic analysis. Given the individual feature series, and the “cross” part of CAM captures
concealment of content-related information in encrypted traffic, temporal correlations across multiple feature series of encrypted
the temporal correlations and dynamics of encrypted traffic rep- traffic. CTT converts multivariate feature series of encrypted
resent one of the few analyzable variables. State-of-the-art meth- traffic to feature representations enriched with temporal insights,
ods [14], [15] utilize Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [13] which are subsequently utilized for completing downstream
and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [16] to generate the tasks.
temporal insights within the encrypted traffic. While these meth- 2) Unified Classification and Forecasting Framework for
ods demonstrate success in capturing local correlations, they Encrypted Traffic: We investigate classification and forecasting
struggle to identify long-term temporal dependencies due to tasks for encrypted traffic based on CTT. The classification task
their limited scope of adjacent traffic. Besides, the majority of involves predicting a label series for encrypted traffic, while
these state-of-the-art approaches are confined to classification the forecasting task aims to forecast a sequence of labels for
paradigms—assigning labels to observed traffic retrospectively. forthcoming encrypted traffic based on currently observed traf-
This “detect-after-the-fact” nature is inherently reactive and fails fic. Particularly, we emphasize long-term forecasting scenarios,
to anticipate evolving traffic states. where the forecasted sequence extends beyond 20 time steps.
 To illustrate the temporal correlations in encrypted traffic, we We develop dedicated components known as the classification
conduct a case study on real-world data, with empirical obser- head and forecasting head, which accomplish classification and
vations detailed in Section V-B. The results reveal both short- forecasting tasks, respectively. Notably, classification and foreand long-term temporal correlations within univariate feature casting share the same upstream process and can be performed
series and across multiple feature dimensions. These temporal simultaneously.
correlations provide critical insights into regular activities and 3) Comprehensive Multi-level Analysis and Systematic Evalanomalies in encrypted networks, making their understanding uations: CTT exhibits adaptability and generality across various
essential for interpreting security issues. analytical levels in encrypted traffic analysis. We cover flow level
 In response to the above observations, this paper intro- (i.e., analyzing entire traffic flows), packet level (i.e., analyzing
duces a novel algorithm named Criss-Cross Traffic Transformer individual packets), and packet-to-flow level (i.e., analyzing
(CTT) for encrypted traffic analysis in security applications. An traffic flow using packet-level information) within a uniform
overview of CTT is depicted in Fig. 1. CTT is a specialized time framework. We systematically evaluate the performance of CTT
series Transformer [17], [18] tailored to efficiently capture both on all 3 analytical levels, using 5 real-world datasets in the
short-term and long-term temporal correlations within encrypted context of 2 security applications, and against 13 benchmarks.
traffic. Besides, CTT is equipped with the capability to ex- The experimental results show that CTT achieves up to 15.56%
plore and extract time dependencies across feature dimensions, improvement over SOTA solutions for encrypted traffic classithereby enhancing analytical performance for encrypted traffic fication. Additionally, CTT demonstrates over 92.5% forecastwith multiple feature variates. CTT is designed to deliver a ing accuracy, comparable to SOTA performances in seen-andunified framework that accommodates various analytical lev- classify scenarios.
els for encrypted traffic analysis, including packet-level, flowlevel, and packet-to-flow (p2f) level, offering generalized and
granularity-adaptable solutions for diverse security applications. II. RELATED WORKS
Particularly noteworthy is that CTT presents an innovative long- Encrypted Traffic Analysis for Security Applications: Existing
term forecasting functionality for encrypted traffic by leveraging works have extensively investigated encrypted traffic analysis
its exceptional capability of capturing long-term temporal cor- for security applications. These works can be categorized into
relations. To the best of our knowledge, this paper makes an three main domains: (1) website/application fingerprinting atinitial endeavor towards forecasting encrypted traffic patterns. tack, (2) malicious attack detection, and (3) user privacy protec-
The contributions of this work are summarized as follows: tion [19]. Studies in fingerprinting attacks focus on identifying
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1551

user activity [3], [10], thereby compromising the anonymity of TABLE I
encrypted networks. Works in malicious attack detection target COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHODS
network intrusion detection [4], [5] and malware detection [6],
[20], safeguarding network security by uncovering potential
attacks hidden within encrypted traffic. Meanwhile, studies
in user privacy protection aim to monitor mobile application
characteristics [21], [22], empowering users to control their
personally identifiable information. In the context of industrial
deployment, Anderson et al. [11] underscored the significant
challenges arising from non-stationarity and label noise in
practical encrypted malware detection. Moreover, Bernighausen
et al. [23] emphasized the imperative of real-time classification
capabilities to accommodate the high throughput characteristic
of modern network infrastructures.
 While prior methodologies have addressed various application scenarios, they predominantly focus on encrypted traffic extraction. ET-BERT [15] interprets traffic bytes as linguistic
classification. In contrast, the proposed CTT not only encom- tokens, pre-training a Transformer for traffic feature learning.
passes encrypted traffic classification tasks but also enables Zhao et al. [32] model network traffic as gray images and adopt
the exploration of encrypted traffic forecasting. Several studies a vision Transformer to extract multi-level flow representations.
have explored the task of traffic forecasting. For instance, Huo Deng et al. [33] introduced AN-Net, a model that processes
et al. [24] applied an enhanced Seasonal and Trend decomposi- traffic features independently before integrating them into a
tion algorithm to decompose traffic data, employing LSTM to robust unified representation via a self-attention module. While
forecast future network volume. Furthermore, Fang et al. [25] Transformer-based methods have demonstrated performance
integrated Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with LSTM to gains over earlier approaches, they typically rely on extensive
extract spatiotemporal features from mobile network traffic, pre-training procedures, which are both time-consuming and
enhancing the accuracy of traffic volume prediction. Montieri computationally demanding. Moreover, such methodologies are
et al. [26] concentrated on fine-grained, packet-level mobile predominantly restricted to traffic classification paradigms and
traffic characteristics prediction, emphasizing the explainability are inherently ill-suited for traffic forecasting. The absence
of their models. However, CTT differs from these works in task of this predictive capability precludes the generation of early
definition and application scope. First, most existing works focus warnings essential for proactive network management and the
on predicting specific traffic features or traffic volume, whereas preemption of advanced threats. Table I provides a qualitative
CTT is designed to forecast the labels of future traffic. Second, comparison between CTT and existing approaches in terms of
these works focus on mobile communication scenarios without methodological characteristics.
specific emphasis on encrypted traffic.
 ML Solutions for Encrypted Traffic Analysis: Traditional ML III. ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS
techniques have found extensive applications in encrypted traffic
analysis. Taylor et al. [10] proposed Appscanner, employing A. Preliminaries of Encrypted Traffic Analysis
statistical features to train an SVC for identifying Android apps. As aforementioned, encrypted traffic analysis lies as the fun-
Ede et al. [3] proposed Flowprint, which leverages temporal damental basis for various security applications in encrypted
correlations among destination-related features to achieve traffic networks. Our work analyzes encrypted traffic with a specific
classification through clustering. The efficiency of ML-based focus on temporal dependencies, which exerts minimal prereqmethods heavily depends on the quality of feature selection uisites on the form of encrypted traffic, thereby offering broad
and necessitates judicious feature extraction and selection for applications across typical implementation scenarios. Here, we
different scenarios. present two typical security applications based on encrypted
 DL has gained popularity in encrypted traffic analysis due to traffic analysis from the perspectives of both malicious attackers
its ability for autonomous feature extraction. Sirinam et al. [27] (fingerprinting attack) and network defenders (malware detecintroduced DF, leveraging CNN to capture patterns in packet size tion). These two scenarios also align with the experiments carand direction. To compensate for the loss of inter-variable infor- ried out in Section V. The fingerprinting attack aims to identify
mation caused by encryption, RNN is used to capture temporal the applications that the user is visiting in an encrypted connecpatterns in the traffic. Liu et al. [14] proposed FS-Net based on tion. In this case, the malicious attacker eavesdrops on encrypted
RNN to learn temporal dependencies from packet sequences. traffic between clients and the network services, and then utilizes
Lin et al. [28] proposed TSCRNN, leveraging a combination the encrypted traffic analysis to identify the application service
of CNN and stacked bidirectional LSTM. While RNN-based in use based on the collected encrypted traffic. In the context of
methods have shown performance improvement compared to malware detection, a network administrator collects encrypted
CNN-based methods, they have limited capability to capture traffic at gateways or routers and analyzes encrypted traffic to
long-term time dependencies [29], suggesting that there is still distinguish whether the encrypted traffic is issued by benign
room for improvement. software or malware.
 Transformers have shown great modeling ability for long- The above application scenarios can be described by a process
range dependencies in sequential data in Computer Vision of encrypted traffic analysis. The encrypted traffic analysis is
(CV) [30] and Natural Language Processing (NLP) [31], and carried out by a dedicated agent. This agent can be the malicious
thus are appealing to encrypted traffic analysis. Recent ad- attacker in the fingerprinting attack or the network administrator
vancements have utilized Transformer-based models, adapting in the malware detection scenario. The agent is tasked with two
language or vision processing techniques for traffic feature primary functions: (1) collecting encrypted packets during user
1552 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

communications, and (2) pre-processing collected encrypted indicating the length of the segmented flow. Following simipackets and performing the designed encrypted analysis. This lar procedures in packet-level analysis, a packet-level feature
 ∞
agent is deployable at intelligent switches, routers, and gate- series {xpkt τ }τ =1 can be constructed. The p2f-level analysis
 pkt ∞
ways, which are typical sites for implementing traffic collection receives {xτ }τ =1 as input and generates analytical results for
tools such as Libpcap [35], TCPdump [35], etc. The enhanced flows {flj }∞ j=1 , where flj = (pkt(j−1)×F +1 , . . . , pktj×F )
computational capabilities of these high-end edge devices also denotes j-th flow.
allow for the execution of DL computations. During packet 2) Analytical Tasks:
collection, the agent runs the traffic collection tool to capture • Encrypted Traffic Classification: The classification task
encrypted packets. takes a finite feature series → x = {x1 , . . . , xL } as input, where
 xl is either a flow-level feature vector xfl τ or a packet-level
 feature vector xpkt τ and L denotes the length of the feature
B. Analytical Levels/ Tasks for Encrypted Traffic series. Notably, the feature vectors are continuous in time, i.e.,
 →
 with x1 ← xt , the l-th feature vector in x satisfies xl ← xt+l−1 .
 Upon acquiring encrypted packets, the traffic analysis agent For flow-level and packet-level classification, the goal of claspre-processes them with analyzers such as Wireshark [36], sification is to assign a label series →  = {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷL } to the
 y
and Tranalyzer [37]. The processing of encrypted traffic can →
 input feature series x. Here, each label ŷl ∈ [1, 2, . . . , C] (C
be adapted to various granularities contingent on the imple- is the number of classes) represents the predicted class for
mentation scenario. Herein, we present three analytical levels, the l-th flow/packet. The classification for p2f-level analysis
packet-level, flow-level, and packet-to-flow level, alongside two follows a similar formulation but differs in the length of the
analytical tasks, namely classification and forecasting. predicted label series. Given the packet-level feature series → x,
 1) Analytical Levels: p2f classification analyzes it in form of feature series seg-
 • Packet-level Traffic Analysis: This level is highly granular, →
 ments, x = {(x1 , . . . , xF ), . . . , (xL−F +1 , . . . , xL )} and generfacilitating near-real-time analysis for encrypted traffic, which  = {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷ
 →
fits application scenarios like real-time intrusion detection. In ates a predicted label series y L/F }, where ŷf , f =
the context of packet-level analysis, encrypted traffic is charac- 1, . . . , L/F, denotes the predicted class of f -th segment (i.e.,
terized as a sequence of consecutive packets (pkt), denoted by flow). This formulation has a mild implicit assumption that
Traffic = {pktτ }∞ τ =1 , and its processing centers on extract-
 L > F and L = u × F, u = 1, 2, . . . .
ing packet features. Due to the encryption, observable features • Encrypted Traffic Forecasting: Compared to classification,
of encrypted packets are restricted. Common features include traffic forecasting has received limited attention, largely due to
the source/destination IP, source/destination port, packet size, the lack of effective supporting techniques. Traditional traffic
packet payload size, etc. The features associated with pktτ are forecasting works [25], [38] focus on low-level metrics such
encapsulated in a feature vector xpkt ∈ RM , where M pkt is
 pkt as traffic volume or throughput. In contrast, our work aims to
 τ
the number of extracted features. By applying feature extraction predict semantic-level labels (e.g., application categories, malto each packet in {pktτ }∞ ware families), offering significant advantages for both proactive
 τ =1 , a packet-level feature series
{xpkt ∞ network defense and quality of service (QoS) enhancement. For
 τ }τ =1 can be constructed. The packet-level analysis is
conducted on the packet-level feature series, where each packet example, in malware detection scenarios, forecasting that an
serves as a fundamental unit. upcoming flow sequence is likely associated with a specific
 • Flow-level Traffic Analysis: This level analyzes encrypted malware family enables the early deployment of mitigation
traffic flows rather than individual packets to provide a higher- strategies—such as preemptively blocking IPs or ports, dynamlevel overview of network activity, making it suitable for security ically adjusting firewall rules, isolating vulnerable resources, or
applications such as fingerprinting attacks. In the context of flow- prioritizing forensic analysis of suspected endpoints—before the
level analysis, the encrypted traffic is represented as a sequence malicious activity fully manifests. In this context, we outline the
of successive flows (fl), denoted by Traffic = {flτ }∞ inputs and outputs involved in forecasting tasks. The forecasting
 τ =1 .
A flow is defined as a collection of packets sharing specific task also operates on a finite flow-level or packet-level feature secommon attributes within a predefined time interval. Therefore, ries →x = {x1 , . . . , xL }, serving as input. The primary objective
the features of flows often encompass statistics derived from of forecasting is to predict a label series →  = {ŷL+1 , . . . , ŷL+T }
 y
the packets contained in the flow, including the packet count, corresponding to forthcoming encrypted traffic (unseen) over T
maximum packet length, minimum interval time, etc. We let time steps. We call L the look-back length, and T the forecasting
xfl
 τ ∈R
 M fl
 denote the feature vector of flτ , where M fl is the length. The forecasted label ŷL+t can represent the class label of
number of extracted features. By applying feature extraction to a packet in the packet-level analysis or the class label of a flow
each flow in {flτ }∞ τ =1 , we can obtain a flow-level feature series
 in flow-level analysis. To address the inherent challenge of unla-
 ∞
{xflτ }τ =1 , on which flow-level traffic analysis is performed. The
 beled encrypted flows in real-world environments, CTT supports
fundamental unit in the flow-level analysis is traffic flow. two workflows: direct label-free forecasting of future traffic
 →
 • Packet-to-flow Level Traffic Analysis: This approach facili- solely from feature vectors x, or alternatively, first classifying
tates examining encrypted traffic at the flow level by analyzing the lookback window to obtain predicted labels {ŷ1 , . . . , ŷL }
underlying packet-level attributes. It inspects fine-grained in- which are then propagated through the forecasting pipeline to
formation to obtain a high-level pattern of encrypted traffic, generate {ŷL+1 , . . . , ŷL+T }.
which is advantageous in advanced threat detection systems
for identifying sophisticated malware. The p2f-level analysis
 IV. CRISS-CROSS TRAFFIC TRANSFORMER
processes encrypted traffic in the unit of packets Traffic =
{pktτ }∞ τ =1 . The packet sequence is segmented into flows Criss-cross Traffic Transformer (CTT) is a specialized time
{(pkt1 , . . . , pktF ), (pktF +1 , . . . , pkt2×F ), . . . }, with F series transformer designed specifically for encrypted traffic.
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1553

 to the previous one, resulting in an overlap between consecutive patches of length (P − S). For a univariate feature series
 →(m)
 x , the overlapped patching generates a sequence of N patch
 (m) (m) (m)
 sequence xp = {x(n−1)×S+1 , . . . , x(n−1)×S+P }N n=1 , where
 N =  (L−PS
 )
  + 2 is the total number of generated patches. To
 ensure that the length of the last patch is the same as the length
 of previous patches, we pad S repeated instances of the last
 (m) →
 value xL ∈ R to the end of x(m) . The patch length determines
 the granularity of the analysis. Longer patches capture broader
 temporal patterns but may miss finer details in brief intervals.
 Conversely, shorter patches enhance the resolution of analysis,
 detecting subtle variations but potentially overlooking wider
Fig. 2. Diagram of CTT architecture.
 trends. Additionally, the patch length and stride length jointly
 govern the overlap between patches. A larger patch overlap
 offers multiple contextual perspectives of the same data point
Fig. 2 presents an overview of CTT, which encompasses three across adjacent patches, thereby improving the capacity of CTT
key components: Patching Module, Criss-cross Attention Mod- (m)
 to learn nuanced features. The patch sequence xp is then fed
ule (CAM), and Dual Output Head. into Transformer, with each patch corresponding to a token (an
 Patching Module: The patching operation is a distinctive trait individual unit of input data in Transformer). Patching reduces
of CTT. Recall our objective is to understand the temporal the number of input tokens from L to approximately L/S.
correlations within encrypted traffic. However, an individual This implies the computational complexity of attention maps
packet or flow offers restricted insight across time domain. is quadratically decreased by S.
Patching operations amalgamate time steps into subseries-level (m)
 The patch sequence xp is mapped to the latent space of
patches, thereby capturing comprehensive information that is
 dimension dmodel through a learnable linear projection Wp ∈
not attainable through point-wise analysis. This approach en-
 Rdmodel ×P and a learnable additive position encoding Wpos ∈
hances the locality of traffic data and facilitates the examination
 Rdmodel ×N for monitoring the temporal order of patches, which
of short-term time correlations. Besides, patching enables the (m)
subsequent transformer to access longer historical traffic data, generates the embedding xd ∈ Rdmodel ×N for patch sequence
 (m) (m) (m)
facilitating the analysis of long-term time correlations. xp : xd = Wp xp + Wpos . The patch sequence embed-
 Criss-cross Attention Module: CAM is the core of CTT. (m)
 ding xd serves as the input to CAM.
Compared to the traditional Transformer, CAM utilizes a two- Why channel-independent patching? CTT utilizes channelstage attention framework to efficiently capture the cross-time independent patching. An alternative strategy is channel-mixing
correlations and cross-dimension correlations. CTT comprises patching [17], which aggregates all features in each time step
Cross-time Attention Layers (CTALs) and Cross-dimension into input tokens. However, this strategy may encounter chal-
Attention Layers (CDALs). The CTALs are designed to mine lenges due to potential inconsistencies of the temporal depenshort-term and long-term temporal dependencies within patches dencies among univariate feature series. Mixing these feature
of an individual feature series, whereas the CDALs capture the series during patching could obscure the temporal correlation
time dependencies across multiple feature series. within each univariate feature series. Therefore, we adopt the
 Dual Output Head: CTT incorporates two distinct output channel-independent patching strategy to better retain temporal
heads tailored to classification and forecasting tasks. The classi- correlations within each univariate feature series. The temporal
fication head utilizes a CNN-based structure to reconstruct tem- correlations across multiple feature series will be addressed by
poral information from patch-level to point-level, thus enabling the subsequent CAM module.
CTT to generate classification results of each data point (i.e.,
each packet/flow). The forecasting head utilizes a straightforward flattening structure to forecast future label series based
 B. Criss-Cross Attention Module
on the temporal correlations observed in the lookback series.
This dual output head makes CTT a robust solution for various Despite utilizing the channel-independent patching in CTT,
encrypted traffic analysis scenarios. it is noteworthy that the correlations among different feature
 series are not regarded as insignificant. To compensate for
A. Patching Module the information loss in cross-feature correlations, we propose
 → the Criss-cross Attention Module (CAM). CAM strategically
 The input feature series x = {x1 , . . . , xL } is a finite multi- captures cross-time and cross-dimension temporal correlations
 →
variate series, where an element xl ∈ RM ×1 in x is the multi- through a two-stage process, which comprises two loosely
dimension feature vector for a packet/flow. Therefore, → x can coupled components Cross-Time Attention Layer (CTAL) and
be decomposed into M univariate feature series. The m-th uni- Cross-Dimension Attention Layer (CDAL). This sequential ar-
 → (m) (m)
variant feature series is denoted by x(m) = {x1 , . . . , xL }. chitecture is specifically designed to mitigate the computational
To better mine the short-term and long-term dependencies within complexity of CAM, as concurrent attention across both time
univariate feature series, CTT performs channel-independent and dimensions is computationally prohibitive.
patching. We employed an overlapped patching strategy, which Cross-time Attention Layer: CTAL directly applies the multigenerates feature patches based on the patch length P and stride head self-attention (MSA) mechanism [39] to capture temporal
S. Each subsequent patch is shifted backward by S steps relative correlations within each feature series, as illustrated in Fig. 2 (c).
1554 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 (m)
It takes patch embedding of univariate feature series xd , m = Here, Otimen ∈ RM ×dmodel represents the vectors of all dimen-
1, . . . , M, as input. In the multi-head attention mechanism, each sions, An ∈ Rc×dmodel denotes the aggregated messages from all
 (m) feature dimensions, and Õdimn is the output of the router mechaattention head, indexed by h = 1, . . . , H, transforms xd into
 (m) (m) (m) nism. The multi-head attention block also includes LayerNorm
query matrices Qh = (xd ) WhQ , key matrices Kh =
 (m)  (m) (m) layers and a feed-forward network with residual connections,
(xd ) WhK , and value matrices Vh = (xd ) WhV . Here, expressed as:
WhQ , WhK , ∈ Rdmodel ×dk , WhV ∈ Rdmodel ×dv , with dk = dv =
dmodel /H. Given the Query-Key-Value (QKV) matrices, each  
attention head utilizes the scaled dot-product attention to com- Ôdim = LayerNorm Otime + Õdim
pute the attention scores, expressed as  
     Odim = LayerNorm Ôdim + MLP(Ôdim ) (5)
 (m) (m) (m) (m)
 Oh = attention Qh , Kh , Vh
 ⎛   ⎞
 (m) (m) CAM comprises K (K = 3 in our work) criss-cross atten-
 ⎜ hQ K h ⎟ (m)
 = softmax ⎝ √ tion blocks (a combination of a CTAL and a CDAL). This
 ⎠ Vh , (1) (m)
 dk process can be expressed as Z = CAM({xd }M m=1 ), where
 M ×N ×dmodel
 Z∈R is the output of CAM. Since the router mech-
 (m) anism reduces the complexity of CDAL from O(M 2 ˜N ) to
where Oh ∈ Rdk ×N is the output of the h-th attention head. O(M N ). The overall computational complexity of CAM is
The output of MSA can be represented as Eqn. (2), where WO O(M N 2 + M N ) = O(M N 2 ). After CAM, both temporal coris a learnable linear projection in MSA. relations within the univariate feature series and across multiple
   feature series are captured in Z.
 (O(m) ) = MSAtime Q(m) , K(m) , V(m)
    
 (m) (m)
 = concat O1 , . . . , OH WO . (2) C. Dual Output Head
 With temporal insights of encrypted traffic captured in Z,
All feature dimensions share the same MSAtime . The multi-head a dual output head is designed to realize classification and
attention block also includes LayerNorm layers and a feed- forecasting tasks. The dual output head includes a classification
forward network with residual connections, expressed as head and a forecasting head, whose architecture is depicted in
   Fig. 2(e) and (f).
 (m)
 Ô(m) = LayerNorm xd + O(m) , Classification Head: For classification tasks, a straightfor-
    ward way to obtain label series is passing Z ∈ RM ×N ×dmodel
 (m)
 Otime = LayerNorm Ô(m) + MLP Ô(m) , (3) through an MLP network to aggregate temporal and crossdimension information, and then reshaping it to the desired
where MLP denotes a multi-layer (two-layer in this paper) feed- format. However, in the phase of patching and CAM, temporal
 (m) information is preserved and extracted among patches rather
forward network, and Otime is the output of CTAL.
 The computation complexity of the CTAL is O(M N 2 ). After than individual data points, posing challenges for data point
this stage, temporal dependencies among patches within the classification. Furthermore, applying MLP raises concerns re-
 (m) garding computational complexity. Specifically, the dimension
feature dimension are encapsulated in Otime ∈ Rdmodel ×N . Subof the input layer being M × N × dmodel is typically large,
sequently, Otime ∈ RM ×dmodel ×N undergoes further processing leading to elevated learning costs for MLP. To address these chalby CDAL. lenges, we propose a CNN-based output head for classification
 Cross-dimension Attention Layer: CDAL needs to apply MSA tasks. The architecture of the CNN-based head consists of two
to all feature dimensions. However, implementing this directly convolutional blocks, each comprising a convolution layer, an
results in a computational complexity of O(M 2 ), which be- activation layer, and a pooling layer. The convolutional layers are
comes impractical for a large feature dimension M . To address utilized to reconstruct fine-grained temporal information from Z
this problem, we introduce the router mechanism [40]. As de- by capturing features from different channels, while the pooling
picted in Fig. 2(d), a learnable vector serves as the router for n-th layers facilitate the extraction of dominant features. After two
patch, denoted as Rn ∈ Rc×dmodel , c M , n = 1, . . . , N . The convolution blocks, the output vectors at the data point level and
router aggregates messages from all dimensions using Rn as can be fed into an MLP layer to obtain predicted label series ŷ
query matrices in MSA, and vectors of all dimensions Otimen ∈ Forecasting Head: As illustrated in Fig. 2(f), the forecast-
RM ×dmodel act as key and value matrices. Subsequently, Rn ing head obtains the forecasting results by pushing Z through
redistributes received messages among dimensions by utilizing a flattening layer and an MLP. The flattening layer receives
vectors of dimensions Otimen as queries and the aggregated mes- the output from the attention module, Z ∈ RM ×N ×dmodel , and
sages as key and value. This establishes an all-to-all connection reshapes it into Z̃ ∈ RN ×Δ , where Δ = M × dmodel repreamong M dimensions. The router mechanism can be expressed sents the flattened dimension of each patch. This process efas: fectively consolidates the information from each patch into
 An = MSA1dim (Rn , Otimen , Otimen ), n = 1, . . . , N. a unified vector Z̃n , n = 1, . . . , N . MLP then processes Z̃ to
 extract further insights and produce the forecasted outputs y =
 →
 Õdimn = MSA2dim (Otimen , An , An ), n = 1, . . . , N. (4) (ŷL+1 , . . . , ŷL+T ).
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1555

D. Training CTT-Based Classifier/Forecaster malware detection. These datasets are selected to enable con-
 1) Training CTT-Based Classifier: As aforementioned, en- sistent comparison with SOTA methods, particularly ET-BERT
 [15] and YaTC [32]. Statistical details of all datasets are provided
crypted traffic can be characterized by flow-level or packet-level
multivariate feature series, denoted by X = {xτ }∞ in Supplementary Material C-A.
 τ =1 . Training
of CTT-based traffic classifier also requires the ground-truth 1) ISCX-VPN2016 [41] investigates fingerprinting attacks,
 where adversaries attempt to classify encrypted VPN traffic into
labels Y = {yτ }∞ τ =1 for the feature series.
 Packet/flow-level Traffic Classification: For packet-/flow- 7 user behavior categories (e.g., Browsing, Chat).
level traffic classification, the mini-batch update is used to 2) ISCX-Tor2016 [42] focuses on fingerprinting attacks
 within Tor-encrypted traffic, covering 8 behavior categories
train CTT. In each training iteration, a mini-bacth of feature
series Xb = {→ xi }B (e.g., Audio, Browsing, Chat).
 i=1 is randomly sampled from X , where B 3) CSTNETTLS1.3 [15] is designed for website fingerprintis the batch size (i.e., number of sampled feature series) and
→ ing attacks over the TLS 1.3 protocol. It comprises traffic traces
xi = {xi,1 , xi,2 , . . . , xi,L } is the i-th feature series sample
with its starting point xi,1 randomly selected in X . We also from 120 websites (e.g., apple.com) under CSTNET.
obtain the ground-truth label series from Y for the sampled 4) USTC-TFC2016 [43] supports malware detection from
 → → a defensive perspective, containing encrypted traffic from 20
feature series mini-batch, denoted by Yb = {yi }B i=1 where yi =
{yi,1 , yi,2 , . . . , yi,L } is ground-truth label series for xi . → software types—10 benign (e.g., BitTorrent, Facetime, FTP) and
 10 malicious (e.g., Cridex, Geodo, Htbot).
 CTT-based encrypted traffic classifier takes the mini-batch of
 5) CIC-IoT2022 [44] also targets malware detection. Followfeature series Xb , and generates a mini-batch of predicted label
  }B , where →  = {ŷi,1 , ŷi,2 , . . . , ŷi,L } is the ing [32], we select 10 software categories due to limited traffic
series Ŷb = {→ y i i=1 y i in some, comprising seven benign (e.g., Interactions Audio,
 →
predicted label series for xi . The classification loss is quantified Interactions Cameras) and three malicious (e.g., Attacks Flood,
by a cross-entropy loss function  = σ(Yb , Ŷb ), and parameters Attacks Hydra) categories.
of CTT are trained toward minimizing loss. We adopt two data processing approaches to evaluate the
 Packet-to-flow Level Traffic Classification: For p2f-level traf- robustness of CTT under different preprocessing strategies
fic classification, the mini-batch of packet-level feature se- comprehensively. For ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, USTC-
 → → B
ries Xb = {xi }B i=1 and ground-truth label series Yb = {yi→ }i=1 TFC2016, and CIC-IoT2022, we follow a unified pipeline conare constructed. The form of feature series sample xi = sisting of 3 main steps: (1) constructing multivariate feature se-
{xi,1 , . . . , xi,L } in p2f-level analysis is identical to the packet- ries with Tranalyzer2 [37], including session and flow identifiers;
level analysis. The key difference lies in the ground-truth label (2) mitigating class imbalance through stratified downsampling
 → L/F
series which is expressed as yi = {yi,j }j=1 , where yi,j is the based on session or flow IDs; and (3) train-test-validation set
ground-truth label for the j-th flow, (xi,(j−1)×F +1 , . . . , xi,j×F ), split with a 70:20:10 ratio, ensuring that each session appears
in →xi and F is the length of the segmented flow. In each training exclusively in one subset to prevent information leakage. For
iteration, Xb is fed into a CTT-based classifier to obtain predicted CSTNET-TLS1.3, we adopt a PCAP-level processing strategy,
  }B . Similarly, a cross-entropy where (1) entire PCAP files serve as the units for the trainp2f-level label series Ŷb = {→ y i i=1 test-validation set split with a 70:20:10 ratio. Subsequently, (2)
loss function  = σ(Yb , Ŷb ) is employed for the model training. multivariate feature construction and (3) class balancing are
 2) Training of CTT-Based Forecaster: Training of the CTT- performed independently within each subset, following the same
based forecaster also utilizes mini-batch updating. In each procedures as previously described. Detailed preprocessing proiteration, we construct a mini-batch of lookback feature se- cedures are provided in Supplementary Material C-B.
ries Xb = {→ xi }B i=1 . A sampled lookback feature series xi =
 →
 Evaluation Metrics and Implementation Details: Four widely
{xi,1 , . . . , xi,L } has the same form as that in classification tasks. recognized evaluation metrics, accuracy (ACC), recall (REC),
Differing from the CTT-based classifiers, CTT-based forecasters precision (PRE), and F1-score (F1), are employed to assess
construct mini-batches for two types of ground-truth label series. the classification and forecasting performance. For CTT imple-
The first type is the mini-batch for ground-truth lookback label mentation, CAM is composed of 3 criss-cross attention blocks.
 → →
series Yb = {yi }B i=1 , where yi = {yi,1 , . . . , yi,L }. The second Flow-level classification utilizes a lookback length L = 64, baltype is the mini-batch of forthcoming series Yb = {→ yi }B
 i=1 ancing essential temporal pattern capture against performance
 →
where yi = {yi,L+1 , . . . , yi,L+T }. The CTT-based forecaster degradation from irrelevant long-range dependencies at higher
 →
can take two kinds of input: (1) a lookback feature series, xi ; L values, while preventing insufficient long-term correlation
(2) a lookback feature series combined with its ground-truth capture at lower L. For p2f analysis, L = 32 is empirically
 → →
lookback label series, {xi , yi }. We have considered both cases selected to avoid excessive short-flow filtering and maintain
in the experiments. Given Xb or {Xb , Yb }, CTT-based forecaster dataset integrity. Training employed a batch size of 128 and
outputs a mini-batch of forecasted label series Ŷb = {y  }, where
 → an initial learning rate of 1 × 10−4 , dynamically adjusted via a
 i
 = {ŷi,L+1 , . . . , ŷi,L+T }. The loss function to be minimized
→ OneCycle scheduler. To prevent overfitting, early stopping with a
y i patience of 20 epochs is applied. All configurations are evaluated
by the CTT-based forecaster is also the cross-entropy loss func- over five independent runs with randomized seeds, with avertion  = σ(Yb , Ŷb , ). age performance reported. Hyperparameters are summarized in
 Table II, and features are detailed in Supplementary
 Material C-C.
 V. EXPERIMENTS AND EVALUATIONS
A. Experimental Setups B. Observations of “time” Impact
 Datasets and Preparations: We evaluate CTT’s performance We present several empirical observations in Fig. 3 which are
using 5 real-world datasets: 3 for fingerprinting attacks and 2 for obtained during this work. We characterize real-world encrypted
1556 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 HYPER-PARAMETERS OF CTT FLOW-LEVEL CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE

 follows: (1) ML-based methods: FlowPrint [3] and AppScan-
Fig. 3. Illustration of temporal correlations of encrypted traffic. (a) Temporal ner [10]; (2) CNN/RNN-based methods: Deep Fingerprinting
correlations within univariate feature series. (b) Temporal correlations across (DF) [27], FS-Net [14], Deeppacket [34], and TSCRNN [28];
feature dimensions.
 (3) Transformer-based methods: ET-BERT [15], YaTC [32]
 and AN-Net [33]; (4) Multimodal methods: App-Net [45] and
 MIMETIC [46]. As established in [45] and [46], both App-Net
traffic in dataset ISCX-VPN2016 [41] by extracting features and MIMETIC require two input modalities: traffic-featurefrom its flows (minPktSz, maxPktSz, minIAT, numPk- based time series and traffic payload. Since our datasets lack
tRevd), and generate a multivariate feature series. payload information, these models cannot be directly applied.
 Long-/Short-term temporal correlation in univariate feature To enable fair comparison, we introduce modified versions,
series: Fig. 3 (a) presents a visualization of a univariate fea- AppNet-LSTM and MIMETIC-GRU, retaining only their RNN
ture series and its temporal correlations. The bottom part of and GRU components respectively to capture temporal corre-
Fig. 3 (a) depicts the univariate feature series (minPktSz) of lations. For further details on baselines, refer to Supplementary
encrypted traffic. We compute pairwise correlations of arbitrary Material C-D. Additionally, as most SOTA methods are designed
time frames within the feature series. The correlation scores, for specific analytical levels in traffic classification (see Table I),
obtained using Scaled Dot-Product Attention [39] (detailed in each baseline is compared only at its applicable analytical level.
Supplementary Material A), are presented in a correlation matrix Results and Discussions: The comparative analysis of CTT
in the upper part of Fig. 3 (a). For a selected target time frame and baselines at flow-level is summarized in Table III. CTT
(colored in red), we identify time frames with high correlation achieves superior performance in encrypted traffic classification
scores as its relevant time frames (colored in gray). Notably, across 3 datasets, with F1-scores of 0.9481, 0.9912, and 0.8829.
relevant time frames exhibit varying distances from the target Flow-level classification on ISCX-Tor2016 is omitted due to
time frame, some distant and others being proximate. This its limited size (469 flows) and severe class imbalance. On
observation underscores the presence of both long-term and CSTET-TLS1.3, the scarcity of per-class samples, combined
short-term temporal correlations within encrypted traffic. with ET-BERT’s stronger small-sample learning capability as a
 Temporal correlation across feature dimensions: Fig. 3 (b) pre-training-based method, results in slightly better performance
presents visualizations of multiple univariate feature series and than CTT. The packet-level classification performance is prethe temporal correlations across different feature dimensions. sented in Table IV. CTT consistently achieves values exceeding
The bottom part of Fig. 3 (b) depicts a multivariate feature series 0.91 across all evaluation metrics over all 5 datasets, underof the encrypted traffic. Within this context, we select a specific scoring its robust capability in capturing temporal dependencies
target frame in the minPktSz feature series and assess its among packet sequences.
temporal correlations with time frames in other feature dimen- Classification performance at the p2f-level is detailed in
sions. The upper part of Fig. 3 (b) depicts the correlation score, Table V. Evaluation of the p2f-level in CSTNet-TLS1.3 is
which demonstrates noticeable temporal correlations between precluded due to severe class imbalance. CTT outperforms
time frames across multiple feature dimensions. other methods on ISCX-VPN2016, ISCX-Tor2016, and USTC-
 TFC2016 datasets, achieving F1-scores of 0.9943, 0.9962, and
 0.9948, respectively. However, CTT encounters challenges on
C. Comparison With State-of-The-Art Methods
 the CIC-IoT2022 dataset due to significant category imbal-
 1) Traffic Classification. Baselines: We evaluate CTT ance, resulting in comparatively lower performance on minority
against 11 state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods, categorized as classes. Conversely, YaTC exhibits remarkable effectiveness in
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1557

 TABLE IV TABLE VI
 PACKET-LEVEL CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF IMBALANCE MITIGATION STRATEGIES

 TABLE VII
 EFFICIENCY COMPARISON ON ISCX-VPN2016 DATASET

 TABLE V
 P2F-LEVEL CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE

 Fig. 4. Efficiency comparison at the p2f-level. Circle size is proportional to
 memory footprint. (a) VPN2016. (b) Tor2016.

 augments minority classes to the median sample frequency using
 random oversampling with replacement; and (2) FocalLoss [47],
 configured with α = 0.25 and γ = 2 to focus learning on hard
 examples. The comparative results, summarized in Table VI,
 demonstrate that both strategies yield distinct performance gains
 compared to the baseline YaTC. These findings confirm that
 integrating sampling-based augmentation or specialized loss
 functions effectively improves CTT’s capability to handle imbalanced distributions, offering actionable solutions for real-world
 network environments.
 Efficiency Analysis: We conduct a comprehensive comparison
 of classification performance, processing time (PT), memory
 footprint (MF), and CPU utilization between CTT and baseline
 models at the packet-to-flow (p2f) level. Processing time is
 measured using training speed per iteration. The results are
 summarized in Table VII, with a visual representation provided
 in Fig. 4. As shown in Table VII, CTT achieves a faster processing speed than other Transformer-based methods (YaTC)
 but remains slower than other deep learning-based approaches.
 Meanwhile, Transformer-based models (CTT and YaTC) exhibit
 superior classification performance compared to other baselines
 but entail a higher memory footprint and increased CPU utilizathis scenario, benefiting from its robust transfer learning capabil- tion during training.
ities. The performance gaps observed in specific scenarios stem Significance Tests: Statistical significance tests are conducted
from the divergence between CTT’s “training-from-scratch” on the ISCX-VPN2016 and ISCX-Tor2017 datasets to evaluate
approach and the “pre-training” paradigms of baselines like ET- the performance of CTT in comparison to baseline methods at
BERT and YaTC. Although pre-training improves robustness in the packet-level. The evaluations on each dataset are performed
data-scarce environments via prior knowledge, it necessitates over 10 independent runs with different random seeds. In adsignificant computational resources. dition to the 5 runs presented in the main results, 5 additional
 Mitigation of Class Imbalance: To enhance CTT’s robustness runs are conducted to enhance the robustness of the statistical
against data imbalance in practical deployments, we evaluated analysis. Wilcoxon signed-rank tests are employed to compare
two specific mitigation strategies on the highly imbalanced CIC- CTT with each baseline, consistently demonstrating that CTT
IoT2022 dataset (p2f-level): (1) Random Oversampling, which significantly outperforms all baseline methods (W = 55.0,
1558 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE IX
 FORECASTING PERFORMANCE OF CTT AND BASELINES

Fig. 5. Paired performance plots of CTT and ET-BERT at packet-level.
(a) ISCX-VPN2016. (b) ISCX-Tor2016.

 TABLE X
 EFFICIENCY COMPARISON ON FORECASTING TASKS

 packet inter-arrival times, forthcoming packets may arrive be-
Fig. 6. Critical Difference (CD) diagram at packet-level. (a) AppScanner. fore the forecasted results can be effectively utilized. There-
(b) Deeppacket. (c) ET-BERT. fore, this experiment focuses on forecasting flow-level label
 sequences with a lookback length of L = 24. The experiments
 are conducted with varying forecasting steps (T = 8, 12, 24) on
 TABLE VIII the ISCX-VPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 datasets. The selec-
 CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE UNDER DATA SCARCITY tion of T is driven by the inherently bursty and non-stationary
 nature of encrypted network traffic, which imposes fundamental
 constraints on reliably predicting label sequences over extended
 horizons. Consequently, our evaluation prioritizes short-term
 traffic forecasting. Additionally, the limited number of flows
 in ISCX-Tor2016 and the imbalanced class distribution in CIC-
 IoT2022 pose significant challenges for forecasting tasks, leadp = 0.001) across both datasets. Paired performance plots, ing to their exclusion from this part.
presented in Fig. 5, illustrate that CTT consistently outperforms Results and Discussions: Table IX presents the forecasting
the previous SOTA, ET-BERT, across varying random seeds. performance of CTT in comparison to baselines. Specifically, on
Furthermore, the Nemenyi test is employed, facilitating pairwise the ISCX-VPN2016 dataset, CTT achieves F1-scores of 0.7407,
comparisons across multiple datasets. The calculated Critical 0.7101, and 0.6695 at different forecasting steps, demonstrating
Difference (CD) is 0.438 (p = 0.05). CD diagrams illustrating the a notable improvement over baselines. On the USTC-TFC2016
performance of CTT relative to each baseline on the two datasets dataset, CTT shows comparable performance to baselines, with
are presented in Fig. 6. The ranking differences between CTT F1-scores of 0.888, 0.8818, and 0.8786 at evaluated forecasting
and each baseline exceed the CD threshold, thereby confirming steps. These results validate the efficacy of CTT on traffic
that CTT demonstrates statistically significant superiority over forecasting tasks.
all baseline methods. Efficiency Analysis: We further compare the efficiency of CTT
 Data Scalability Analysis: To assess CTT’s robustness under with baselines for the traffic forecasting task. The results on
limited labeled data, we conducted additional experiments on the ISCX-VPN2016 dataset with T = 24 are summarized in
ISCX-Tor2017 for packet-to-flow level traffic classification. We Table X. While PatchTST achieves the best processing speed
trained CTT using only 1%, 2%, 5%, and 10% of the original and memory efficiency, CTT outperforms the baselines in terms
training data while keeping the validation and test sets un- of CPU utilization and forecasting performance.
changed, ensuring temporal continuity in the remaining training Performance without Lookback Label: We also assess the
sequences. The results, presented in Table VIII, show that with forecasting performance of CTT under conditions where the
1% or 2% of labeled data, CTT’s F1-score declines by 12.74%. lookback label series is unavailable. The F1-scores of CTT and
However, with 5% or 10%, performance remains stable, with a baselines, with and without access to lookback label series on
reduction of less than 5%. These findings underscore CTT’s ISCX-VPN2016 and USTC-TFC2016 datasets, are illustrated
robustness, demonstrating its ability to maintain competitive in Fig. 7. As illustrated, the absence of ground-truth labels
performance under data scarcity. from the lookback traffic series does not significantly impair
 2) Traffic Forecasting: Baselines: In encrypted traffic fore- the performance of CTT. Notably, CTT maintains superior
casting, there appears to be a paucity of related works, to the forecasting accuracy without lookback traffic labels, achieving
best of our knowledge. To evaluate the effectiveness of CTT, F1-scores of 0.7361, 0.67, and 0.5955 for different forecasting
we benchmark it against two SOTA time-series Transformers: lengths on ISCX-VPN2016, and 0.8831, 0.8739, and 0.8768 on
PatchTST [18] and Crossformer [40]. Given the typically short USTC-TFC2016.
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1559

 features are implicitly captured through channel-mixing rather
 than explicitly via CDAL. CTT without CDAL retains only
 CTAL in the attention module, omitting CDAL. CTT without
 DOH replaces the CNN-based output head for traffic classification with an MLP head of equivalent depth.
 As illustrated in Table XI: (1) The absence of the channelindependent mechanism leads to performance degradation
 across all configurations, highlighting the crucial role of capturing temporal correlations within individual feature series. (2)
 Removing CDAL from CTT results in inferior performance in
Fig. 7. Forecasting performance (F1 score) w./w.o. lookback labels under most configurations, emphasizing the importance of capturing
varying forecasting lengths T . (a) ISCX-VPN2016. (b) USTC-TFC2016.
 temporal correlations across multiple features. (3) Replacing the
 CNN head with an MLP head in CTT configurations consistently
 results in performance degradation, indicating the superior capability of the CNN-based head to extract and utilize feature
 information effectively. (4) The integration of CIP, CAM, and
 DOH in CTT consistently yields superior classification results
 across most settings.
 The effect of the patching strategy is presented in Supplementary Material D-B.
Fig. 8. Impact of individual feature omission.
 2) Impact of Specific Features: To elucidate the methodological source of CTT’s robustness, we conducted a feature study
 on the ISCX-Tor2016 dataset for the p2f level classification
 task. We systematically excluded key packet-level features—
 specifically pktIAT, pktLen, L7Len, and L4Len—from the
 input to evaluate their individual contributions. The resulting
 performance variations are illustrated in Fig. 8. As observed, the
 omission of pktLen induces the most substantial decline in ac-
Fig. 9. Open-world binary forecasting performance. curacy, highlighting its critical role in characterizing encrypted
 traffic. Nevertheless, CTT demonstrates remarkable resilience;
 despite varying impacts from different features, the model maintains robust performance even when individual key attributes are
 Open-Set Forecasting Capability: To assess CTT’s robustomitted.
ness in dynamic, open-world environments, we conducted an
 3) Impact of Hyperparameters. Router Dimensions: This
open-set binary forecasting experiment on the USTC-TFC2016
 experiment studies the impact of router dimension c on the
dataset under a label-free setting. We established an open-set
 classification performance. We fix the lookback length L to
protocol by training on a subset of 16 classes while reserving
 be 64 (32) at the flow/packet (packet-to-flow) level and vary
four categories—Facetime and Skype (Benign), alongside
 the router dimension to be c = [5, 10, 20]. The F1-scores under
Htbot and Nsis-ay (Malicious)—exclusively for the test set
 varying router dimensions are depicted in Fig. 10. As shown,
as unseen classes. With a fixed lookback length of L = 24, the
 F1-scores remain relatively stable in most settings with varying
performance across varying forecast horizons (T ) is illustrated in
 c, indicating that CTT exhibits insensitivity to changes in c
Fig. 9. Notably, CTT exhibits strong generalization capabilities,
 within a certain range.
maintaining an F1-score of 0.977 even at an extended horizon
 Stride Lengths: This experiment examines the effects of the
of T = 96. These results validate CTT’s effectiveness in disstride length S. The traffic classification performance of CTT
tinguishing novel malicious threats from benign traffic without
 with varying stride length (S = [1, 2, 3, 4]) while the patch
prior exposure.
 length P is fixed to 4 on USTC-TFC2016 and CIC-IoT2022
 is summarized in Table XII. We can see that on the USTC-
D. Ablation Studies TFC2016 dataset, the performance of CTT does not vary signif-
 1) Component Ablation: Recall that CTT encompasses three icantly with varying stride lengths. Otherwise, the performance
key components: Channel-Independent Patching (CIP) mecha- of CTT degrades slightly when the stride length extends. It can
nism, Criss-cross Attention Module (CAM), and Dual Output be concluded that the performance of CTT with varying S is rela-
Heads (DOH). We conduct ablation studies on these components tively robust, and the effect can be varied under different network
for the encrypted traffic classification task. conditions. Further empirical analysis regarding the impact of
 The experimental results for the traffic classification task stride length S and patch length P is provided in Supplementary
are summarized in Table XI, with ET-BERT [15] serving as Material D. Collectively, the results suggest that highly bursty
a baseline. In CTT without CI, channel-mixing patching re- traffic necessitates smaller P values to preserve local resolution,
places the channel-independent paradigm. This involves pro- while traffic with rigid heartbeat patterns demonstrates distinct
jecting each univariate feature series xt into a latent space, insensitivity to variations in patch size.
xt → ht , ht ∈ Rdmix , where dmix = 10 (equal to c), preventing Lookback Lengths: We investigate the influence of lookback
independent extraction of temporal correlations within each length L and forecasting length T on prediction performance.
feature. Additionally, CTT without CI excludes CDAL in the As shown in Fig. 11, the optimal lookback length depends
attention module, meaning temporal correlations across multiple on the forecast horizon: shorter L values are effective for
1560 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE XI
 ABLATION STUDY OF CTT FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION

 Fig. 11. Forecasting performance (F1-score) of CTT with varying lookback
 length L and forecasting length T . (a) ISCX-VPN2016. (b) USTC-TFC2016.

 leads to the accumulation of uncertainty over longer time steps,
 posing challenges for long-term dependency modeling. An analysis of performance and resource utilization under varying L
 is provided in Supplementary Material D-D. Practically, the
Fig. 10. Classification performance (F1-score) of CTT with different router
dimensions. (a) VPN2016. (b) Tor2016. (c) TFC2016. (d) IoT2022. determination of L should integrate the temporal characteristics
 of the target traffic with prevailing resource limitations, refined
 via empirical tuning. In the absence of strong prior knowledge,
 TABLE XII a moderate L typically serves as a robust default.
 CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE WITH VARYING S
 To facilitate the efficient identification of optimal configurations for diverse scenarios, we have integrated a dedicated
 automated grid search module for these hyperparameters into
 our open-source code implementation1 .

 VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
 This paper introduced CTT, a novel time series transformer
short-term forecasting, while medium lengths offer more bal- model for encrypted network traffic analysis. The generalizanced performance across varying T . On the USTC-TFC2016 ability of CTT is demonstrated through its ability to analyze
dataset, longer lookbacks yield certain advantages, whereas no encrypted traffic at multiple granularities, which renders CTT
such benefits are observed on ISCX-VPN2016. This indicates particularly valuable in web service security contexts.
that optimal lookback length is shaped not only by the forecast Limitations and Future Works: The primary limitations of
horizon but also by intrinsic temporal characteristics of the CTT include challenges in long-term traffic forecasting, pertraffic, such as autocorrelation, periodicity, and burstiness. It formance sensitivity in sparse data scenarios, and the reliance
is observed that predictive performance naturally degrades as
the forecasting horizon extends. This phenomenon is primarily
driven by the inherent burstiness of encrypted traffic, which 1 https://github.com/Amanda-HuaDing/Criss-cross_Traffic_Transformer.
DING et al.: TIME WILL TELL: CRISS-CROSS TRANSFORMER FOR ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC ANALYSIS 1561

on a closed-set assumption. To mitigate data scarcity, we plan to [11] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware
incorporate active learning strategies alongside semi-supervised traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” in
paradigms. This involves developing mechanisms to intelli- Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2017,
 pp. 1723–1732.
gently identify and annotate the most informative unlabeled sam- [12] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “ImageNet classification
ples, thereby maximizing model performance while minimizing with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Proannotation costs. To alleviate performance degradation in long- cess. Syst., 2012, vol. 25.
term forecasting scenarios, we aim to investigate ensemble learn- [13] W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, and O. Vinyals, “Recurrent neural network
 regularization,” 2014, arXiv:1409.2329.
ing techniques and generative approaches with future-sequence [14] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
attention, effectively mitigating error accumulation over ex- network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
tended horizons. Simultaneously, to overcome the closed-set Commun., Jun. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
constraint where unseen classes are inevitably mapped to known [15] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted
representations, we aim to evolve towards open-world scetraffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022, pp. 633–642.
narios. This involves integrating Open-Set Recognition and [16] A. Graves and A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” in Supervised
anomaly detection mechanisms to effectively distinguish novel Sequence Labelling With Recurrent Neural Networks. Berlin, Germany:
threats from established traffic patterns. Regarding efficiency Springer, Jan. 2012, pp. 37–45.
and scalability, future works include incorporating lightweight [17] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FEDFormer:
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series foretechniques—such as model pruning and quantization—to en- casting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27268–27286.
hance efficiency for edge deployment. We also aim to integrate [18] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
dynamic routing into the Cross-Dimension Attention Layer worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. 11th
to adaptively handle high-dimensional data. Furthermore, we Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023.
 [19] E. Papadogiannaki and S. Ioannidis, “A survey on encrypted network trafidentify adaptive configuration as a critical research direction.
 fic analysis applications, techniques, and countermeasures,” ACM Comput.
Moving beyond our current reliance on empirical grid search, Surv., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–35, Jul. 2021.
we aim to develop environment-aware strategies leveraging [20] A. H. Lashkari, A. F. A. Kadir, H. Gonzalez, K. F. Mbah, and A. A.
automated frameworks such as Bayesian optimization. Ghorbani, “Towards a network-based framework for android malware
 Application Scenarios: Beyond encrypted traffic analysis, detection and characterization,” in Proc. 15th Annu. Conf. Privacy, Secur.
 Trust, Aug. 2017, pp. 233–23309.
CTT can be applied to real-world scenarios such as intrusion [21] M. Laštovička, S. Špaček, P. Velan, and P. Čeleda, “Using TLS fingerprints
detection, anomaly detection, and threat intelligence analysis, for OS identification in encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Netw.
where identifying subtle temporal patterns in network activity Operations Manage. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–6.
is crucial. Moreover, its forecasting capabilities can support [22] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments using
predictive cybersecurity defenses, enabling proactive defense network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 18,
 no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019.
against threats such as encrypted botnet communications or [23] M. Priymak and R. Sinnott, “Real-time traffic classification through deep
web application abuse by anticipating anomalous encrypted learning,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 8th Int. Conf. Big Data Comput., Appl.
traffic trends. Adapting and practically implementing CTT to Technol., 2021, pp. 128–133.
diverse implementation scenarios within network security holds [24] Y. Huo, Y. Yan, D. Du, Z. Wang, Y. Zhang, and Y. Yang, “Long-term span
 traffic prediction model based on STL decomposition and LSTM,” in Proc.
significant potential and warrants further exploration. 20th Asia-Pacific Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., Nov. 2019, pp. 1–4.
 [25] Y. Fang, S. Ergüt, and P. Patras, “SDGNet: A handover-aware spatiotem-
 REFERENCES poral graph neural network for mobile traffic forecasting,” IEEE Commun.
 Lett., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 582–586, Mar. 2022.
 [1] Electronic Frontier Foundation, “Year in review: The last mile of encrypt- [26] A. Montieri, G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A.
 ing the web,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/ Pescapè, “Packet-level prediction of mobile-app traffic using multitask
 2023/12/year-review-last-mile-encrypting-web deep learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 200, Dec. 2021, Art. no. 108529.
 [2] Zscaler Security Research Team, “2022 encrypted attacks report,” 2022. [27] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 [Online]. Available: 2022EncryptedAttacksReport Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in ACM
 [3] T. Van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. System Secur. Symp., [28] K. Lin, X. Xu, and H. Gao, “TSCRNN: A novel classification scheme
 Feb. 2020, vol. 27. of encrypted traffic based on flow spatiotemporal features for efficient
 [4] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ML-based management of IIoT,” Comput. Netw., vol. 190, May 2021, Art. no. 107974.
 malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,” in [29] U. Khandelwal, H. He, P. Qi, and D. Jurafsky, “Sharp nearby, fuzzy far
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2023, pp. 1005–1019. away: How neural language models use context,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Meet-
 [5] K. Wolsing, E. Wagner, and M. Henze, “Facilitating protocol-independent ing Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (Vol. 1, Long Papers), 2018, pp. 284–294.
 industrial intrusion detection systems,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. [30] X. Chen, S. Xie, and K. He, “An empirical study of training self-supervised
 Comput. Commun. Secur., 2020, pp. 2105–2107. vision transformers,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021,
 [6] S. Zhu et al., “Measuring and modeling the label dynamics of online {Anti- pp. 9640–9649.
 Malware} engines,” in Proc. USENIX Secur., 2020, pp. 2361–2378. [31] J. Devlin, M.-W Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 [7] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc.
 analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 25, Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. Techno. 1, pp. 791–824, Firstquarter 2023. nol., Vol. 1 (Long Short Papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186. [Online]. Available:
 [8] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID
 mapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic [32] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder based
 classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., 2004, traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc. AAAI
 pp. 135–148. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
 [9] D. Bonfiglio, M. Mellia, M. Meo, D. Rossi, and P. Tofanelli, “Revealing [33] X. Deng, Y. Wang, and Z. Xue, “AN-Net: An anti-noise network for anony-
 Skype traffic: When randomness plays with you,” in Proc. Conf. Appl., mous traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 4417–4428.
 Technol., Architectures, Protoc. Comput. Commun., 2007, pp. 37–48. [34] M. Lotfollahi, M. Jafari, R. Siavoshani, S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian,
[10] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner: “Deep packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted network using deep learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012,
 traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2016, pp. 439–454. Feb. 2020.
1562 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

[35] TCPdump Team, “TCPdump network debugger,” (n.d.). [Online]. Avail- Shenghong Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
 able: https://www.tcpdump.org/ BS and MS degrees in electrical engineering from the
[36] Wireshark Foundation, “Wireshark,” (n.d.). [Online]. Available: https:// Jilin University of Technology, Changchun, China,
 www.wireshark.org/ in 1993 and 1996, respectively, and the PhD degree
[37] Anteater, “Tranalyzer,” (n.d.). [Online]. Available: https://tranalyzer.com/ in radio engineering from the Beijing University of
[38] C. Zhang, M. Fiore, and P. Patras, “Multi-service mobile traffic forecasting Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in
 via convolutional long short-term memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. 1999. Since 1999, he has been with Shanghai Jiao
 Meas. Netw., 2019, pp. 1–6. Tong University, Shanghai, China, as a research fel-
[39] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. low, associate professor, and professor, successively.
 Process. Syst., 2017, vol. 30. His research interests include information security,
[40] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “CrossFormer: Transformer utilizing cross-dimension signal and information processing, and artificial
 dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. 11th Int. intelligence.
 Conf. Learn. Representations., 2023.
[41] G. D. Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related features,” in Proc.
 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[42] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
 Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2017, vol. 2, pp. 253–262.
[43] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,”
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw., 2017, pp. 712–717. Hao Peng received the PhD degree in computer sci-
[44] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, and ence and technology from Shanghai Jiaotong Univer-
 A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidimensional sity, in 2012. He is currently a full professor with the
 IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhe-
 2022, pp. 1–11. jiang Normal University. He has authored or coau-
[45] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-Net: A hybrid neural network for thored more than 100 papers in prestigious journals
 encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. and conferences. His research interests include AI
 Commun. Workshops, 2020, pp. 424–429. security, IoT security, software and system security,
[46] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapè, “MIMETIC: Mobile data-driven security, and Big Data mining and analyencrypted traffic classification using multimodal deep learning,” Comput. sis. He was the program committee for more than ten
 Netw., vol. 165, 2019, Art. no. 106944. international conferences.
[47] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Dollár, “Focal loss for dense
 object detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 42, no. 2,
 pp. 318–327, Feb. 2020.

 Hua Ding (Student Member, IEEE) received the BS
 degree from the Dalian University of Technology,
 Dalian, China, in 2022. She is currently working
 toward the PhD degree with the School of Computer Zhe Qu (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in
 Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, automation from Xiamen University, Xiamen, China,
 China. Her research interests include encrypted net- in 2015, the MS degree in electrical and computer enwork service, network security, and machine learning gineering from the University of Delaware, Newark,
 for networks. DE, USA, in 2017, and the PhD degree in electrical
 engineering from the University of South Florida,
 Tampa, FL, USA, in 2022. He is currently a tenuretrack associate professor with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South Univer-
 Lixing Chen received the BS and ME degrees from sity, Changsha, China. His research interests include
 the College of Information and Control Engineering, network and mobile system security, and machine
 China University of Petroleum, Qingdao, China, in learning for networks.
 2013 and 2016, respectively, and the PhD degree in
 electrical and computer engineering from the University of Miami, in 2020. He is currently a tenuretrack assistant professor with the School of Computer
 Science, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. His
 research interests include mobile edge computing and
 machine learning for networks.

 Bo Zhang received the BS degree from Hohai Uni- Yang Bai (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 versity, in 2007, the MSc degree from Southeast Uni- from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, and
 versity, Nanjing, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree the MS and PhD degrees from the College of Enfrom the Nanjing University of Science & Technol- gineering, University of Miami, USA, in 2015 and
 ogy, Nanjing, China, in 2018. He was a postdoc with 2021, respectively. She is currently an assistant pro-
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 2023 and 2025, fessor with the Department of Automation, School
 respectively. His research interests include cyberse- of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering,
 curity in smart grid and network security situation Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. Her research
 awareness. interests include intelligent edge systems and industrial IoT.