This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS 1

 TopoCL: Topological Contrastive Learning
 for Time Series
 Namwoo Kim , Hyungryul Baik, and Yoonjin Yoon

 Abstract—Universal time-series representation learning is processing (NLP) [4], and recommendation system [5], [6],
challenging but valuable in real-world applications such as mainly due to its ability to train models without explicit
classification, anomaly detection, and forecasting. Recently, con- labels. Accordingly, ongoing research is focused on applying
trastive learning (CL) has been actively explored to tackle
time-series representation. However, a key challenge is that the CL to time-series data for various downstream applications,
data augmentation process in CL can distort seasonal patterns or including anomaly detection [7], [8], forecasting [9], and
temporal dependencies, inevitably leading to a loss of semantic classification [10].
information. To address this challenge, we propose topological CL In general, CL leverages data augmentation to create
for time series (TopoCL). TopoCL mitigates such information positive and negative pairs for training, thereby creating a
loss by incorporating persistent homology, which captures the
topological characteristics of data that remain invariant under contrast between similar and dissimilar samples by exploring
transformations. In this article, we treat the temporal and different transformations and variations of the data. Several
topological properties of time-series data as distinct modali- augmentation techniques for time-series have been proposed to
ties. Specifically, we compute persistent homology to construct learn robust and discriminative representations. For example,
topological features of time-series data, representing them in permutation reorders segments within a time series to produce
persistence diagrams (PDs). We then design a neural network to
encode these persistent diagrams. Our approach jointly optimizes a new sequence [10], [11]. However, using permutation on
CL within the time modality and time–topology correspondence, time-series data might introduce inappropriate inductive bias,
promoting a comprehensive understanding of both temporal as it can distort the autocorrelated nature of time-series data.
semantics and topological properties of time series. We conduct Techniques borrowed from CV, such as f lipping, which flips
extensive experiments on four downstream tasks—classification, the signs of the original time series, may misrepresent the trend
anomaly detection, forecasting, and transfer learning. The results
demonstrate that TopoCL achieves state-of-the-art performance. or seasonal patterns. Moreover, these distortions raise concerns
 about whether the augmented time series are, indeed, positive
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, classification, contrastive samples of the original series. Consequently, applying data
learning (CL), forecasting, time-series modeling, topological data
analysis (TDA). augmentation may inevitably risk information loss, making it
 difficult to capture semantically meaningful representations.
 Therefore, it is necessary to find ways that compensate such
 I. I NTRODUCTION potential information loss.

T IME-SERIES analysis plays a crucial role in numerous real-world applications such as weather, economics,
and transportation. However, analyzing time-series data are
 Recently, topological data analysis (TDA) has emerged as a
 subfield of algebraic topology focused on capturing the global
 shape of data, where shape broadly refers to data properties
challenging due to its incompleteness, vulnerability to noise, that remain invariant under transformations [12]. Such shape
and complexity. In addition, employing deep learning models patterns or topological features include connected compofor time-series analysis introduces further obstacles, as it nents, loops, and voids. Topological features are obtained
necessitates well-labeled data. Labeling time-series data is by computing persistent homology and are represented as a
time-consuming and requires a high level of expertise, creating multiset in persistence diagrams (PDs) [13]. These diagrams
significant bottlenecks in the analysis process. In recent years, encapsulate persistent homology across different scales of
contrastive learning (CL) has become increasingly popular in data. The overall structure and distribution of sets in the
graph [1], computer vision (CV) [2], [3], natural language diagram provide insights into the topological invariants of the
 data. By incorporating such topological information, we can
 Received 26 November 2024; revised 31 October 2025; accepted 9 March
2026. This work was supported in part by the National Research Foundation capture the essential structural properties of the time series
of Korea (NRF) Basic Research Laboratory under Grant 2021R1A4A1033486 that remain invariant under various transformations. Therefore,
and in part by Midcareer Research funded by the South Korean Government integrating topological information can help compensate for
under Grant 2020R1A2C2010200 and Grant RS-2025-00517342. (Corresponding author: Yoonjin Yoon.) potential information loss due to data augmentation, reduce
 Namwoo Kim and Yoonjin Yoon are with the Department of inductive bias, and lead to more robust representations.
Civil and Environmental Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Sci- Fueled by the advancements in both CL and TDA, we
ence and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon 34141, South Korea (e-mail:
namwoo@spacetime.kaist.ac.kr; yoonjin@spacetime.kaist.ac.kr). harness the strengths of the two methods and introduce topo-
 Hyungryul Baik is with the Department of Mathematical Science, Korea logical CL for time series (TopoCL), a simple yet effective
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (e-mail: hrbaik@kaist.ac.kr). cross-modal CL approach for universal time-series representa-
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2026.3675422, provided by the authors. tions. Our method integrates and leverages information from
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNNLS.2026.3675422 the time and topology modalities. To start, we construct
 2162-237X © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

topological characteristics from time series data. We apply topological layers for machine learning applications. The first
delay embedding to time-series data, compute persistent approach to input a PD into a neural network architecture
homology, and design a simple topological module to effec- was presented by Hofer et al. [19]. Carrière et al. [20] protively encode topological information. Our approach then posed PersLay, which incorporates PD for graph classification.
focuses on a joint objective: ensuring that the augmented ver- Moor et al. [21] proposed a topological autoencoder preserving
sions of the same time series are closely embedded together in topological structures of the input space in latent representhe feature space while preserving the correspondence between tations. Kim et al. [22] proposed PLlay, a neural network
time and topology. The joint learning objective promotes layer for learning embeddings from persistence landscapes.
a comprehensive understanding of temporal semantics and These approaches demonstrated that incorporating persistent
topological properties of time series and improves robustness homology with deep learning has the potential to offer a more
to data augmentations. We perform extensive experiments on comprehensive understanding of data.
time-series forecasting, anomaly detection, classification, and
transfer learning tasks. The experimental results demonstrate B. Time-Series CL
that the learned representations of TopoCL are effective. The
 Similar to the advancements of CL in the fields of CV
contributions of this work are as follows.
 and NLP, numerous studies incorporate CL into time-series
 1) We demonstrate that incorporating topological proper- analysis. TS-TCC [10] employed both weak and strong
 ties is effective for capturing robust and discriminative augmentations to time-series data and utilized contextual
 representations of time-series data. contrasting to learn transformation-invariant representations.
 2) We design a novel framework for learning representa- Mixing-up [23] generated an augmented sample by mixing two
 tions of time-series data that takes into account their data samples and proposed a pretext task method for predicting
 topology. To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the mixing proportion. Inspired by great success in masked
 the first to combine persistent homology with CL in the modeling in NLP and CV, several works adopted this approach
 context of time-series representation learning. for time series. TS2vec [7] used masking and cropping for
 3) We conduct extensive experiments across four down- data augmentation, and proposed a hierarchical contrastive loss
 stream tasks: time-series classification, anomaly detec- to learn scale-invariant representations. InfoTS [24] exploited
 tion, forecasting, and transfer learning on diverse a meta-learning framework to automatically select the augdatasets. The experimental results demonstrate the effec- mentation method. SimMTM [25] generated multiple masked
 tiveness of the proposed model. series and facilitated reconstruction by assembling comple-
 The remainder of this article is organized as follows. mentary temporal variations from multiple masked series.
Section II presents a literature review on TDA and time- Recently, several studies have focused on the use of the
series CL. Section III provides preliminaries. The proposed frequency domain of time series data. CoST [9] proposed
framework is described in Section IV. Section V provides a disentangled seasonal-trend representation learning framethe experimental results of the proposed model. Section VI work, incorporating contrastive loss in both the time and
presents the additional analysis. Finally, Section VII presents frequency domains. TF-C [26] proposed a novel contrastive
the conclusion and future work. loss to maintain consistency between frequency- and timedomain representations.
 II. R ELATED W ORKS Gorade et al. [27] captured both low- and high-frequency
 features from the input signal and learns complementary fea-
A. Topological Data Analysis
 tures between them to learn robust representations. TimesURL
 TDA is an emerging field that utilizes abstract algebra [8] proposed a novel frequency-temporal-based augmentato uncover the intrinsic shape of the data. A fundamental tion method to maintain temporal dependencies of time
concept in TDA is PD, which helps to understand the topo- series. However, it still remains unclear whether the proposed
logical structure of data. By computing persistent homology methodologies effectively mitigate the inevitable information
across scales, such topological structure is represented as loss resulting from data augmentation. To address this issue,
a multiset of points. Directly using PD in machine learn- we propose using persistent homology to capture the essential
ing and deep learning models is challenging, since these structural properties of time-series data, thereby mitigating
models typically work with Hilbert space. To overcome such information loss.
this, several research efforts have been made to convert
PD into a vector format. For instance, persistence land- III. P RELIMINARY
scapes transform the multiset of points in a PD into a
 In this section, we give the formal definitions of the major
collection of piecewise-linear functions [14]. Adams et al.
 terminologies of TDA used in this study.
[15] proposed persistence images, which convert PD into
a fixed-size representation. In addition, various kernel functions have been proposed to handle PD, such as geodesic A. Delay Embedding
topological kernel [16] and persistence landscape-based Takens’s delay embedding [28] is a commonly used
kernels [17], [18]. technique for converting time-series data into point cloud rep-
 Recently, the integration of TDA into neural networks resentations. Given an ith time series xi = {xi,1 , xi,2 , . . ., xi,T },
has been explored, leading to the development of various one can extract a sequence of vectors of the form
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES 3

[xi,t , xi,t+γ , . . ., xi,t+(m−1)γ ] ∈ Rm , where m is the embedding 2) Persistent Homology: Persistent homology is a valuable
size and γ is the time delay. technique in TDA for understanding the shape of complex
 datasets. For a given simplicial complex K, let (K)m i=0 be a
 nested subcomplexes of K such that ∅ = K0 ⊆ K1 ⊆ . . . ⊆
B. Simplicial Complex
 Km = K, called a filtration. The inclusion maps Ki ,→ K j
 In the algebraic topology, a simplex is a geometric object defined by f (x) = x induce fi, j : H p (Ki ) → H p (K j ) for all i, j
that generalizes the notion of a triangle or a tetrahedron to with 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ m, for all p. Then, the sequence of homology
higher dimensions. Specifically, a k−simplex is defined as groups is represented as follows:
a convex hull spanned by k + 1 points v ∈ Rm that are
affinely independent. Then, a simplicial complex K is a finite 0 = H p (K0 ) → H p (K1 ) → . . . → H p (Km ) = H p (K) . (3)
collection of simplices such that following hold. For given i ≤ j and p, we can consider the pth boundary
 1) If σ ∈ K, every subset of σ (i.e., every face of σ) is an maps ∂ip : C p (Ki ) → C p−1 (Ki ) and ∂ pj : C p (K j ) → C p−1 (K j ).
 also element of K. Since Ki ⊂ K j , one can see C p (Ki ) and C p−1 (Ki ) as subspaces
 j
 2) If two simplices σ1 , σ2 ∈ K intersects, their intersection of C p (K j ) and C p−1 (K j ), respectively. Then, both im(∂ p+1 )⊂
 is a face of both σ1 and σ2 . i
 C p (K j ) and ker(∂ p ) ⊂ C p (Ki ) can be considered as subspaces
 of C p (K j ). Then, pth persistent homology group is defined as
 follows:
C. Vietoris–Rips Complex ı  j  
 To construct a simplicial complex, we used the H i,p j = ker ∂ip im ∂ p+1 ∩ ker ∂ip . (4)
Vietoris–Rips complex [29]. Let (X, d) be a finite metric Note that an element of ker(∂ip ) represents both an element
space equipped with a distance function d. The Vietoris–Rips
 of H p (Ki ) and an element of H p (K j ). If it vanishes in H i,p j ,
complex VR(X, r) is the abstract simplicial complex whose j
 then it must be in im(∂ p+1 ), hence it vanishes in H p (K j ) as
simplices are subsets of X with diameter (i.e., the maximum
pairwise distance between points) at most r ≥ 0. That is, well. In summary, the homology group H i,p j consists of the pth
a subset S of X is a simplex in VR(X, r) if and only if homology classes of Ki that are still present at K j , i.e., those
the distance d(x, y) ≤ r for any two points x, y ∈ S . The not in the kernel of the map fi, j .
0-simplices of VR(X, r) are the points of X, and the The pth Betti number, which refers to the rank of the
k-simplices are the subsets of X of cardinality k + 1 that can homology group, is defined as: βi,p j := rankH i,p j . By analyzing
be realized as the union of k + 1 closed balls of radius r the sequence of Betti numbers, persistent homology enables
with nonempty pairwise intersections. the systematic measurement of topological features (e.g., holes
 and voids) in a dataset across multiple scales. Such topological
 information can be summarized as PD.
D. Homology
 1) Simplicial Homology: Given a simplicial complex K, E. Persistence Diagram
a weighted sum of n-simplices with coefficients from Z/Z2 - In TDA, PD is a useful tool for summarizing topological
defines an n-chain on K. Then, the space of n-chains on K, information from data across different scales. A PD captures
represented as Cn (K), is defined as the vector space spanned topological features such as connected components and loops,
by n-simplicies of K over Z/Z2 . The modules C0 , C1 , . . ., are showing when these features appear and disappear as the scale
connected by boundary operators ∂n : Cn (K) → Cn−1 (K). The parameter changes. The pth PD Dgm p is defined as a multiset
boundary operator for a simplex σ = [v0 , . . . , vn ] is defined as collection of points (i, j) with µi,p j = 1, where µi,p j is calculated
follows: as follows:
 Xn
 ∂n (σ) = [v0 , . . . , v̂i , . . . , vn ] µi,p j = βi,p j−1 − βi,p j − βi−1, j−1
 − βi−1, j
 .
  
 (1) p p (5)
 i=0
 Each point (a, b) ∈ Dgm p corresponds to a homological
where [v0 , . . . , v̂i , . . . , vn ] denotes the (n − 1) simplex spanned feature that was born at scale a and dies at scale b. This
by all the vertices except vi . It is easy to see that im(∂n+1 ) is homological feature has the persistence value of b − a. Fig. 1
contained in ker(∂n ) for each n. The nth homology group of illustrates an example of PD based on the Vietoris–Rips
K is defined as follows: filtration. The diagram effectively summarizes evolving homological information with respect to . For instance, as 
 Hn (K) = ker (∂n ) /im ∂n+1 .
 
 (2)
 increases from 0 to 1, the number of connected components
The nth Betti number of K, denoted by βn (K), is the dimension decreases from 4 to 2, which is reflected as a point (0, 1) on
of the nth homology group of K, which can be computed as the the PD.
difference between the kernel dimension of ∂n and the image
dimension of ∂n+1 . In simpler terms, the nth Betti number IV. S TABILITY OF P ERSISTENT H OMOLOGY U NDER
indicates the number of n-dimensional voids that exist in the VARIOUS DATA AUGMENTATIONS
simplicial complex. For example, β0 indicates the number of In Section III, we claim that the use of topological features
connected components, while β1 represents the number of as a robust auxiliary view in CL is stable under common data
loops. augmentations such as jittering, scaling, and shifting.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 2) Scaling: Rescaling of the entire sequence
 x̃t = (1 + ) xt ,  ∼ N 0, σ2 .
 

 3) Shifting: Additive offset
 x̃t = xt + ,  ∼ N 0, σ2 .
 

 4) Rotation: Sign inversion of the signal
 x̃t = −xt .
 In Sections IV-A–IV-D, we provide theoretical analyses
 showing that the PDs remain stable under each type of
 augmentation.

 A. Stability Under Jittering
 Let x = {xt }Tt=1 be a real-valued time series and x̃ = { x̃t }Tt=1 its
 jittered version with x̃t = xt + t . Fix an embedding dimension
 m and delay τ, and form the delay-embedded point clouds
 N
 X = x (i) = xi , xi+τ , . . ., xi+(m−1)τ ∈ Rm i=1
 ˚  
  N
 X̃ = x̃ (i) = x̃i , x̃i+τ , . . ., x̃i+(m−1)τ i=1
 ˚ 
 (6)
 where N := T − (m − 1)τ. For each i,
 m−1
 X
 kx (i) − x̃ (i)k22 = i+kτ
 2
 . (7)
 k=0
 By the Laurent–Massart inequality [31], for any s > 0
 √
 P kx (i) − x̃ (i)k22 ≤ σ2 m + 2 m s + 2s ≥ 1 − e−s . (8)
 

 Since dH (X, X̃) ≤ max1≤i≤N kxi − x̃i k2 , we obtain
Fig. 1. Illustration of PD. (a) Vietoris–Rips filtration. (b) Corresponding PD.
 √
 q
 dH X, X̃ ≤ σ m + 2 m s + 2s
 
 (9)
 −s
 We begin with the following well-established theory from with probability at least 1 − N e .
persistent homology. Because dGH (X, X̃) ≤ dH (X, X̃) for subsets of the same
 Theorem 1 (Rips Stability via Gromov–Hausdorff Distance metric space, the Vietoris–Rips stability theorem yields, for
[30]): Let (X, dX ) and (Y, dY ) be compact metric spaces, and every k ≥ 0
let F be a field. For every k ≥ 0, the kth persistent homology dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk X̃ ≤ 2 dGH X, X̃
  
modules of the Vietoris–Rips filtrations
 √
 q
 Hk (X; F) = {Hk (VR (X, r) ; F)}r≥0 ≤ 2 σ m + 2 m s + 2s (10)
 Hk (Y; F) = {Hk (VR (Y, r) ; F)}r≥0 with probability at least 1 − Ne−s .

are 2 dGH (X, Y) interleaved B. Stability Under Scaling
 dI (Hk (X; F) , Hk (Y; F)) ≤ 2 dGH (X, Y) . For each i, we have x̃(i) = (1 + )x(i), hence

In particular, for the associated PDs kx (i) − x̃ (i)k2 = || kx (i) k2 ≤ || M
 M := max kx (i)k2 . (11)
 dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk (Y) ≤ 2 dGH (X, Y) .
 
 1≤i≤N

 This theorem implies that if two point clouds X, X̃ ⊂ Rd are Taking the canonical pairing i 7→ x̃i yields
 
close in Gromov–Hausdorff distance, then their Vietoris–Rips dH X, X̃ ≤ max kx (i) − x̃ (i) k2 ≤ || M. (12)
 1≤i≤N
PDs are close in bottleneck distance. Therefore, when data
augmentations cause only small geometric perturbations (i.e., Since  ∼ N (0, σ2 ), for any s > 0, Gaussian tail bounds
when dGH (X, X̃) is small), the corresponding Vietoris–Rips yields  √ 
PDs remain stable. P || ≤ σ 2s ≥ 1 − 2e−s . (13)
 To further demonstrate the robustness of persistent homol-
 Consequently,
ogy to practical data augmentations, we analyze four repre-  √ 
 P dH X, X̃ ≤ M σ 2s ≥ 1 − 2e−s
 
sentative types of augmentations commonly applied to time (14)
series.
 dB Dgmk (X) , Dgmk X̃ ≤ 2 dGH X, X̃
  
 1) Jittering: Additive Gaussian noise applied to each time √
 step ≤ 2 M σ 2s (15)
 i.i.d.
 x̃t = xt + t , t ∼ N 0, σ2 .
  −s
 with probability at least 1 − 2e .
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES 5

C. Stability Under Rotation C. PD Construction
 For the sign-inverted time series x̃, the delay-embedded To extract topological features from a time series, we
point clouds X and X̃ are related by the reflection map R(v) = first convert x ∈ Xtime into a point cloud format, enabling
−v for v ∈ X. Since R is an isometry, the metric spaces (X, d) the construction of the Vietoris–Rips filtration. This involves
and (X̃, d) are distance-preserving isomorphic, and hence applying delay embedding to the input sample x. Next, we
their Gromov–Hausdorff distance satisfies dGH (X, X̃) = 0. compute PDs for H0 and H1 homology groups, summarizing
 Moreover, because the Vietoris–Rips complex depends the topological features of the data. For each channel c in
only on pairwise distances, the filtrations {VR(X, r)}r≥0 and time-series data, we obtain channel-specific 0-D and 1-D PDs
{VR(X̃, r)}r≥0 are isomorphic under S . Consequently, for every Dgmc (x). A composite diagram Dgm(x) is then created as
k ≥ 0, the PDs coincide, i.e., Dgm(x) = ∪c Dgmc (x). Next, points in Dgm(x) are mapped
 using δ : (a, b) → (a, b, b − a), resulting in point cloud
 Dgmk (X) = Dgmk X̃
 
 (16) data x p ∈ R M×3 , where M is the maximum number of
 topological features. The set of topological feature is denoted
and their bottleneck distance is 0. Therefore, Vietoris–Rips
 by Xtopo = {x1p , x2p , . . . , xNp }. Further details of topological
persistence is stable under sign inversion of the original time
 feature construction are provided in the Appendix.
series.

 D. Topological Feature Extraction
D. Stability Under Shifting
 We design a topological feature extractor fθtopo , which
 For the shifted time series x̃ = {xt + ε}Tt=1 , the delaydirectly processes unordered point sets x p as inputs. Given
embedded point clouds X and X̃ are related by the translation
 that a point cloud is an unordered collection of points, a
map T : X → X̃, defined by T (u) = u + (ε, . . . , ε) for u ∈ X.
 neural network capable of processing these M point sets
Since translation is an isometry, the metric spaces (X, d) and
 needs to be invariant to M! possible permutations of the
(X̃, d) are isometric, and hence Vietoris–Rips persistence is
 input set’s order during data feeding. Inspired by the works
also stable under shifting of the original time series.
 on PointNet [32] and Deep Sets [33], we apply a simple
 These results collectively establish that PDs are robust to
 symmetric function to combine information from all the points
a wide class of common time-series augmentations. The key
 in x p = {p1 , p2 , . . . , p M }. Then, the model is unaffected
implication is that the distance between PDs is always bounded
 by the order of input points, preserving invariance to input
above by the amount of perturbation applied to the input.
 permutations.
 Specifically, a series of shared multilayer perceptrons
 V. P ROPOSED T OPO CL F RAMEWORK (MLPs) φ : R3 → RH is applied to each topological feature
 xip ∈ Xtopo to obtain a set of encoded persistence points. We
 In this section, we present TopoCL framework.
 then aggregate the resulting embeddings via a permutationinvariant function ζ. Formally, the topological encoder is
A. Problem Formulation defined as follows:
 ˚  M 
 θ
 Our goal is to train a neural network fθ to transform xip = ζ φ p j j=1 .
 
 ftopo (17)
each time series instance xi ∈ RT ×C in the time series
set Xtime = {x1 , x2 , . . . , xN } into its representation ri . Here, As illustrated in Fig. 2, we use a max-pooling layer as
N denotes the number of samples, T denotes the number the permutation-invariant function ζ. Each point in xip passes
of timestamps, and C represents the number of variables. through the series of shared MLP with ReLU activation
The representation ri is expressed as {ri,1 , ri,2 , . . . , ri,T }, where and max pooling aggregates all outputs into a topological
ri,t ∈ RF is the embedding vector at time t, with F being the representation vector h ∈ RH , where H is the dimension of
dimension of embedding vector. the embedding vector. Since both the shared MLP φ and the
 max-pooling operator ζ are invariant to the order of the inputs,
 θ
 the overall function ftopo is permutation invariant
B. Overview
 θ θ
 xip = ftopo π xip ∀ permutations π.
  
 The overall framework of TopoCL is shown in Fig. 2. ftopo (18)
Given Xtime , we construct the topological modality Xtopo
by computing its PD. Then, Xtime is fed into the temporal module to capture temporal dependencies. Concurrently, E. Temporal Feature Extraction
Xtopo is processed by the topological module to learn the Capturing the temporal dependency is essential for time
underlying topology of the data. Temporal features are series representation learning. Given an input instance xi ,
learned using a time modality contrastive loss Ltime . In addi- we construct augmented versions of it. Then, the time-series
tion, an auxiliary contrastive objective Lcross is applied to feature extractor fθtime maps them to a feature embedding
align temporal features and topological features. The out- space, resulting in embeddings ri and ri0 .
put of the temporal encoder fθtime is used for downstream To learn discriminative and robust temporal representations,
 (i,t)
applications. we use temporalwise and instancewise contrastive losses, `temp
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 2. (a) Overall framework of TopoCL. TopoCL consists of two distinct modules: temporal module and topological module. The temporal module learns
semantically meaningful temporal characteristics using a hierarchical contrastive loss, while the topological module facilitates time–topology correspondence
through cross-modal contrastive loss. To achieve this, topological feature construction is performed in three steps: time delay embedding, PD calculation via
Vietoris–Rips filtration, and point cloud transformation. Subsequently, a contrastive loss between the embeddings from the time and topology modalities is
applied to ensure time–topology correspondence. TopoCL jointly optimizes the learning process through both intramodal and cross-modal correspondences.
 topo
After pretraining, the embedding vectors obtained from fθtime are used for downstream applications. (b) Topological feature extractor fθ . The topological
feature extractor comprises a series of MLPs with ReLU activations and a max-pooling layer.

 (i,t)
and `inst zi = pro jtime ri∗
 
 [7]. For a given timestamp t, these two loss functions (23)
can be formulated as follows: z0i = pro jtime ri∗0
 
 (24)
 0
 
 (i,t) exp ri,t · ri,t
 `temp = − log P  (19) where ri∗ is an instance level representation of ri,t which is
 t0 exp ri,t · ri,t + 1[t,t0 ] exp ri,t · ri,t
 0
 
  obtained by applying max pooling across all timestamps. The
 0
 (i,t) exp ri,t · ri,t average of zi and z0i is computed as follows:
 `inst = − log P     .
 j exp ri,t · r j,t + 1[i, j] exp ri,t · r j,t
 0 1
 zai =
 zi + z0i .
 
 (25)
 (20) 2
 Next, we maximize the similarity between zai and yi , which
Time modality contrastive loss function Ltime for a mini-batch
 are mapped into the multimodal latent space. The similarity
B is defined as follows:
 between zai and yi is defined as s(zai , yi ) = (zai · yi )/(kzai kkyi k)/τ,
 1 X X  (i,t) (i,t)
 
 where τ refers to the temperature parameter. For a mini-batch
 Ltime = `temp + `inst . (21)
 BT i t B, (zai , yi ) is regarded as a positive pair, whereas the remaining
Next, we apply the hierarchical contrasting method proposed 2B − 2 feature vectors constitute negative pairs. Our crossby Yue et al. [7]. This involves performing max pooling modal contrastive loss between zai and yi can be formulated as
 0
on ri,t and ri,t along the time axis and then recursively follows:
compute (21). (i;time,topo)
 `align
 exp s zai , yi
 
F. Time–Topology Alignment = − log P     .
 exp s zai , y j + 1[ j,i] exp s zai , zaj
 
 In addition to Ltime , which learns instance-specific char- j∈B
acteristics and temporal variation, we propose a contrastive (26)
objective for aligning time and topology modalities. Since the The final cross-modal contrastive loss is formulated as follows:
PD inherently captures topological features that are robust
 1 X  (i;time,topo) (i;topo,time)
 
to perturbations, the proposed cross-modal alignment helps Lcross = `align + `align . (27)
prevent potential information loss caused by augmentations. To 2B i
this end, we first map the embedding vectors ri,t , ri,t
 0
 ∈ RF from (i;time,topo)
 In the time-to-topology direction `align , the temporal
 time
temporal encoder fθ , and topological features hi ∈ RH to the a
 view zi acts as the query, and the model is trained to align
multimodal latent space. Then, we apply projection headers
 it with the matching topological representation yi (target).
pro jtime and pro jtopo as follows: (i;topo,time)
 Conversely, in the topology-to-time direction `align , the
 yi = pro jtopo (hi ) (22) topological representation yi becomes the query, and the
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES 7

temporal representation zai is the target. This symmetric formu- TABLE I
lation enables the model to learn a mutual alignment between A NOMALY D ETECTION R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL
temporal and topological modalities. Leveraging the inher- AND BASELINES ON YAHOO AND KPI DATASETS

ent robustness of PDs—which capture topological features
resilient to perturbations—the proposed alignment further
helps to prevent potential information loss introduced by data
augmentations.

G. Overall Objective
 The proposed model jointly optimizes CL in time modality
and time–topology correspondence. The overall loss function
can be formulated as follows:
 L = Ltime + αLcross (28)
where α is a hyperparameter.
 Please note that instance discrimination using contrastive
loss is not performed on the topology modality. Instead, we
apply contrastive loss to the time modality and leverage topology modality to enhance time series representation learning.
The assumption is that time–topology alignment allows learning comprehensive and complementary semantic information
by incorporating temporal features and their corresponding Fig. 3. CD diagram of representation learning methods on time-series
topological features. classification tasks, using 125 UCR datasets and 29 UEA datasets.

 VI. E XPERIMENTS
 multivariate time-series datasets from each archive. We train
 In this section, we conduct experiments on anomaly detec- an RBF kernel-based SVM classifier on top of the learned
tion, classification, forecasting, and transfer learning tasks by representation, following the evaluation protocol used in
applying TopoCL to state-of-the-art methods. Implementation T-Loss [43]. The penalty factor for the RBF kernel is selected
details are presented in the Appendix. by performing a grid search on the validation set, exploring
 the range {10i | i ∈ [−4, 4]}
A. Anomaly Detection We apply TopoCL to TS2vec and compare its pefor-
 The anomaly detection is used for identifying and address- mance with baselines including DTW, TST [44], TS-TCC
ing unusual patterns or behaviors across various domains. In [10], T-Loss [43], TNC [45], TS2vec, and InfoTS [24]. The
this task, Yahoo [34] and KPI [35] datasets are used. We classification results for these datasets are summarized in
apply TopoCL to TS2Vec [7], and the evaluation is performed Table II. The classification accuracy of the proposed model
under normal and cold-start settings. For the normal setting, outperforms the best baseline by 3.8% on the UCR datasets
each sample is divided into two portions: one for training and and by 1.4% on the UEA datasets. Detailed classification
the other for testing. For the cold-start setting, the model is results are provided in the Appendix.
pretrained on the FordA dataset from the UCR archive before To further evaluate the effectiveness of TopoCL, we perform
evaluating on each target dataset. Following the evaluation a significance test on the classification results. In Fig. 3,
protocol proposed by [34], we determine whether the last point critical difference (CD) diagram [46] for Nemenyi tests on all
is an anomaly. datasets is presented. The CD diagram indicates that methods
 SPOT, DSPOT [36], DONUT [37], SR, and TS2vec meth- connected by a bold line do not have significantly different
ods are used as baselines for the normal setting, while FFT average ranks. From the results, we can conclude that the
[38], Twitter-AD [39], and Luminol [40], SR, and TS2vec are proposed model significantly outperforms other methods in
used as baselines for the cold-start setting. As shown in Table I, average ranks.
in the normal setting, TopoCL improves the F1 score by 1.9%
and 2.2% on the Yahoo and KPI dataset, respectively. In the C. Forecasting
cold-start setting, our model outperforms the best baseline,
 In this section, we conduct two types of forecasting experachieving a 1.8% higher F1 score on the Yahoo dataset and a
 iments to examine the plug-and-play capability of TopoCL
0.5% improvement on the KPI dataset.
 across different self-supervised learning paradigms. Specifically, we apply TopoCL to: 1) the masked-modeling-based
B. Classification pretraining framework of PatchTST [47] and 2) contrastive-
 In this section, we conduct a classification task to evaluate learning-based frameworks such as TS2Vec and CoST [9]. All
the performance of the proposed model using the UCR [41] models are evaluated using mean absolute error (MAE) and
and UEA [42] archives, selecting 125 univariate and 29 mean squared error (mse) as performance metrics.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

 TABLE II
 C LASSIFICATION R ESULTS OF THE P ROPOSED M ODEL AND BASELINES ON UCR AND UEA DATASETS

 TABLE III
 M ULTIVARIATE F ORECASTING R ESULTS W HEN T OPO CL I NTEGRATED W ITH PATCH TST

 1) TopoCL With PatchTST: In this task, the PatchTST coefficient is selected using the validation set, searching over
architecture is employed as the encoder and trained in a self- {0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000}.
supervised manner using a masked-modeling objective. The We use Informer [48], LogTrans [57], TCN [58], LSTnet
model is first pretrained on the ETT [48] dataset and subse- [59], TS2Vec, and CoST as baselines. The evaluation results
quently finetuned on the same data for task-specific long-term for multivariate forecasting are shown in Table IV. In general,
forecasting. TopoCL is integrated into this training pipeline to CoST + TopoCL outperforms the baselines in most cases,
enhance representation learning during the pretraining stage. achieving reductions of 1.76% in multivariate forecasting, in
The experiments focus on long-term time-series forecasting terms of mse. Furthermore, TS2Vec + TopoCL demonstrates a
with prediction horizons of 96, 192, 336, and 720 time steps. 3.33% decrease in average mse compared with TS2Vec alone
 We compare our method against ten state-of-the-art time- for multivariate forecasting.
series forecasting baselines including ASAP [49], iTransformer [50], PatchTST, Crossformer [51], MRformer [52],
NonStat [53], SCINet [54], TimesNet [55], and DLinear D. Transfer Learning
[56]. To ensure a fair comparison, the input sequence length Transfer learning on time-series data brings a unique chalfor all models is fixed at 96. As summarized in Table III, lenge, stemming from the complex nature of the data, such
TopoCL consistently outperforms end-to-end forecasting base- as rapidly changing trends and shifts in temporal dynamics.
lines that directly optimize the prediction loss. It achieves In this section, we conduct transfer learning, following the
improvements across most prediction horizons on multivariate experimental settings proposed by TF-C [26]. Specifically, the
long-term forecasting benchmarks, with an average reduction model is pretrained on the SleepEEG dataset and subsequently
of 2.0% in mse and 0.7% in MAE over the best-performing finetuned on the Epilepsy [60], Gesture [61], FD-B [62], and
baseline. EMG [63] datasets.
 2) TopoCL With TS2Vec and CoST: To further assess the To assess the generality of the proposed approach, TopoCL
plug-and-play capability of TopoCL under CL paradigms, we is applied to two distinct self-supervised learning paradigms:
integrate it into two representative self-supervised frameworks: CL (TS-TCC [10]) and masked modeling (SimMTM [25]).
TS2Vec and CoST [9]. Following [7] and [9], a ridge regressor The method is compared with several state-of-the-art basewith L2 regularization is trained on top of the final time- lines, including TS-TCC, SimMTM, TS2Vec, CoST, Ti-MAE
step representation rt to forecast future values. Specifically, [64], TF-C, and TST. Performance is evaluated using accuracy
the model predicts the next 24, 48, 168, and 720 time and F1 score. As shown in Table V, both SimMTM and TSsteps based on the preceding observations. The regularization TCC exhibit performance improvements when combined with
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES 9

 TABLE IV
 M ULTIVARIATE F ORECASTING R ESULTS W HEN T OPOCL I NTEGRATED W ITH C O ST AND TS2 VEC

 TABLE V TABLE VI
 T RANSFER L EARNING R ESULTS A BLATION R ESULTS

 TABLE VII
 E FFECT OF FPS D OWNSAMPLING ON RUNTIME ,
 M EMORY U SAGE , AND ACCURACY
TopoCL. In particular, integrating TopoCL with TS-TCC leads
to a notable performance gain.

 VII. A NALYSIS
A. Ablation Study
 In this section, we compared TopoCL to its five variants on 128 UCR datasets to study the effectiveness of
 steps), and the DuckDuckGeese dataset, which has the highest
the proposed components. The five variants are as follows:
 dimensionality (1345 channels and 60 time steps).
1) w/o time–topology alignment: removes the time–topology
 Because computational and memory costs increase with the
cross-modal alignment from TopoCL; 2) w/o time domain
 number of persistence points generated during PD computacontrastive loss removes the instance and temporal contrast
 tion, this quantity is reported for both datasets. The maximal
from fθtopo ; 3) w/o H0 excludes the 0-D persistent homology
 number of persistence points reached 520 910 for Duckwhen computing the PD, 4) w/o H1 excludes the 1-D persistent
 DuckGeese and 33 021 for EigenWorms. Although persistent
homology; and 5) avg-pool replaces the symmetric aggregate
 homology computations are performed entirely as an offline
function (max-pool) in fθtopo with avg-pool. As shown in
 preprocessing step, the large volume of topological features
Table VI, any absence of the components leads to a decrease
 caused DuckDuckGeese to exceed the memory capacity of
in performance, showing that all components are imperative.
 an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24-GB VRAM). To mitigate
 this issue, farthest point sampling (FPS) was applied to the
B. Runtime and Memory Analysis point cloud xip ∈ Xtopo , reducing redundancy while preserving
 In this section, the runtime and memory consumption of the underlying geometric structure. The impact of FPS was
the proposed framework are evaluated using two represen- examined by retaining 10k and 1k points, respectively, and the
tative datasets: the EigenWorms dataset, which contains the corresponding runtime, GPU memory usage, and classification
longest multivariate time series (six channels and 17 984 time accuracy are summarized in Table VII.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

Fig. 4. Comparison of classification accuracy under different augmentation
techniques with and without Lcross ) on (a) crop and (b) RefrigerationDevices
datasets.

 As shown in the results, applying FPS to our framework
reduces memory consumption, while causing only a marginal
drop in accuracy. These results demonstrate that although the
 Fig. 5. Visualized explannations. (a) Raw time series. (b) Learned embeddings
large volume of topological features can lead to computational of TopoCL w/o Lcross . (c) Learned embedding of TopoCL.
overhead, such challenges can be effectively mitigated through
sampling strategies.

C. Robustness Under Data Augmentation
 The robustness of TopoCL was evaluated against different
data augmentation techniques using the Crop and RefrigerationDevices datasets from the UCR archive. Specifically,
common augmentation methods, including jittering, scaling,
shifting, and rotation, were applied individually.
 The classification accuracy was measured for both
configurations—with and without the proposed topological
regularization—and the results are summarized in Fig. 4.
While the performance gain from each augmentation varies
across datasets, incorporating Lcross generally led to improved
accuracy under different augmentation settings. These results
empirically demonstrate that time–topology alignment can
help compensate for the information loss introduced during Fig. 6. Classification results in a limited data sample scenario.
data augmentation.

D. Visualized Explanation To illustrate the representative structure of the learned
 In this section, we visualize the learned embeddings embeddings (see Fig. 5), we focus on the 16 latent dimenobtained from the time–topology alignment. The analysis is sions with the highest variance. Without the time–topology
conducted on the RefrigerationDevices dataset, which primar- correspondence term Lcross, the representation shows irregily exhibits periodic behavior with occasional sharp transient ular fluctuations and diffuse responses around the transient
peaks. The first test sample is selected as a representative case anomaly (t ≈ 480), suggesting that the model mainly captures
for evaluation. local amplitude variations. In contrast, incorporating Lcross
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

KIM et al.: TopoCL: TOPOLOGICAL CONTRASTIVE LEARNING FOR TIME SERIES 11

produces more periodic and structured embeddings, with the [8] J. Liu and S. Chen, “TimesURL: Self-supervised contrastive learning
transient anomaly localized to only a few dimensions. for universal time series representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI, 2024,
 pp. 13918–13926.
 [9] G. Trajcevski, Z. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhang, T. Zhong, and
E. Limited Data Scenario F. Zhou, “Learning latent seasonal-trend representations for time
 series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Due to sensor malfunctions, data transmission errors, or 2022, pp. 38775–38787. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/
manual data entry issues, a sufficient amount of data is not forum?id=PilZY3omXV2
 [10] E. Eldele et al., “Time-series representation learning via temporal and
always guaranteed. To verify the effectiveness of the proposed contextual contrasting,” in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
method in scenarios with limited data, we adjusted the pro- 2021, pp. 2352–2359.
portion of training samples. FordB dataset from the UCR [11] Q. Meng, H. Qian, Y. Liu, L. Cui, Y. Xu, and Z. Shen, “MHCCL:
 Masked hierarchical cluster-wise contrastive learning for multivariate
archive is chosen for this analysis. The classification results time series,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 9153–9161.
using only 1%–9% of the original training dataset are shown [12] G. Carlsson, “Topology and data,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 46, no. 2,
in Fig. 6. The proposed method consistently outperforms w/o pp. 255–308, 2009.
 [13] D. Cohen-Steiner, H. Edelsbrunner, and J. Harer, “Stability of persistime–topology alignment. This result suggests that leveraging tence diagrams,” in Proc. 21st Annu. Symp. Comput. Geometry, Jun.
topological properties can capture the intrinsic characteristics 2005, pp. 263–271.
of the data, even with a small amount of data. [14] P. Bubenik et al., “Statistical topological data analysis using persistence
 landscapes,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 77–102, 2015.
 [15] H. Adams et al., “Persistence images: A stable vector representation of
 VIII. C ONCLUSION persistent homology,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1–35,
 2017.
 This article presents TopoCL, a topological CL for time [16] T. Padellini and P. Brutti, “Supervised learning with indefinite topologseries. We treat temporal and topological properties of time ical kernels,” Statistics, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 765–786, Jul. 2021.
series as distinct modalities and propose a joint learning [17] X. Zhu, A. Vartanian, M. Bansal, D. Nguyen, and L. Brandl, “Stochastic
objective to enhance understanding of both, while also improv- multiresolution persistent homology kernel,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2016,
 pp. 2449–2457.
ing robustness to data augmentations. TopoCL is evaluated [18] P. Bubenik, “The persistence landscape and some of its properties,” in
across multiple tasks: time-series classification, forecasting, Proc. Topological Data Anal. Abel Symp. Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
anomaly detection, and transfer learning. The experimental 2020, pp. 97–117.
 [19] C. Hofer, R. Kwitt, M. Niethammer, and A. Uhl, “Deep learning with
results demonstrate the universality, generalization capability, topological signatures,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 1634–1644.
and effectiveness of the proposed model. Our ablations show [20] M. Carrière, F. Chazal, Y. Ike, T. Lacombe, M. Royer, and Y. Umeda,
that the joint learning of time modality contrastive loss and “PersLay: A neural network layer for persistence diagrams and new
 graph topological signatures,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2020, pp. 2786–2796.
time–topology correspondences enhances these capabilities. [21] M. Moor, M. Horn, B. Rieck, and K. Borgwardt, “Topological
Moreover, TopoCL shows consistent performance across vari- autoencoders,” in Proc. ICML, 2020, pp. 7045–7054.
ous data augmentation techniques, suggesting its effectiveness [22] K. Kim, J. Kim, M. Zaheer, J. Kim, F. Chazal, and L. Wasserman,
in mitigating information loss resulting from these augmenta- “PLLay: Efficient topological layer based on persistent landscapes,” in
 Proc. NerIPS, 2020, pp. 15965–15977.
tions. In the future, we aim to extend TopoCL to accommodate [23] K. Wickstrøm, M. Kampffmeyer, K. Ø. Mikalsen, and R. Jenssen,
large scale and diverse pretraining datasets, thereby advancing “Mixing up contrastive learning: Self-supervised representation learntoward a foundation model for time-series analysis. ing for time series,” Pattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 155, pp. 54–61,
 Mar. 2022.
 [24] D. Luo et al., “Time series contrastive learning with information-aware
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT augmentations,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 4534–4542.
 [25] J. Dong, M. Long, J. Wang, H. Wu, H. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “SimMTM:
 The authors gratefully acknowledge the data donors whose A simple pre-training framework for masked time-series modeling,” in
contributions made this article possible. Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 29996–30025.
 During the preparation of this work they used ChatGPT [26] T. Tsiligkaridis, X. Zhang, Z. Zhao, and M. Zitnik, “Self-supervised
 contrastive pre-training for time series via time-frequency consistency,”
and Grammarly in order to refine the writing and check the in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 3988–4003.
grammar. [27] V. Gorade, A. Singh, and D. Mishra, “Large scale time-series representation learning via simultaneous low- and high-frequency feature
 bootstrapping,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1,
 R EFERENCES pp. 991–1002, Jan. 2025.
[1] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph [28] F. Takens, “Detecting strange attractors in turbulence,” in Proc. Dyn.
 contrastive learning with augmentations,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020, Syst. Turbulence, Warwick Symp. Held Univ. Warwick. Cham, Switzerpp. 5812–5823. land: Springer, 2006, pp. 366–381.
[2] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework [29] L. Vietoris, “Über den höheren Zusammenhang kompakter räume und
 for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. ICML, 2020, eine klasse von Zusammenhangstreuen abbildungen,” Mathematische
 pp. 1597–1607. Annalen, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 454–472, Dec. 1927.
[3] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for [30] S. Lim, F. Mémoli, and O. B. Okutan, “Vietoris–rips persistent homolunsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. ogy, injective metric spaces, and the filling radius,” Algebr. Geometric
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735. Topol., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1019–1100, Apr. 2024.
[4] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of [31] B. Laurent and P. Massart, “Adaptive estimation of a quadratic functional
 sentence embeddings,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. by model selection,” Ann. Statist., vol. 28, pp. 1302–1338, Oct. 2000.
 Process., Nov. 2021, pp. 6894–6910. [32] R. Q. Charles, H. Su, M. Kaichun, and L. J. Guibas, “PointNet:
[5] Y. Zhang et al., “Enhancing sequential recommendation with graph Deep learning on point sets for 3D classification and segmentation,”
 contrastive learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Jul. in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017,
 2022, pp. 2398–2405. pp. 77–85.
[6] Y. Yang, C. Huang, L. Xia, C. Huang, D. Luo, and K. Lin, “Debiased [33] M. Zaheer, S. Kottur, S. Ravanbakhsh, B. Poczos, R. R. Salakhutdinov,
 contrastive learning for sequential recommendation,” in Proc. ACM Web and A. J. Smola, “Deep sets,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 3391–3401.
 Conf., Apr. 2023, pp. 1063–1073. [34] H. Ren et al., “Time-series anomaly detection service at Microsoft,” in
[7] Z. Yue et al., “TS2Vec: Towards universal representation of time series,” Proc. 25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining,
 in Proc. AAAI, 2022, pp. 8980–8987. Jul. 2019, pp. 3009–3017.
 This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NETWORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS

[35] Y. B. Nikolay Laptev, Saeed Amizadeh. (2015). A Benchmark [61] J. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Zhong, J. Wickramasuriya, and V. Vasudevan,
 Dataset for Time Series Anomaly Detection. [Online]. Available: “UWave: Accelerometer-based personalized gesture recognition and its
 https://yahooresearch.tumblr.com/post/114590420346/a-benchmark- applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Pervasive Comput. Commun.,
 dataset-for-time-series-anomaly Mar. 2009, pp. 1–9.
[36] A. Siffer, P.-A. Fouque, A. Termier, and C. Largouet, “Anomaly detec- [62] C. Lessmeier, J. K. Kimotho, D. Zimmer, and W. Sextro, “Condition
 tion in streams with extreme value theory,” in Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD monitoring of bearing damage in electromechanical drive systems by
 Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, Aug. 2017, pp. 1067–1075. using motor current signals of electric motors: A benchmark data set
[37] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto- for data-driven classification,” in Proc. PHM, 2016, pp. 1–17.
 encoder for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. WWW, 2018, [63] P. PhysioBank, “PhysioNet: Components of a new research resource for
 pp. 187–196. complex physiologic signals,” Circulation, vol. 101, pp. 215–220, Jun.
[38] F. Rasheed, P. Peng, R. Alhajj, and J. Rokne, “Fourier transform based 2000.
 spatial outlier mining,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Intell. Data Eng. Automated [64] Z. Li, Z. Rao, L. Pan, P. Wang, and Z. Xu, “Ti-MAE: Self-supervised
 Learn. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2009, pp. 317–324. masked time series autoencoders,” 2023, arXiv:2301.08871.
[39] O. Vallis, J. Hochenbaum, and A. Kejariwal, “A novel technique for
 long-term anomaly detection in the cloud,” in Proc. 6th USENIX
 Workshop Hot Topics Cloud Comput. (HotCloud), 2014, pp. 1–6.
 Namwoo Kim received the B.S. degree in math-
[40] V. Brennan and M. Ritesh. (2018). Luminol (Github Repository).
 ematical science and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/linkedin/luminol
 in civil and environmental engineering from Korea
[41] H. A. Dau et al., “The UCR time series archive,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom.
 Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
 Sinica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1293–1305, Nov. 2019.
 (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea, in 2015, 2017, and
[42] A. J. Bagnall et al., “The UEA multivariate time series classification
 2023, respectively.
 archive,” 2018, arXiv:1811.00075.
 From January to June 2023, he was a Visiting
[43] J.-Y. Franceschi, A. Dieuleveut, and M. Jaggi, “Unsupervised scalable
 Student Researcher at the Department of Civil and
 representation learning for multivariate time series,” in Proc. NeurIPS,
 Environmental Engineering, University of Califor-
 2019, pp. 4652–4663.
 nia, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. He is currently
[44] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff,
 a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Department of
 “A transformer-based framework for multivariate time series repre-
 Civil and Environmental Engineering, KAIST. His research interests include
 sentation learning,” in Proc. SIGKDD, New York, NY, USA, 2021,
 spatiotemporal data mining, representation learning, topological data analysis
 pp. 2114–2124.
 (TDA), and urban informatics.
[45] S. Tonekaboni, D. Eytan, and A. Goldenberg, “Unsupervised representation learning for time series with temporal neighborhood coding,” in
 Proc. ICLR, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[46] J. Demšar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,”
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 1–30, Jan. 2006.
[47] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series
 Hyungryul Baik received the B.S. degree in mathis worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc.
 ematical sciences from KAIST, Daejeon, South
 ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–24.
 Korea, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree in mathematics
[48] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
 from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, in 2014.
 time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI, 2021, pp. 11106–11115.
 He was a Post-Doctoral Researcher at the Univer-
[49] J. Chen, P. Li, J. Lv, H. Zha, K. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “Learning
 sity of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, from 2014 to 2017,
 temporal features with alternated similarity and proximity attention for
 time-series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, before joining the Faculty Member at KAIST, in
 2017. He is currently an Associate Professor with
 no. 9, pp. 16339–16350, Sep. 2025.
 the Department of Mathematical Sciences and the
[50] Y. Liu et al., “iTransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time
 Director of the Graduate School of AI for Mathematseries forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR, 2024, pp. 1–25.
 ics, KAIST. His research interests primarily involve
[51] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “Crossformer: Transformer utilizing crossdynamical techniques at the geometric topology and geometric group theory,
 dimension dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc.
 as well as the topological and geometric structures of low-dimensional spaces.
 ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–21.
 More recently, he has expanded his research focus toward topological data
[52] S. Zhu, J. Zheng, and Q. Ma, “MR-transformer: Multiresolution transformer for multivariate time series prediction,” IEEE Trans. Neural analysis and mathematical formalization.
 Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 1171–1183, Jan. 2025.
[53] Y. Liu, M. Long, J. Wang, and H. Wu, “Non-stationary transformers:
 Exploring the stationarity in time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv.
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 9881–9893.
[54] M. Chen et al., “SCINet: Time series modeling and forecasting with
 sample convolution and interaction,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Yoonjin Yoon received the B.S. degree in mathe-
 Syst., 2022, pp. 5816–5828. matics from Seoul National University, Seoul, South
[55] H. Wu, T. Hu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Wang, and M. Long, “TimesNet: Korea, in 1996, the M.S. degree in computer science
 Temporal 2D-variation modeling for general time series analysis,” in and the M.S. degree in management science and
 Proc. ICLR, 2023, pp. 1–23. engineering from Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
[56] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective USA, in 2000 and 2002, respectively, and the Ph.D.
 for time series forecasting?,” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 11121–11128. degree in civil and environmental engineering from
[57] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck the University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA,
 of transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, USA, in 2010.
 pp. 5244–5254. Since 2011, she has been an Assistant Professor
[58] S. Bai, J. Z. Kolter, and V. Koltun, “An empirical evaluation of generic with the Department of Civil and Environmental
 convolutional and recurrent networks for sequence modeling,” 2018, Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
 arXiv:1803.01271. Daejeon, South Korea. Before arriving at KAIST, she was a Graduate Student
[59] G. Lai, W.-C. Chang, Y. Yang, and H. Liu, “Modeling long- and short- Researcher with the National Center of Excellence in Air Transportation
 term temporal patterns with deep neural networks,” in Proc. 41st Int. Operations Research (NeXTOR), University of California, Berkeley, from
 ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retr., Jun. 2018, pp. 95–104. 2005 to 2010. Previously, she was a Research Assistant with the Artificial
[60] R. G. Andrzejak, K. Lehnertz, F. Mormann, C. Rieke, P. David, Intelligence Center, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA, USA, in 1999, and
 and C. E. Elger, “Indications of nonlinear deterministic and finite- the Center for Reliability Computing, Stanford University, from 2000 to 2002.
 dimensional structures in time series of brain electrical activity: Her research interests include the traffic management of both crewed and
 Dependence on recording region and brain state,” Phys. Rev. E, Stat. uncrewed vehicles using stochastic optimization, data-driven driving behavior
 Phys. Plasmas Fluids Relat. Interdiscip. Top., vol. 64, no. 6, Nov. 2001, analysis, and autonomous vehicle traffic flow management using large-scale
 Art. no. 061907. driving data.