IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026 2271

 Toward Efficient Distributed Network Security: A
 Lightweight Multitask Traffic Analysis Framework
 Jiadong Fu , Jiang Fang, Jiyan Sun, Shangyuan Zhuang , Yinlong Liu , and Zhiqiang Lv

 Abstract—With the rapid development of cloud computing,
network architectures are moving towards distributed computing,
which performs data processing at edge nodes to reduce latency,
enabling more efficient and scalable network services. Nevertheless, this shift introduces significant security challenges due to the
heterogeneity of communications protocols and the vulnerabilities
of edge devices. To effectively secure these distributed networks,
it is essential to perform multiple traffic analysis tasks, e.g.
Network Intrusion Detection, Encrypted Traffic Classification,
and Application Traffic Classification. However, existing methods have limited generic feature extraction and require the
deployment of multiple models to solve multiple tasks, which
exceeds the resource capacity of edge nodes. To address these
challenges, we introduce a Lightweight Multitask Traffic Analysis Fig. 1. Edge traffic analysis tasks in distributed network architectures.
Framework LiMTa, which novelly proposes a traffic pre-training
method, FreqRec, and a lightweight multi-task model fine-tune
method, MT-Adapter. FreqRec enables high-level semantic fea- Benefiting from data processing at edge nodes close to the data
ture extraction by reconstructing the frequency features of traffic source, distributed networks can significantly reduce latency
samples, and MT-Adapter efficiently performs multiple tasks by for real-time applications and alleviate bandwidth constraints
computing the pre-trained model only once. Experimental results typically existing in centralized networks. As shown in Figdemonstrate that our approach achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance on six traffic analysis tasks. Moreover, the MT- ure 1, edge nodes are tasked with managing many kinds
Adapter module only fine-tunes a small number of parameters, of edge devices and network services in their respective
accounting for only 6.37% of the pre-trained model’s parameters, areas. Therefore, edge nodes are required to handle network
and achieves the same result as the full fine-tuning. Compared traffic from heterogeneous protocols of edge devices [4], such
to full fine-tuning, LiMTa reduces the time cost by 50.9% and as MQTT and CoAP. In addition, many edge devices have
the space cost by 57.4% in six edge traffic analysis tasks.
 potential security vulnerabilities due to insufficient security
 Index Terms—Edge security, frequency feature, feature recon- design and testing [5], [6]. These security vulnerabilities
struction, reuse model, multitask traffic analysis task. expose distributed networks to significant security risks [7],
 [8], e.g., Botnet attacks targeting IoT devices Mirai [9], IoT
 I. I NTRODUCTION Goes Nuclear [10], and large-scale DDoS attacks [11].
 These security risks can lead to significant downtime, loss

W ITH the rapid development of the Internet of Things
 (IoT) and mobile communication technologies, network architectures are shifting from traditional centralized
 of trust from users, and substantial financial and reputational
 damage for service providers.
 To ensure the security of distributed networks, it is essential
processing to distributed network computing [1], [2], [3]. to perform multiple traffic analysis tasks, such as Network
 Intrusion Detection [12], Encrypted Traffic Classification [13],
 Received 22 January 2025; revised 8 December 2025; accepted 8 December
2025; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON N ETWORKING Editor A. and Application Traffic Classification [14], for effective detec-
Khreishah. Date of publication 17 December 2025; date of current version tion of network security risks. By labeling data and training
12 January 2026. This work was supported in part by the Climbing Program specific models for specific traffic analysis tasks, current
of the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
under Grant E3Z0031. (Corresponding authors: Jiang Fang; Yinlong Liu.) machine learning [15], [16] and deep learning [17], [18]
 Jiadong Fu, Shangyuan Zhuang, Yinlong Liu, and Zhiqiang Lv are methods have achieved good performance. Furthermore, to
with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sci- ensure timely task completion and minimize the risk of privacy
ences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of Cyber Security,
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e- breaches, these traffic analysis tasks are advised to be trained
mail: fujiadong@iie.ac.cn; zhuangshangyuan@iie.ac.cn; liuyinlong@iie.ac.cn; and deployed at edge nodes closer to the traffic source [19].
lvzhiqiang@iie.ac.cn). However, the above machine learning and deep learning meth-
 Jiang Fang is with the Electronic Engineering Institute, National University of Defense Technology, Hefei 230037, China, and also with the ods are primarily designed for single-task scenarios, making
Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, Hefei 230031, China (e-mail: jiang- it necessary to train and deploy multiple models to handle
fang2025@gmail.com). multiple traffic analysis tasks [20]. Since edge nodes are often
 Jiyan Sun is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China (e-mail: sunjiyan@iie.ac.cn). limited in computational and storage capacities, the resource
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2025.3643832 demands of multiple models greatly exceed the capacity of
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2272 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

edge nodes. This limitation makes these methods impractical rithm, similar to full fine-tuning, requires multiple forward
when applied to edge nodes to solve multiple traffic analysis computations on the pre-trained model to combine the different
tasks [21], [22]. Besides, these methods heavily rely on large LoRA layer outputs when dealing with multi-traffic analysis
amounts of labeled data and are restricted to single-task tasks. Multiple forward computations on resource-constrained
scenarios, rendering them both time-intensive and impractical edge nodes significantly increase the processing time and can’t
for multi-task scenarios [23], [24]. timely handle multiple traffic analysis tasks.
 Recently, the “Pre-training” & “Fine-tuning” paradigm has To address the above challenges, we propose a Lightweight
been applied to address the common challenges of label Multitask Traffic Analysis Framework, LiMTa. First, in the
scarcity and poor task transferability [23], [24], [25]. This pre-training stage, we propose a novel traffic pre-training
paradigm has shown great potential natively in multiple traffic method, FreqRec, which trains the model on the feature space
analysis tasks for distributed networks [26]. In this paradigm, through the frequency feature reconstruction task. Specifia massive amount of unlabeled network traffic is first collected cally, FreqRec constructs frequency feature-missing samples
from the open Internet to ensure that the model pre-training by randomly masking frequency features. Then, it extracts
process does not involve any private information. After that, high-level semantic features by designing a dual-stream netthe pre-training process with huge computational and storage work to reconstruct the frequency features of feature-missing
requirements is performed on massive unlabeled datasets in samples in the feature space. This method enables the model
the cloud to train a feature extraction model. The pre-trained to effectively extract temporal and frequency features of traffic
model is then distributed to edge nodes, where only fine-tuning without relying on any labeled samples. Experimental results
a small amount of labeled data is required for the model to show that FreqRec achieves SOTA performance in various
perform traffic analysis tasks. traffic analysis tasks.
 However, these existing traffic analysis methods for “Pre- Second, in the fine-tuning stage, we propose a lightweight
training” & “Fine-tuning” face two serious challenges when multi-task model fine-tuning method, MT-Adapter. Unlike
applied to edge nodes. Firstly, in the pre-training stage, parameter-efficient fine-tuning and full fine-tuning methods,
existing pre-training methods retain excessively low-level the MT-Adapter is independent of the pre-trained model,
semantics and overlook critical frequency features, limiting without affecting the pre-trained model’s forward process
the model’s performance in downstream tasks. In detail, these and pre-trained parameters. Our method requires only one
methods are usually trained on raw sample reconstruction and computation of the pre-trained model to obtain hidden layer
prediction tasks based on temporal features of traffic [27], features and then feeds these features into different lightweight
e.g., autoencoder reconstruction [25] and context prediction MT-Adapters to achieve the same model performance as
[23] and have achieved remarkable performance. While these full fine-tuning in solving multiple tasks. Moreover, the MTmethods focus on temporal features, ignoring the potential Adapter can efficiently perform different tasks by adding and
period and frequency features in the traffic data [28], which fine-tuning only a small portion of parameters, just 6.37%
is critical for detecting periodic attacks. Furthermore, these of the pre-trained model’s parameters. Our method signifimethods reconstruct temporal traffic features in raw space, cantly reduces the resource overhead of model deployment
retaining a lot of unnecessary low-level semantic traffic infor- and inference. Our method surpasses the pre-training methods
mation [29], e.g. non-meaningful padding bytes, and are ET-BERT [23] and YaTC [24] by 5.03% and 7.47% on
inefficient in training, affecting the performance of the model the CrossPlatform-Android dataset, respectively. Moreover,
in downstream traffic analysis tasks [28], [30], [31]. compared to full fine-tuning, LiMTa reduces the time cost by
 Secondly, in the fine-tuning stage, existing methods for ana- 50.9% and the space cost by 57.4% in six edge traffic analysis
lyzing network traffic, mainly including linear fine-tuning, full tasks. In conclusion, the main contributions of this paper are
fine-tuning, and parameter-efficient fine-tuning [32], present as follows:
issues of limited adaptability or computational redundancy, 1) We propose a lightweight pre-training and fine-tuning
limiting the application of the model on edge nodes. For linear framework, LiMTa, which is designed to perform mulfine-tuning, this method can update only the parameters of the tiple traffic analysis tasks on edge nodes with limited
classification layer to adapt to different traffic analysis tasks. computational resources.
Nevertheless, the limited adaptability of the model makes 2) We propose a novel traffic pre-training method, FreqRec,
it difficult to achieve satisfactory performance in different which achieves a high-level semantic feature extraction
traffic analysis tasks. For full fine-tuning, this method can model by reconstructing the frequency features of traffic
update all pre-trained model parameters to enable exceptional samples. This way effectively extracts the frequency and
performance on specific tasks. While updating all parameters temporal features of traffic data.
of the pre-trained model requires a huge resource cost, it is 3) We introduce a pre-trained model fine-tuning method,
very difficult to train and apply a pre-trained model on edge MT-Adapter, which efficiently performs multiple tasks
nodes. For parameter-efficient fine-tuning like LoRA [33], it by computing the pre-trained model only once. This precan achieve excellent model performance by adding LoRA trained model reuse way effectively reduces the training
parameters to the hidden layer of the pre-trained model. Yet, and inference computational overhead.
the output of the pre-trained model’s hidden layer relies on 4) We conducted extensive experiments on six trafficthe computation of the LoRA layer. This leads to that, in related security tasks, providing overall comparisons
the inference stage, the parameter-efficient fine-tuning algo- and detailed evaluations. The experimental results
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2273

 demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art most discriminative features, thereby improving the accuracy
 (SOTA) performance. and efficiency of traffic analysis. However, deep learning-
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- based methods usually require large amounts of labeled data
tion II reviews related work. Section III presents the detailed and a high level of computational resources for the training
design of LiMTa. Section IV provides an experimental evalu- process [36]. In addition, deep learning-based approaches
ation of its performance. Section V discusses the limitations accomplish multiple traffic analysis tasks that require trainof LiMTa. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper. ing, deploying, and reasoning about multiple deep model
 parameters, further expanding the demand for computational
 II. R ELATED W ORK resources [26]. These methods are often unavailable on edge
 nodes with limited computational resources.
 In this section, we review the main research related to our
work. It mainly includes machine learning-based traffic analy- C. Pre-Training & Fine-Tuning Based Traffic Analysis
sis methods, deep learning-based traffic analysis methods, and Methods
recent emerging pre-training and fine-tuning traffic analysis
 The pre-training methods typically construct self-supervised
methods.
 learning tasks to learn generalizable feature representations
 from large-scale unlabeled datasets. Then, a small amount
A. Machine Learning Based Traffic Analysis Methods of labeled traffic data is used to fine-tune it for a specific
 Recently, machine learning-based traffic analysis methods downstream task. This approach significantly reduces the need
have achieved excellent traffic analysis performance by con- for labeled data. Moreover, the “Pre-training” & “Fine-tuning”
structing classification or regression models to extract features paradigm can be effectively applied to distributed network
from traffic data [34]. These methods include classic algo- architectures [26]. The resource-intensive pre-training process
rithms such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random is performed on massive unlabeled datasets in the cloud. The
Forest, and K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN), etc [35]. Typically, pre-trained model is then distributed to the edge nodes. With
AppScanner [16] extracts traffic features and combines them a small amount of labeled data for fine-tuning, the model is
with a variety of machine learning models to achieve efficient able to perform a series of traffic analysis tasks at the edge.
classification of mobile application traffic and detection of In recent years, some research has explored pre-training
malicious attacks, and exhibits low false alarm rates even methods for traffic analysis tasks. Specifically, the PERT
in encrypted communication environments. FlowPrint [15] framework [38] utilized dynamic word embedding techniques
analyzes the metadata of a flow and extracts the feature to automatically extract traffic features from the contextual
fingerprint of each flow to accurately identify the traffic distribution of traffic payload bytes. Subsequently, it leverages
patterns of an application or service with the help of machine the pre-trained network for classification tasks to achieve
learning models. However, machine learning methods rely on greater performance. Consequently, the ET-BERT model [23]
high-quality manual feature engineering; their performance adapts the BERT architecture from NLP to learn deep traffic
degrades when faced with complex traffic patterns and sparsely representations, showing improved performance in traffic clascharacterized data [36]. In addition, since their models are sification tasks. Similarly, YaTC [24] adopt autoencoder-based
usually designed for specific tasks, they are difficult to support architectures, where the pre-training objective is to reconstruct
multi-task traffic analysis requirements. raw traffic features. With the proposal of mamba technology,
 NetMamba [25] applies a mamba-based architecture for traffic feature extraction, by reconstructing raw traffic features,
B. Deep Learning Based Traffic Analysis Methods demonstrating the potential of self-supervised learning on
 Deep learning-based traffic methods are able to automat- unlabeled data. Over the past year, TrafficFormer [39] utilizes
ically extract high-dimensional feature representations from a Transformer encoder architecture and is pre-trained using a
raw traffic data through multi-layer neural networks without fine-grained multi-classification task, demonstrating significant
relying on manual feature engineering. This makes deep performance gains and competitive computational efficiency
learning methods highly generalizable when dealing with com- across various traffic classification benchmarks. MIETT [40]
plex traffic patterns, encrypted traffic, and unknown attacks leverages the Transformer to model dependencies across multi-
[37]. Typical deep learning architectures include Convolu- ple related traffic instances within a flow. This work highlights
tional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks the trend of using complex Transformer variants to capture
(RNNs), and Self-Attention Networks (Transformers), etc. intricate behavioral dependencies.
DeepPacket [18] uses CNNs to capture local features of However, these methods reconstruct raw traffic information
network traffic and combines them with RNNs to capture tem- and retain massive unnecessary low-level semantic informaporal information in traffic sequences to achieve efficient and tion, affecting the performance of the model in performing
accurate traffic classification. This joint neural network mod- downstream traffic analysis tasks. Moreover, these methods
eling approach significantly improves the ability to recognize focus on temporal features, ignoring the potential period and
complex traffic patterns. FS-Net [17] employs CNN model frequency features in the traffic data, which are critical for
to extract deep traffic features and filters the most relevant detecting periodic attacks. Besides, full fine-tuning and linear
features for the classification task with an adaptive feature fine-tuning strategies face challenges in terms of high compuselection module. This approach automatically identifies the tational costs and poor adaptability, respectively. Additionally,
2274 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 2. LiMTa framework. The framework consists of three stages: (Left) traffic preprocessing, (Center) pre-training with FreqRec, and (Right) task-specific
fine-tuning with MT-Adapter.

in the inference stage, the parameter-efficient fine-tuning algo- to compute the feature representations of the original traffic
rithm needs to perform multiple forward computations on samples and the frequency-missing samples. Then, FreqRec
the pre-trained model. This approach also fails to address implements the reconstruction of the frequency features in the
the reusability of the pre-trained models in multi-tasking high-level feature space via predictor. Experiments verify that
scenarios. Thus, it is difficult to apply existing methods to this design can pre-train powerful feature extraction models
edge nodes to solve multiple traffic analysis tasks. from massive unlabeled traffic data.
 In the fine-tuning stage, we novelly introduce a pre-
 III. F RAMEWORK D ESIGN trained model fine-tuning method called MT-Adapter. The
 This section describes the proposed Lightweight Multitask MT-Adapters are separated from the pre-trained models by
Traffic Analysis Framework, LiMTa. We first describe the computing the pre-training model to obtain the hidden layer
overall architecture of LiMTa and then detail its various stages. features only once, and then feeding these features into different lightweight MT-Adapters, thus executing multiple tasks
 efficiently. Specifically, LiMTA freezes the parameters of the
A. Framework Overview
 pre-trained model and adds lightweight MT-Adapter modules
 In this subsection, we detail our proposed framework for each traffic analysis task. Then, LiMTA embeds the raw
LiMTa. As shown in Figure 2, the LiMTa consists of three token data into vector representations and feeds them into the
main stages: traffic preprocessing stage, pre-training stage, pre-trained model to compute hidden layer features. These
and fine-tuning stage. Specifically, in the traffic preprocessing features are then passed to different MT-Adapter modules to
stage, LiMTa first divides the raw traffic data into multi- generate predictions for various tasks. This design enables
ple independent session flows based on five-tuple features. effective reuse of the pre-trained model, significantly reducing
Secondly, to ensure the consistency of session flows, LiMTa computational overhead in multitasking scenarios and making
aligns the header and payload length of each session flow it highly suitable for deployment on edge nodes.
packet. Finally, the aligned packets are concatenated into a
continuous binary-byte sequence and divided into tokens of a
fixed size. This approach transforms raw traffic into structured, B. Traffic Preprocessing Stage
tokenized data, simplifying the data while preserving essential This subsection details the traffic preprocessing stage in
relationships. LiMTa. Inspired by [23] and [25], the traffic preprocessing
 In the pre-training stage, we propose a novel traffic pre- stage in this paper includes traffic mirroring, data flow segtraining method, FreqRec, which pre-trains powerful traffic mentation, packet alignment, and packet tokenization.
feature extraction models by doing a frequency feature recon- 1) Traffic Mirroring and Flow Splitting: Traffic mirroring
struction task. Specifically, LiMTA first embeds tokenized operates by duplicating packets during their transmission
traffic data into a vector representation as the original traf- through the switch and forwarding these copies to a designated
fic sample. Next, FreqRec computes the frequency feature mirror port. In this study, a port forwarding strategy is consamples by Fast Fourier Transform and then constructs the fre- figured on the core switch to route all traffic packets passing
quency missing samples by randomly masking the frequency through edge nodes to the port on which the traffic analysis
features. Finally, FreqRec constructs a dual-stream network model is processed. The traffic at the edge node comprises
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2275

a mix of packets from various devices and hosts operating called FreqRec, which trains powerful traffic feature extraction
across different protocols. To minimize interference from non- models by doing a frequency feature reconstruction task.
host traffic, LiMTa first filters out packets associated with Specifically, FreqRec first embeds the token array Ft to
IP-independent protocols. Then, packets with the same five- acquire the original sample vector X. Then, based on the
tuple (source IP, destination IP, source port, destination port, original sample vector X, FreqRec constructs the frequency
protocol) are aggregated into a flow. Each flow represents a feature-missing samples vector X̂. After that, FreqRec builds
complete network communication process between hosts. The a dual-stream network to compute the feature representations
flow encapsulates critical information about host interactions of the original traffic samples and the frequency featureand key communication features, e.g. traffic load, protocol missing samples. Finally, FreqRec reconstructs the frequency
usage, and the behavioral patterns of both communicating feature-missing samples through the projection layer and
parties. Overall, this data provides a comprehensive view of then aligns the original sample feature representations with
the network’s operational status and communication patterns. the reconstructed frequency feature-missing sample feature
 2) Packet Alignment: First, to eliminate potential corre- representations in the high-level feature space. This process
lations between packets, LiMTa anonymizes all packets by completes a frequency feature reconstruction task. Through the
masking Ethernet headers and IP addresses. Then, LiMTa con- FreqRec pre-training method, LiMTa can pre-train a generic
siders the variation in byte length between different protocol traffic feature extraction model for multiple traffic analysis
packets, such as MQTT [41] packets have a 2-byte header tasks.
and typically a 2-byte to several hundred-byte payloads, while 1) Token Embedding: Since the original token data is
UDP packets have a fixed 8-byte header and a maximum typically high-dimensional and sparse [24], [25], we use
payload length of 65,507 bytes. Packets that are either too token embedding and position embedding to represent the
long or too short may affect the byte information of the flow. characteristics of each token. This allows the token to be
Therefore, it is essential to standardize packet sizes by allocat- compressed into a representation while retaining the semantic
ing a uniform size to all packets and assigning fixed lengths to relationships of the traffic data.
the headers and payloads of the packets. Thus, LiMTa trims Specifically, given a traffic token sequence Ft , we first
packets that are too long, while shorter packets are padded apply token embedding to obtain a vector representation of the
with “0” bytes to ensure that both the header and payload of tokens, which projects each token into a vector of size d. For
the packets have the same length, denoted as Nh bytes and Np each token ti ∈ Ft , it is mapped into a vector representation
bytes, respectively. In this paper, we set Nh to 80 and Np to using an embedding matrix Et with dimensions Nt × d,
240 bytes. The choice of Nh = 80 and Np = 240 for packet denoted as ei = Et (ti ) = ti ∗ Et . Consequently, we add a
alignment is based on the empirical finding that most critical position embedding to each token to capture the positional
protocol headers are encapsulated within the first 80 bytes, and information of tokens within the sequence. For the traffic token
the initial 240 bytes of the payload are highly discriminative, sequence Ft of length N , we use a position embedding matrix
containing key application-layer fingerprints (e.g., TLS/HTTP Ep with dimensions N × d to represent the embedding of
handshake messages) crucial for classification. different positions. The position embedding can be expressed
 3) Packet Tokenization: To collect more comprehensive as pi = Ep (i). The final embedding result xi is the sum of
traffic information, we follow the method outlined in previous the token embedding and the position embedding, denoted as
research [25], dividing multiple bytes into a single token. Equation 1.
Specifically, LiMTa first aggregates the bytes of k consecutive
packets from each flow into a unified byte array. It is defined xi = ei + pi = Et (ti ) + Ep (i) (1)
as Fb = [b1 , b2 , . . . , bLb ], where Lb = k × (Nh + Np ) In this work, we set the embedding dimension d = 512.
represents the length of the array, and bi represents the i- For a given traffic token sequence Ft = [t1 , t2 , . . ., tN ], after
th byte. Secondly, to improve computational efficiency, we the embedding process, we obtain X = {x1 , x2 , . . ., xN }. X
group Nt adjacent binary characters into a single token t, so represents the traffic temporal feature vector.
each byte array is divided into N = Lb /Nt tokens. In this 2) Frequency Feature-Missing Samples Construction: To
paper, we set Nt to 16. The tokenisation size of Nt = 16 comprehensively extract the high-level semantic features of
is selected as an optimal trade-off to capture the necessary traffic data, FreqRec first constructs the frequency feature
local semantic dependencies while significantly reducing the missing samples by randomly masking the frequency features.
sequence length (L) fed into the Transformer, thereby ensuring For the two-dimensional traffic feature X obtained after token
computational efficiency for latency-critical edge deployments. embedding, we first compute the frequency features XF of
Finally, the tokens contained in a flow can be represented X using the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) [42], denoted as
as Ft = [t1 , t2 , . . ., tN ]. This method can reduce the model Equation 2, to obtain the frequency feature information of the
input’s length while retaining essential sequential information traffic samples.
in the traffic data.
 N −1 X
 d−1
 ik1 jk2
 X[i, j]e−j2π( N + d )
 X
C. Pre-Training Stage XF [k1 , k2 ] = (2)
 i=0 j=0
 In this stage, to address the issue that existing methods
retain excessively low-level semantics and overlook critical where X[i, j] denotes the element in the i-th row and
frequency features, We propose a novel pre-training method j-th column of the feature X, and XF [k1 , k2 ] represents the
2276 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 includes multihead self-attention with 4 heads and a feedforward network. This architecture ensures that the model
 can capture complex dependencies in the traffic data, while
 maintaining efficiency through residual connections and layer
 normalization. Dropout is applied to prevent overfitting and
 enhance generalization, contributing to the model’s robustness. After the Transformer encoder, the model employs a
Fig. 3. Architecture of the traffic feature extraction model used as the preconvolutional projection layer with a kernel size of 3 to
trained backbone in LiMTa. capture local temporal correlations in the sequence data.
 This convolutional layer helps refine the output representation
frequency component in the frequency-domain matrix at the before it is passed through an optional post-processing step,
 ik1 jk2 including layer normalization and dropout, to stabilize the
k1 -th row and k2 -th column. The terms e−j2π N and e−j2π d
 learning process. This compact yet powerful architecture is
correspond to the Fourier transform factors for the rows and
 designed to efficiently handle multitasking traffic analysis
columns, respectively.
 while minimizing computational overhead, making it suitable
 Subsequently, a Random Mask process is applied to XF .
 for deployment on edge nodes.
The Random Mask process generates a random 0-1 matrix
 FreqRec Process. To efficiently compute the feature repre-
M and dot-products it with the original frequency feature
 sentation of the two samples, FreqRec employs a dual-stream
matrix to compute the frequency feature-missing sample. To
 network architecture to reconstruct the features of the freensure the effectiveness of model training, we set the mask
 quency feature-missing samples in the feature space, thus
ratio to 25%, as section IV-G shows it offers the best tradetraining models that can efficiently capture and learn the
off between reconstruction difficulty and feature preservation.
 frequency and temporal features of traffic samples. As illus-
This involves setting certain frequency components to zero,
 trated in Figure 2, the fundamental architecture of FreqRec
thereby generating samples that exhibit feature differences
 consists of two identical neural networks: the online model,
compared to the original samples. The Random Mask process
 which comprises a feature extraction model f , and the target
is defined as Equation 3.
 model, which shares the same structure as the online model
 X̂F = XF M ; M ∈ {0, 1}N ×d (3) but additionally contains a predictor p. The predictor p is
 composed of a linear layer. The parameters fm of the target
where represents the dot product. Compared with raw model are the exponential moving average (EMA) [43] of the
temporal features, frequency-domain representations empha- parameters from the online model.
size periodicity and global temporal regularities in the traffic. The encoder f is used to compute the feature representation
Typical examples include periodic keep-alives, IoT telemetry of the original sample X, and encoder fm is used to compute
uploads, botnet beaconing, and on–off patterns in streaming the feature representation of the frequency feature-missing
or DoS attacks, which often become more salient at specific sample X̂. The predictor p is used to reconstruct the missing
frequencies after the transformation. frequency information representation. The training objective of
 Since the model inputs are temporal features, It needs to this framework is to maximize the similarity between (X, X̂)
transform it back to the temporal domain using the inverse in the feature space, aligning the feature representations of the
Fast Fourier Transform (iFFT) [42], resulting in the frequency original sample X and the samples with missing frequency
feature-missing sample X̂, denoted as Equation 4. features X̂ and achieve the frequency feature reconstruction
 in feature space. The formula is as follows Equation 5.
 N −1 d−1
 1 X X ik1 jk2
 X̂[i, j] = X̂F [k1 , k2 ]ej2π( N + d ) (4) LReC = min LN CS (f (X), p ◦ fm (X̂)) (5)
 N ∗d p,f
 k1 =0 k2 =0
 where LNCS is the negative cosine similarity.
Ultimately, LiMTa can obtain the original feature sample X
and the frequency feature-missing sample X̂. <a·b>
 LN CS (a, b) = 2 − 2 ∗ (6)
 3) Feature Space Reconstruction: After constructing the kak2 kbk2
original samples and the frequency feature-missing samples, By employing the task of reconstructing frequency features,
FreqRec pre-trains a powerful feature extraction model by the pre-trained model can effectively capture both temporal
performing the frequency feature reconstruction task. and frequency features of the traffic data. Ultimately, the model
 Feature Extraction Model Design. As illustrated in Fig- enables the learning of high-level semantic features from the
ure 3, the feature extraction model is designed as a lightweight raw traffic, thereby providing a richer feature foundation for
architecture for traffic analysis on resource-constrained edge downstream tasks.
nodes. The first step in the model is a linear transformation
that maps the input features into a hidden dimensionality. This
transformation allows the model to work in a latent space D. Fine-Tuning Stage
that is more suitable for subsequent operations. Following To address the limited adaptability of linear fine-tuning
the linear transformation, the core of the model consists of and the computational redundancy of existing full fine-tuning
a Transformer encoder with 6 layers. Each of these layers and parameter-efficient fine-tuning methods, we propose a
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2277

 representations. Finally, the results are output through a linear
 classification layer.

 Algorithm 1 MT-Adapter Fine-Tune Process of LiMTa
 1: Input: Data-set D, Classification Layer g, Pre-trained
 model f ;
 2: Initialization: hA1 = [0, 0.., 0], batchsize ζ = 64.
 3: Init block i, Ai = N (0, δ), Bi = 0, and forward layer Pi
 4: for epoch e = 1,...,E do
 5: for batch b = 1,...,|D|/ζ do
Fig. 4. Architecture of the proposed MT-Adapter for multitask fine-tuning. 6: Extract a sample (X, y) from Db
 7: f (X) => h1 , h2 . . . hm
 8: for i in [1,2,3...,m − 1] do
lightweight multi-task fine-tuning method called MT-Adapter.
 9: hA A
 i+1 = Pi (Bi Ai ∗ (hi + hi ))
Unlike existing fine-tuning methods, MT-Adapter operates
 10: end for
independently of the pre-trained model, ensuring that the pre-
 11: pred = g(hA m + hm )
trained model’s forward process is not affected.
 12: loss = CrossEntropy(pred, y)
 Concretely, in the fine-tuning stage, we leverage the hidden
 13: end for
features of the pre-trained model to supervise the fine-tuning
 14: end for
process of each MT-Adapter module. This supervision enables
the MT-Adapter to progressively learn and capture taskspecific feature representations layer by layer based on the 2) Fine-Tuning and Inference Processes: As shown in
pre-trained model. Moreover, by freezing the parameters of Algorithm 1, we define a small labeled fine-tuning dataset
the pre-trained model and updating only the MT-Adapter’s D = {(X, y)|X ∈ Rn , y ∈ [C]}, where X represents the
parameters, which account for just 6.37% of the pre-trained feature data of the traffic after embedding, y is the label
model’s parameters, the method achieves efficient task-specific of the sample X, and C is the number of categories in
fine-tuning while significantly reducing computational costs. the dataset. The input data X first passes through the pre-
 During the inference stage, the MT-Adapter further trained model to compute and store the hidden layer features
enhances efficiency by requiring the pre-trained model only H = {h1 , h2 , . . . , hm }, where m denotes the number of preonce to obtain the hidden layer features. These features are trained hidden layer layers and hm corresponds to the output
then fed through different MT-Adapter modules to achieve the features of the pre-trained model. Then, for each layer of
same performance as full fine-tuning. This approach allows the MT-Adapter, the output is calculated based on Equation
the pre-trained model to be reused across various traffic 7. Finally, a linear classification layer is added to obtain the
analysis tasks, reducing the time of model deployment and output.
computation, and significantly lowering the resource costs During the multi-task inference stage of the model, the input
required. traffic sample X are processed through the pre-trained model
 1) MT-Adapter Design: As illustrated in Figure 4, our to compute and store the hidden layer features. These hidden
proposed MT-Adapter consists of multiple blocks and a linear layer features are then fed into the MT-Adapter modules
classification layer, each containing a linear projection layer P corresponding to different downstream tasks to obtain the final
and a low-rank matrix projection layer W . Each block takes results. Our method requires only one computation of the
the corresponding hidden features from the pre-trained model pre-trained model to obtain hidden layer features and then
as input, along with the output from the previous block, as feeds these features into different lightweight MT-Adapters
shown in Equation 7. to achieve the same model performance as full fine-tuning in
 solving multiple tasks. By introducing feature aggregation and
 hA A
 i+1 = Pi (Wi ∗ (hi + hi )) (7) lightweight modularization, MT-Adapter enables pre-trained
 models to be effectively reused across various downstream
where hi represents the hidden variable of the i-th layer of the tasks. Simultaneously, by reducing the computational cost of
pre-trained model, hA i denotes the output of the i-th layer’s
 the model, this method allows for the deployment of the model
MT-Adapter, Wi corresponds to the low-rank matrix projection on resource-constrained edge nodes, meeting the demands of
layer of the i-th layer, and Pi is the linear projection layer of real-world applications.
the i-th layer. W is expressed as the product of two low- 3) Inference Time and Space Complexity Analysis: In this
rank matrices B and A. Where A ∈ Rd×r and B ∈ Rr×d , r subsection, we analyze the time and space complexity of
representing the rank of the matrix. In this paper, the rank r MT-Adapter across multiple traffic analysis tasks. We define
of the matrix W is generally set to the value 8. the computational time of the pre-trained model as Tmodel ,
 Therefore, by aggregating the hidden features of the respectively, with storage spaces denoted as Mmodel . The compre-trained model through multiple layers of blocks, the MT- putation time of a module of the MT-Adapter is Tadapter , and
Adapter can leverage the feature representation capability of the storage space is Madapter . Notably, a module parameter of
the pre-trained model to extract deeper task-specific feature MT-Adapter count constitutes only 6.37% of the parameters in
2278 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 T HE S TATISTICAL I NFORMATION OF THE DATASETS

the pre-trained model, rendering it exceptionally lightweight. These datasets cover a diverse range of task types and encom-
Therefore, Tadapter  Tmodel and Madapter  Mmodel . pass a rich variety of application protocol traffic, allowing for a
 To address n edge traffic analytics tasks, conventional fine- thorough assessment of LiMTa’s performance in complex and
tuning inference methods require n times the computation time dynamic edge environments. The tasks and the corresponding
of the model, as well as n times the storage space of the model, datasets are shown in Table I.
denoted as n∗Tmodel and n∗Mmodel , respectively. In contrast, Application Traffic Classification Task. These widely used
the model inference time for the MT-Adapter method includes datasets, CrossPlatform-Android [44] and CrossPlatform-IOS
the pre-trained model part and the sum of the inference [44] datasets, encompass 181 and 125 types of Android and
times of n adapters, with a similar storage space. They are IOS applications, respectively, accurately reflecting the traffic
denoted as Tmodel + n ∗ Tadapter and Mmodel + n ∗ Madapter , characteristics of users employing diverse applications on
respectively. It’s worth noting that the MT-Adapter requires a mobile devices. These datasets are well-suited for assessing
negligible amount of additional storage to temporarily store the LiMTa’s capability to accurately classify multi-application
hidden features of the pre-trained model, which is insignificant traffic in edge environments.
compared to other storage spaces. Overall, when performing Network Intrusion Detection Task. The CICIoT2022
multiple tasks (n > 1), the LiMTa method outperforms tradi- [45] dataset simulates a real-world Internet of Things (IoT)
tional fine-tuning in terms of both storage and time costs. The environment, encompassing normal traffic and various attack
lightweight advantage of LiMTa becomes increasingly evident types, with a total of 6 traffic categories. Similarly, the
as the number of tasks grows. This analysis is consistent with USTCTFC2016 [46] dataset focuses on network intrusion
the experimental results in Section IV-D. detection, simulating multiple traffic scenarios with 20 traffic
 categories. Both datasets are instrumental in describing intru-
 IV. E XPERIMENTS sion detection tasks. It provides a platform to assess LiMTa’s
 In this section, we perform extensive experiments on the performance in attack detection and traffic monitoring within
proposed lightweight multitask traffic analysis framework, edge node environments. This dataset is particularly suited for
LiMTa. First, we introduce the setting of our experiment, evaluating the LiMTa framework’s ability to handle diverse
including datasets, baseline, evaluation metrics, and so on. traffic and identify potential attacks on edge nodes deployed
Then, to comprehensively measure the effectiveness of LiMTa, in IoT devices.
we perform the following experiments: Encrypted Traffic Classification Task. The
 • RQ1: Why and whether LiMTa can train excellent feature ISCXVPN2016 [47] dataset comprises traffic transmitted
 extractors and efficiently fine-tune traffic analysis tasks? through VPNs, with 7 distinct categories. Similarly, the
 • RQ2: Why and whether LiMTa performance improves ISCXTor2016 [48] dataset focuses on encrypted Tor network
 in various traffic analysis tasks compared to the baseline traffic, featuring both normal and attack traffic samples
 methods? across 8 categories. In edge computing environments, these
 • RQ3: Why and whether LiMTa improves the computation dataset provides a comprehensive assessment of LiMTa’s
 time and storage cost? performance in addressing encrypted traffic analysis tasks.
 • RQ4: Why and whether can LiMTa be efficiently fine- The six public datasets we use are organized at the session
 tuned with a small set of labeled data? or flow level. In all experiments, we follow common practice
 • RQ5: Why and whether can LiMTa be effectively applied in traffic classification and intrusion detection [15], [18],
 to edge nodes? [23], [24] and operate on fixed-length prefixes of each flow.
 • RQ6: Ablation experiments. Why and whether LiMTa Concretely, for each flow, we only retain the first part of the
 components are effective? byte stream and discard the remaining bytes if the flow is
 longer. This design choice is motivated by two observations:
A. Experiment Setup (i) most flows in the considered datasets are short to mediumlived due to their application nature e.g., mobile app requests,
 1) Traffic Analysis Task and Dataset: To comprehensively
 VPN sessions used for specific activities, and (ii) prior work
evaluate the effectiveness of LiMTa in addressing multiple
 has repeatedly shown that the early packets in a connecedge analytics tasks, we have selected six widely used datasets.
 tion already contain most of the discriminative information
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2279

needed for application identification, intrusion detection, and
encrypted traffic classification. In summary, these datasets
exhibit a diverse range of task types and closely align with the
traffic characteristics of edge nodes, enabling a comprehensive
evaluation of LiMTa’s effectiveness in handling various traffic
analysis tasks within edge environments.
 2) Baseline: To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness
of LiMTa, we compare it against SOTA methods in traffic
analysis as baselines, including:
 Fig. 5. Assessment of the pre-training and fine-tuning validity of LiMTa.
 • Traditional machine learning approaches, such as App-
 Scanner [16] and FlowPrint [15], which utilize conventional feature extraction and classification techniques;
 • Deep learning approaches like DeepPacket [18] and FS-
 Net [17], which capture complex traffic patterns using
 deep neural networks;
 • Pre-training & fine-tuning approaches such as ET-BERT
 [23], YaTC [24], and NetMamba [25], which pre-train
 models on unlabeled tasks before fine-tuning them for
 specific applications.
 Notably, LiMTa-linear represents linear fine-tuning of the
pre-trained model; LiMTa-adapter denotes fine-tuning with the Fig. 6. The visualization of high-dimensional features extracted by the YaTC
MT-Adapter module added to the pre-trained model; LiMTa- [24] and LiMTa models.
all signifies full fine-tuning of the pre-trained model with an
additional classification layer.
 with an initial learning rate of 0.125 and a weight decay of
 3) Evaluation Metric: To comprehensively evaluate the
 1e-5. In the fine-tuning stage, we employed a learning rate
model’s performance on multi-class traffic analysis tasks,
 of 0.03 and introduced a 5-layer MT-Adapter module. The
we employed accuracy (ACC) and macro-averaged F1-score
 rank of the BA matrix was set to 8, based on the ablation
(Macro-F1) as evaluation metrics. The macro-averaged F1
 study presented in Section IV-G, and the warmup ratio was
score, in particular, considers the precision and recall of each
 0.1. All experiments were performed using Pytorch 2.0.0 and
class, making it a more comprehensive performance indicator
 on an NVIDIA R 3090 24G GPU. The source code and the
for datasets, which are calculated as follows:
 pre-trained model checkpoints are made publicly available at
 PN
 I(yi = ŷi ) https://github.com/liyu779/LiMTa.
 ACC = i=1 (8)
 N
where N is the total number of samples. yi is the ground B. Assessment of LiMTa Pre-Training and Fine-Tuning
truth label for the i-th sample. ŷi is the predicted label for the Validity
i-th sample. I(yi = ŷi ) is the indicator function, equal to 1 if
yi = ŷi , and 0 otherwise. To answer RQ1, as shown in Figures 5 (a) and (b), the
 LiMTa model exhibited good convergence during the pre-
 TPc
 Precisionc = (9) training and fine-tuning stages on the CrossPlatform-Android
 TPc + FPc dataset, with a steady increase in accuracy and a gradual
 TPc decrease in loss. Experimental results demonstrated that linear
 Recallc = (10)
 TPc + FNc fine-tuning is less suitable for traffic analysis tasks, while the
 Precisionc · Recallc MT-Adapter module achieved performance comparable to full
 F 1c = 2 · (11)
 Precisionc + Recallc fine-tuning (Difference of 0.0045 ACC) by updating only a
 C
 1 X small number of model parameters (6.37% of the pre-trained
 Macro-F1 = F 1c (12) model). It validated the lack of adaptability of linear fine-
 C c=1
 tuning and the effectiveness of the MT-Adapter module.
where C is the total number of classes. TPc , FPc , and FNc are Figure 6 presents the visualization of high-dimensional
the true positives, false positives, and false negatives for class features extracted by the YaTC and LiMTa models on the
c, respectively. ISCXVPN2016 dataset after dimensionality reduction using
 4) Implementation Details: We adopted the widely used UMAP [50]. Compared to the YaTC method, the sample points
self-supervised learning framework, Solo-learn [49]. During of the LiMTa model were more concentrated, with larger
the pre-training stage, we employed a Transformer encoder distances observed between different classes. This indicates
with 6 layers as the pre-training model. We used the that the features extracted by the LiMTa model possessed
CrossPlatform-Android dataset as the unlabeled dataset for stronger discriminative power. These results confirm that the
pre-training the feature extraction models. We set the batch FreqRec method effectively enhanced the representation of
size to 128 and used a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler frequency and temporal features in traffic data.
2280 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE II
 M ODEL P ERFORMANCE U SING T WO E VALUATION P ROTOCOLS U NDER D IFFERENT DATASETS . T OP -3 B EST M ETHODS A RE UNDERLINED .
 T HE B EST M ETHOD IS B OLDED

 TABLE III Compared with the deep learning approach, LiMTa-all
 A BLATION ON OTHER S ETTINGS IN THE and LiMTa-adapter significantly outperformed FS-Net and
 C ROSS P LATFORM -A NDROID DATASET DeepPacket in various evaluation metrics across all datasets.
 For instance, on the CrossPlatform-Android dataset, LiMTaall achieved an accuracy improvement of 9.3% (0.8739 ⇒
 0.9669) compared to DeepPacket. On the CrossPlatform-IOS
 dataset, LiMTa models also achieved an accuracy 5.37%
 improvement (0.9204 ⇒ 0.9748). This significant performance improvement was attributed to LiMTa’s ability
 to learn rich traffic features from a massive amount of
 unlabeled and diverse traffic data, whereas FS-Net and Deep-
 Packet focused on feature extraction for single-task traffic
 analysis, resulting in relatively limited feature representation
C. Compare LiMTa Performance With Baseline
 capabilities.
 To answer RQ2, we conducted comparative experiments In comparison with other pre-trained models, the LiMTa
against state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. As shown in Table II, model demonstrated significant advantages across various
LiMTa consistently outperformed other methods across var- datasets. Notably, on the CrossPlatform-Android datasets,
ious datasets and metrics. Although the LiMTA-adapter LiMTa-all achieved accuracy improvements of 5.03%
slightly underperformed compared to LiMTA-all, it achieved (0.9166 ⇒ 0.9669), 7.43% (0.9074 ⇒ 0.9669), respecremarkable results with only 6.37% of LiMTA-all’s trainable tively, compared to ET-BERT and YaTC. This discrepancy
parameters. Both LiMTa methods consistently ranked among could be attributed to the following: ET-BERT learned trafthe top three in all metrics, showcasing SOTA performance. fic representations solely from packet payloads; NetMamba
 In terms of the machine learning approach, LiMTa-all and and YaTC primarily focused on extracting temporal features
LiMTa-adapter achieved significant improvements of 9.3% and raw space feature reconstruction, neglecting frequency
(0.8739 ⇒ 0.9669) and 8.85 % (0.8739 ⇒ 0.9624), respec- domain information and extracting massive low-level semantic
tively, compared to FlowPrint on the CrossPlatform-Android features; In contrast, LiMTa comprehensively incorporated
dataset. Unlike FlowPrint and APPScaner methods, which packet headers, temporal and frequency domain features. By
often rely on manual feature engineering, self-supervised reconstructing frequency features within the feature space,
learning methods like LiMTa have effectively extracted rich LiMTa offered a richer and more accurate representation of
and discriminative features from raw traffic data. Traditional network traffic.
machine learning algorithms depended heavily on feature In summary, the results presented in Table II conclusively
engineering and could not automate feature extraction, which demonstrate that our LiMTa framework achieves state-ofis the reason for the low performance. In contrast, LiMTa the-art performance across all three traffic analysis tasks,
demonstrated the ability to extract frequency features, a capa- consistently outperforming full-sized pre-trained models while
bility absent in traditional methods, further highlighting their leveraging its lightweight MT-Adapter design to maintain a
limitations. dramatically lower parameter footprint.
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2281

Fig. 7. Comparing the inference resource cost of different methods.

D. Compare the Inference Resource Cost of LiMTa LiMTa’s performance in scenarios with limited data labels that
 To answer RQ3, as shown in Figure 7, we evaluated the are very important for edge nodes. Notably, both the LiMTatime and space costs of pre-trained models in six traffic adapter and LiMTa-all achieved high F1-score even with
analysis tasks. To better compare the resource overhead of small datasets (low data ratios). LiMTa-all achieved the best
each method, we deployed models that perform different traffic results on different datasets and different ratios of datasets.
analysis tasks and serially execute them to calculate the storage In contrast, models like ET-BERT, YaTC, and NetMamba
overhead and time overhead. The inference costs for 10 and demonstrated inferior performance at low data volumes, partic-
100 traffic analysis tasks were approximated using linear inter- ularly ET-BERT, which showed a significantly lower F1-score
polation [51]. The parameter-efficient fine-tuning approach than the others. These results highlight LiMTa’s superior label
operated similarly to the full fine-tuning approach during efficiency, demonstrating its ability to train effectively with
deployment and inference, which both require multiple for- minimal labeled data.
wards and multiple deployments of the model in multitasking In summary, LiMTa maintains its good performance even at
scenarios. Therefore, in this experiment, we used LiMTa-all lower data sizes. In particular, LiMTa still achieves relatively
to measure the inference time and space overhead of the high performance with limited traffic data volume, which
parameter-efficient fine-tuning approach and full fine-tuning. indicates that it has excellent label efficiency. This feature is
 As shown in Figure 7(a), MT-Adapter demonstrated the valuable for real-world edge traffic analysis applications.
shortest inference time as the number of tasks increased.
Notably, in the single-task scenario, the computational time F. Evaluate the Edge Node Application of the LiMTa
of the LiMTa-adapter was slightly higher than that of LiMTaall due to the additional computational cost introduced by To answer RQ5, we compared the computational overhead
the adapter module. As shown in Figure 7 (b), both LiMTa- as well as the storage overhead of full fine-tuning and MTadapter and LiMTa-all exhibited lower storage costs. Similarly, Adapter on edge devices for different numbers of tasks.
in the single-task scenario, the LiMTa-adapter incurred a Experiments were conducted using the edge node device
slightly higher storage cost than the LiMTa-all due to the NVIDIA R JETSON AGX ORIN Developer Kit, equipped
adapter module and hidden layer feature storage. As shown with a 2048-core NVIDIA Ampere architecture GPU, 64
in Figure 7(c), with six tasks and a batch size of 64, the Tensor Cores, and 64GB of shared memory. Similar to evalcomputational time and storage cost of the LiMTa-adapter uating model inference overhead, we deployed models that
were both improved, reducing the time cost by 50.9% and perform different traffic analysis tasks on edge devices and
the space cost by 57.4%. serially execute them to calculate the storage overhead and
 In summary, the LiMTa-adapter effectively reuses the time overhead.
computationally expensive pre-trained model in multi-task As shown in Figure 9, experimental results demonstrated
scenarios by introducing the lightweight MT-Adapter module, that the LiMTa-adapter method offered significant resource
significantly reducing the model’s inference time and storage. efficiency advantage over full fine-tuning (LiMTa-all) on edge
 nodes. With a task number of 1, the LiMTa-adapter introduced
 additional adapter parameters, which resulted in slightly higher
E. Evaluate the Label Efficiency of the LiMTa computational and memory overhead compared to LiMTa-all.
 To answer RQ4, we evaluated the label efficiency of LiMTa However, as the number of tasks increases from 1 to 6, the
using a subset of the USTCTFC2016 dataset, CICIoT2022 growth in inference time and memory overhead for LiMTadataset and ISCXVPN2016 dataset. We fine-tuned the pre- adapter was considerably lower than that of LiMTa-all. For
trained models of different methods with a small amount of example, when the number of tasks was 6, the inference time
labeled data as a validation of the labeling effectiveness of the of LiMTa-adapter was only 1.6785, while LiMTa-all was close
methods. As shown in Figure 8, we progressively decreased to 3.8475; in terms of memory overhead, LiMTa-adapter was
the dataset size from 100% to only 5%, allowing us to assess 1231M, while LiMTa-all required 2893M.
2282 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 8. Compare the labeling efficiency of different methods. For each method, the x-axis shows the ratio of labeled training data used for fine-tuning (from
5% to 100% of the original training set), and the y-axis reports the Macro-F1 score on the full test set.

 challenging for the model to effectively reconstruct features,
 which ultimately impacted overall performance.
 Comparison with the simple FFT. To further validate the
 effectiveness of FreqRec, we conduct an additional comparison
 experiment between LiMTa and a simpler FFT baseline. The
 simple FFT method first applies a Fast Fourier Transform to
 the raw traffic sequence and then feeds the resulting frequency
 features into the same backbone architecture for supervised
 learning. As shown in Figure 10(c), although the FFT baseline can capture basic spectral information, its performance
Fig. 9. Evaluating the time and memory overhead of LiMTa for edge nodes
application. consistently lags behind both LiMTa-all and LiMTa-adapter
 across all six datasets, for instance, + 47.5% on ISCXTor2016
 and + 32.2% on ISCXVPN2016. Although FFT provides a
 These results highlight the superior scalability and resource global frequency representation, it lacks the ability to model
efficiency of the LiMTa-adapter, making it better suited for frequency-component dependencies and local spectral variresource-constrained edge node applications, especially in ations. In contrast, the FreqRec learns to recover masked
scenarios involving multiple traffic analysis tasks. or incomplete frequency components, forcing the model to
 internalize richer and more robust frequency-domain structures. As a result, LiMTa achieves superior generalization in
G. Ablation Experiment cross-platform and heterogeneous encrypted traffic scenarios,
 To answer RQ6, we performed an ablation study on the outperforming the simple FFT baseline.
proposed LiMTa framework. Rank of the W Matrix. As shown in Figure 10(b), the
 Mask Ratio of FreqRec. To evaluate the impact of different impact of the rank of the W matrix, a key parameter of the MTmasking ratios on the performance of FreqRec, we masked Adapter module, on the fine-tuning performance was analyzed.
different ratios of frequency domain features and performed The experimental results showed that the key parameter rank
a feature reconstruction task to train the feature extraction r in MT-Adapter had a slight impact on model performance
model. Subsequently, we conducted linear fine-tuning on the and parameter proportion. As rank r increases from 2 to
pre-trained model while keeping the parameters of the pre- 32, the proportion of pre-trained model parameters rose from
trained model unchanged. The performance of FreqRec was approximately 6.37% to nearly 7.17%, while the F1 score
evaluated on six datasets under masking ratios of 10%, 25%, steadily improved from around 0.9519 to close to 0.9624, with
50%, and 75%. As shown in Figure 10(a), the experimen- a small but consistent performance gain. Lower rank values
tal result indicated that FreqRec performs better under low (e.g., r = 4 or r = 8) achieved excellent performance while
masking ratios (10% and 25%), demonstrating that the model maintaining a low parameter proportion, making them welleffectively captured the rich semantic features of traffic data suited for resource-constrained scenarios. Conversely, higher
through the frequency domain reconstruction task. However, rank values (e.g., r = 16 or r = 32) provided further
at a masking ratio of 10%, the model’s performance was performance enhancements, which were particularly beneficial
slightly lower than that at 25%, as the limited amount of for scenarios with higher performance requirements and suffimasked information provides insufficient supervision signals cient computational resources. These results demonstrated the
for the reconstruction task. At higher masking ratios (50% and flexible trade-off between resource efficiency and performance
75%), the model’s performance declined significantly. This offered by adjusting the rank r, enabling the MT-Adapter to
was primarily due to the reduced ability to reconstruct fre- adapt effectively to diverse application needs.
quency domain features when excessive masking was applied. Impact of MT-Adapter Rank on Task Sensitivity. The
Over-masking led to the loss of critical information, making it adapter rank governs the capacity-efficiency trade-off of the
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2283

Fig. 10. Ablation Experiment on FreqRec and Rank of the W Matrix.Note that the cross-android represents the crossplatform-android dataset, and the
Cross-IOS represents the crossPlatform-IOS dataset.

MT-Adapter. To ensure transparency, we conducted a sensi- the model lacks the capacity to align general traffic
tivity analysis on r ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16, 32} across six tasks. As features with the distinct decision boundaries required for
shown in Figure 10, we observed that complex multi-class diverse security tasks.
tasks required a slightly higher rank capacity than simpler • w/o Position. In this experiment, positional embeddings
tasks to reach optimal performance. We ultimately select r = 8 for traffic data were removed. The model’s performance
as the final setting, achieving a robust, near-optimal perfor- decreased slightly, but the change was not significant,
mance while maintaining high parameter efficiency across all with accuracy and F1-score being 0.9618 and 0.9617,
heterogeneous traffic analysis tasks. respectively. While positional information is generally
 Other Settings. As shown in Table III, the results of useful for identifying sequential protocol phases, the
ablation experiments with various settings of LiMTa were performance drop is marginal. This suggests that the
analyzed: frequency features extracted by our FreqRec method are
 • w/o FreqMask. In this experiment, the w/o FreqMask robust and position-agnostic. The model primarily relies
 variant was designed to perform the original feature on these dominant frequency patterns to distinguish traffic
 space reconstruction task by masking the raw traffic data. classes, making the explicit positional encoding beneficial
 The model’s accuracy and F1-score dropped significantly but auxiliary rather than critical.
 to 0.1161 and 0.1138, respectively. This sharp decline • w/o Forward P. The forward module in the MToccurs because raw bytes in encrypted traffic often resem- Adapter was excluded in this experiment. The model’s
 ble high-entropy noise with sparse semantic meaning. performance also declined slightly, with both accuracy
 Reconstructing masked raw bytes fails to force the model and F1-score being 0.9591. The linear projection layer
 to capture robust dependencies. In contrast, the FreqMask P plays a vital role in feature refinement. After the
 mechanism compels the model to infer these high-level low-rank matrix W projects the features into a taskstructural features rather than overfitting to local, non- specific subspace, the layer P is responsible for linearly
 meaningful byte variations, proving its necessity for combining and mapping these features to the optimal
 semantic feature extraction. output representation for the next block. Removing P
 • w/o MT-Adapter. In this experiment, the MT-Adapter restricts the adapter’s expressive power, preventing it
 module was removed, and linear fine-tuning was applied from fully synthesizing the adapted features, which leads
 to the pre-trained model. The model’s performance to a suboptimal decision boundary for the classifier.
 declined significantly, with both accuracy and F1-score • w/o Adapter W. The low-rank matrix W module from
 being 0.7654. This result highlights the limitation of the MT-Adapter was removed. The model’s performance
 linear fine-tuning, which restricts the model to a fixed declined significantly to 0.9240. This demonstrates the
 feature space derived from pre-training. The MT-Adapter specific contribution of the low-rank matrix W (where
 is crucial because it introduces a lightweight, learnable W = BA) in feature adaptation. While the linear protransformation that projects these generic pre-trained fea- jection P handles dimensionality, W acts as a specific
 tures into task-specific subspaces. Without the adapter, “steering” mechanism that fine-tunes the hidden states.
2284 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Removing W limits the adapter’s ability to efficiently C. Real-World Model Maintenance and Concept Drift
 modulate the pre-trained features, confirming that the Beyond resource constraints, a critical challenge for reallow-rank decomposition is key to achieving performance world network security systems is concept drift, where the
 comparable to full fine-tuning with minimal parameters. underlying distribution of traffic changes over time, causing
 performance degradation. The LiMTa framework is inherently
 designed to address this challenge economically. Since the
 V. D ISCUSSION
 shared Transformer base model is pre-trained on vast amounts
 In this section, we discuss some of the limitations of LiMTa of general traffic data, it captures fundamental, low-level traffic
in detail so that the reader can further investigate the work. semantics and is expected to exhibit slow drift. Retraining this
The main aspects included are long-lived and streaming traf- full base model is computationally prohibitive and only necfic, resource constraints, real-world maintenance, adversarial essary during major shifts in network protocols. Conversely,
attacks, interpretability and cross-modal modeling. the lightweight MT-Adapters capture task-specific, high-level
 representations and are the most sensitive to concept drift.
 Due to the highly parameter-efficient nature of the Adapters,
A. Applicability to Long-Lived and Streaming Traffic the system can be maintained by periodically and cheaply
 retraining only the task-specific Adapters on fresh, labeled
 The current experimental evaluation focuses on fixed-length
 data without touching the massive shared encoder weights.
prefixes of single-session flows, which reflects how existing
 This strategy ensures LiMTa remains robust and agile in a
public datasets are constructed and labeled. In real-world
 dynamic network while minimizing operational costs.
networks, however, long-lived connections and continuous
streaming traffic, such as video streaming, long-haul TCP
transfers, or persistent IoT telemetry, are also common. These D. Resilience to Adversarial Attacks
scenarios can be naturally viewed as sequences of fixed-length One of the key concerns in deploying deep learning models
prefixes of a single evolving flow, which aligns with the data in real-world network traffic analysis tasks is their vulnerform used in our evaluation. From an architectural perspec- ability to adversarial attacks. Adversaries may attempt to
tive, LiMTa remains compatible with such scenarios because manipulate the input traffic data in a way that causes the
both FreqRec and MT-Adapter operate on fixed-length token model to misclassify or miss key patterns. While this paper
sequences and do not require complete flows. A long-lived or does not specifically focus on adversarial robustness, the
streaming connection can be split into consecutive windows, lightweight of the LiMTa framework and its use of pre-trained
e.g., non-overlapping or sliding segments of packets/bytes, models and feature extraction techniques provide a level of
each independently embedded, passed through the shared pre- resilience against simple perturbations. However, future work
trained encoder, and processed by lightweight task-specific could explore the incorporation of adversarial training methods
MT-Adapters, enabling low-latency online inference. to enhance the robustness of the model. Techniques like
 adversarial fine-tuning, robust optimization, and the integration
 of anomaly detection mechanisms within the model could
B. Hardware Portability and Resource Constraints further fortify LiMTa against sophisticated attacks.
 Our empirical edge-node evaluation is conducted on a
Jetson AGX Orin, but the design of LiMTa does not rely E. Model Interpretability
on any platform-specific feature. The dominant computational Another crucial aspect of deploying machine learning modcost lies in the shared pre-trained encoder, whose complexity els in security-sensitive applications, such as traffic analysis,
scales approximately linearly with sequence length, hidden is model interpretability. Understanding how a model makes
dimensionality, and model depth, while each MT-Adapter decisions is essential for ensuring trust and compliance with
introduces only a small low-rank projection overhead. Because security policies. While deep learning models, including those
both FreqRec and MT-Adapter operate on fixed-length token used in LiMTa, are often viewed as “opaque model,” our
sequences, the computational and memory footprint scales approach using FreqRec enables a degree of interpretability
predictably with model size and input length. This property by focusing on frequency-domain features. By reconstructing
makes LiMTa portable across heterogeneous edge platforms, the frequency features of traffic samples, FreqRec offers a
ranging from CPU-only gateways to low-power GPUs and window into how different traffic characteristics influence the
NPUs, where model depth, width, and adapter rank can be flex- model’s decision-making. Future work could enhance this
ibly adjusted to match available hardware budgets. To further interpretability by integrating techniques like attention mechillustrate this flexibility, we additionally compare FP32 and anisms, saliency maps, or layer-wise relevance propagation
FP16 numerical precision (reducing memory usage by 62.2%) (LRP) to provide clearer insights into which features are most
as well as hidden sizes of 512 vs. 256 (reducing memory influential in the model’s predictions.
usage by 63.4%). Across all these configurations, the accuracy
degradation remains within 3% in the CICIoT2022 Dataset,
demonstrating that LiMTa enables a controllable accuracy, F. Cross-Modal Traffic Models
efficiency trade-off while substantially reducing latency and Current traffic analysis models, including LiMTa, primarily
memory usage under tighter resource constraints. rely on a single modality of data, typically focusing on
FU et al.: TOWARD EFFICIENT DISTRIBUTED NETWORK SECURITY: A LiMTa FRAMEWORK 2285

packet-level or flow-based features. While these models have [10] E. Ronen, A. Shamir, A. Weingarten, and C. O’Flynn, “IoT Goes
shown strong performance, they are limited by the richness nuclear: Creating a ZigBee chain reaction,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
 Privacy (SP), May 2017, pp. 195–212.
of the data they can leverage. In contrast, a cross-modal [11] S. Herwig, K. Harvey, G. Hughey, R. Roberts, and D. Levin,
traffic model would integrate multiple data sources, such as “Measurement and analysis of Hajime, a peer-to-peer IoT botnet,” in
network traffic, system logs and metadata. This multi-source Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2019, Art. no. 23488.
 [12] R. Yang et al., “Efficient intrusion detection toward IoT networks using
approach could provide a more comprehensive understanding cloud–edge collaboration,” Comput. Netw., vol. 228, Jun. 2023, Art. no.
of network activities. By aligning and fusing features from 109724.
different modalities, a cross-modal model could improve the [13] Z. Diao et al., “EC-GCN: A encrypted traffic classification framework
 based on multi-scale graph convolution networks,” Comput. Netw.,
accuracy and robustness of traffic analysis. The integration of vol. 224, Apr. 2023, Art. no. 109614.
cross-modal data could also enhance the LiMTa framework [14] F. Li and F. Ye, “Adaptive and lightweight network traffic classification
by providing richer feature representations and enabling more for edge devices,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 4,
 pp. 2003–2014, Dec. 2022.
context-aware decision-making, which could further improve [15] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
both its performance and adaptability in real-world, resource- on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
constrained edge environments. 2020, Art. no. 24412.
 [16] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “AppScanner:
 Automatic fingerprinting of smartphone apps from encrypted net-
 VI. C ONCLUSION work traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Eur. Symp. Secur. Privacy, Mar. 2016,
 pp. 439–454.
 In this paper, we propose LiMTa, a lightweight multitask [17] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence
traffic analysis framework designed to address the security network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179.
challenges in distributed networks. More specifically, we [18] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep
propose a novel traffic pre-training method, FreqRec, which packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep
achieves high-level semantic feature extraction by recon- learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020.
 [19] A. Alwarafy, K. A. Al-Thelaya, M. Abdallah, J. Schneider, and
structing the frequency features of traffic samples. Moreover, M. Hamdi, “A survey on security and privacy issues in edge-computingwe introduce a pre-trained model fine-tuning method, MT- assisted Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 6,
Adapter, which computes the pre-trained model only once to pp. 4004–4022, Mar. 2021.
 [20] Y. Zhang and Q. Yang, “A survey on multi-task learning,” IEEE Trans.
efficiently perform multiple tasks. By introducing the FreqRec Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 5586–5609, Dec. 2022.
and the MT-Adapter methods, LiMTa efficiently captures both [21] M. G. S. Murshed, C. Murphy, D. Hou, N. Khan, G. Ananthanarayanan,
frequency and temporal features while reducing computational and F. Hussain, “Machine learning at the network edge: A survey,” ACM
 Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1–37, Nov. 2022.
and storage costs. The experiments demonstrated SOTA per- [22] D. Xu et al., “Edge intelligence: Empowering intelligence to the edge
formance on six traffic analysis tasks, and LiMTa significantly of network,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 11, pp. 1778–1837, Nov. 2021.
exceeded existing SOTA models. Moreover, compared to full [23] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
fine-tuning, reduced the time cost by 50.9% and the space cost for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022,
by 57.4%. LiMTa provides a scalable and effective solution for pp. 633–642.
edge network security. [24] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
 R EFERENCES [25] T. Wang, X. Xie, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Cui, “NetMamba:
 Efficient network traffic classification via pre-training unidirectional
[1] J. Waldo, “The jini architecture for network-centric computing,” Com- mamba,” 2024, arXiv:2405.11449.
 mun. ACM, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 76–82, Jul. 1999. [26] Z. Lyu, Y. Li, G. Zhu, J. Xu, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “Rethinking
[2] J. Ren, D. Zhang, S. He, Y. Zhang, and T. Li, “A survey on end- resource management in edge learning: A joint pre-training and fineedge-cloud orchestrated network computing paradigms: Transparent tuning design paradigm,” 2024, arXiv:2404.00836.
 computing, mobile edge computing, fog computing, and cloudlet,” ACM [27] S. Zavrak and M. Iskefiyeli, “Flow-based intrusion detection on
 Comput. Surv., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 1–36, Nov. 2020. software-defined networks: A multivariate time series anomaly detection
[3] S. Das, A. Silva, and T. S. Eugene Ng, “Rearchitecting datacenter approach,” Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 35, no. 16, pp. 12175–12193,
 networks: A new paradigm with optical core and optical edge,” in Proc. Jun. 2023.
 IEEE INFOCOM Conf. Comput. Commun., May 2024, pp. 1371–1380. [28] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
[4] M. Nazzal, A. Khreishah, J. Lee, S. Angizi, A. Al-Fuqaha, detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 and M. Guizani, “Semi-decentralized inference in heterogeneous Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 graph neural networks for traffic demand forecasting: An edge- [29] W. Fu, M. Johnston, and M. Zhang, “Low-level feature extraction
 computing approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 12, for edge detection using genetic programming,” IEEE Trans. Cybern.,
 pp. 19400–19416, Dec. 2024. vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 1459–1472, Aug. 2014.
[5] T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Poisoning [30] K. Yi et al., “Frequency-domain MLPs are more effective learners in
 attacks on federated learning-based IoT intrusion detection system,” in time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
 Proc. Workshop Decentralized IoT Syst. Secur., 2020, Art. no. 23003. pp. 76656–76679.
[6] F. Meneghello, M. Calore, D. Zucchetto, M. Polese, and A. Zanella, [31] J. Liu and S. Chen, “TimesURL: Self-supervised contrastive learning
 “IoT: Internet of threats? A survey of practical security vulnerabilities in for universal time series representation learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 real IoT devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 8182–8201, Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 13918–13926.
 Oct. 2019. [32] J. Fu, J. Fang, J. Sun, S. Zhuang, L. Geng, and Y. Liu, “LoFT:
[7] R. Uddin, S. A. P. Kumar, and V. Chamola, “Denial of service LoRA-based efficient and robust fine-tuning framework for adversarial
 attacks in edge computing layers: Taxonomy, vulnerabilities, threats and training,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw. (IJCNN), Jun. 2024,
 solutions,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 152, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 103322. pp. 1–8.
[8] P. Li, J. Xia, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, and M. Wu, “Secure architecture for [33] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
 Industrial Edge of Things(IEoT): A hierarchical perspective,” Comput. 2021, arXiv:2106.09685.
 Netw., vol. 251, Sep. 2024, Art. no. 110641. [34] M. Shen et al., “Machine learning-powered encrypted network traffic
[9] M. Antonakakis et al., “Understanding the Mirai botnet,” in Proc. 26th analysis: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts.,
 USENIX Secur. Symp. (USENIX Secur.), 2017, pp. 1093–1110. vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 791–824, 1st Quart., 2023.
2286 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

[35] F. Pacheco, E. Exposito, M. Gineste, C. Baudoin, and J. Aguilar, Jiang Fang received the Ph.D. degree from the Insti-
 “Towards the deployment of machine learning solutions in network tute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy
 traffic classification: A systematic survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., of Sciences, in 2025. He is currently a Post-Doctoral
 vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1988–2014, 2nd Quart., 2019. Researcher with the National University of Defense
[36] D. A. Tedjopurnomo, Z. Bao, B. Zheng, F. M. Choudhury, and A. K. Qin, Technology. His research interests include cyberse-
 “A survey on modern deep neural network for traffic prediction: Trends, curity, AI security, and embodied AI security.
 methods and challenges,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 34, no. 4,
 pp. 1544–1561, Apr. 2022.
[37] D. Kwon, H. Kim, J. Kim, S. C. Suh, I. Kim, and K. J. Kim, “A survey
 of deep learning-based network anomaly detection,” Cluster Comput.,
 vol. 22, no. S1, pp. 949–961, Jan. 2019.
[38] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
 Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
[39] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An Jiyan Sun received the B.S. degree in computer
 efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. science and technology from Beijing University of
 Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860. Posts and Telecommunications, China, in 2012, and
[40] X.-Y. Chen, L. Han, D.-C. Zhan, and H.-J. Ye, “MIETT: Multi-instance the Ph.D. degree in signal processing from Chinese
 encrypted traffic transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in Academy of Sciences University, Beijing, China, in
 Proc. AAAI’25/IAAI’25/EAAI, 2025, pp. 15922–15929, doi: 10.1609/ 2017. She is currently an Assistant Researcher with
 aaai.v39i15.33748. the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese
[41] B. Mishra and A. Kertesz, “The use of MQTT in M2M and IoT systems: Academy of Sciences, China. Her current research
 A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 201071–201086, 2020. interests include the areas of content delivery net-
[42] I. Az, S. Sahin, C. Karakuzu, and M. A. Cavuslu, “Implementation of works and data center networking.
 fft and ifft algorithms in fpga,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Electr., Electron.
 Comput. Eng. Symp., 2006, pp. 7–10.
[43] Z. Cai, A. Ravichandran, S. Maji, C. Fowlkes, Z. Tu, and S. Soatto,
 “Exponential moving average normalization for self-supervised and
 semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
 Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 194–203.
[44] J. Ren, D. Dubois, and D. Choffnes, “An international view of privacy Shangyuan Zhuang received the B.S. degree from
 risks for mobile apps,” Northeastern Univ., Boston, MA, USA, Tech. the North China University of Technology, China,
 Rep., 2019. in 2021, and the M.S. degree from the Institute
[45] S. Dadkhah, H. Mahdikhani, P. K. Danso, A. Zohourian, K. A. Truong, of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of
 and A. A. Ghorbani, “Towards the development of a realistic multidi- Sciences, Beijing, China, in 2024, where she is
 mensional IoT profiling dataset,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Int. Conf. Privacy, currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. Her research
 Security Trust (PST), 2022, pp. 1–11. interests include adversarial attack and defense and
[46] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic communication network security.
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam,
 Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[47] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,”
 in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), 2016,
 pp. 407–414.
 Yinlong Liu received the B.S. degree from Hefei
[48] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 University, China, in 2004, the M.S. degree from
 “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 the School of Mechanical Electronic & Informa-
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
 tion Engineering, China University of Mining and
 pp. 253–262.
 Technology, Beijing, China, in 2007, and the Ph.D.
[49] V. G. T. da Costa, E. Fini, M. Nabi, N. Sebe, and E. Ricci, “solo-learn:
 degree from the School of Information and Com-
 A library of self-supervised methods for visual representation learning,”
 munication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts
 J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 23, no. 56, pp. 1–6, 2021.
 and Telecommunications, Beijing, in 2011. His
[50] L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville, “UMAP: Uniform maniresearch interests include security in wireless netfold approximation and projection for dimension reduction,” 2018,
 works and 5G/B5G.
 arXiv:1802.03426.
[51] T. Blu, P. Thevenaz, and M. Unser, “Linear interpolation revitalized,”
 IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 710–719, May 2004.

 Jiadong Fu received the B.S. degree from Shanghai Zhiqiang Lv received the Ph.D. degree in electronic
 Maritime University, China, in 2021, and the M.S. science and technology from Harbin Institute of
 degree from the Institute of Information Engineer- Technology, Harbin, China, in 2007. He is curing, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, rently a Professor with the Institute of Information
 in 2024, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His
 degree. His research interests include model robust- research interests include mobile system security and
 ness enhancement, edge network security, and model hardware security.
 lightweighting.