This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025 1

 Towards Semantic-aware Aerial Video Anomaly
 Detection by Exploiting Multimodal Large
 Language Model
 Ruoheng Li, Xuhui Liu, Yutao Hu, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao, Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Drones have become increasingly widely applied
in surveillance systems due to their mobility, making aerial
video anomaly detection methods more crucial. Anomalies
in aerial videos often present as semantic conflicts, such
as the presence of unexpected objects or unusual behaviors
that do not align with the context. Previous approaches GT: Abnormal (1)
often relied on manually crafted knowledge graphs to detect
 Q: Is there any vehicle stopped on the road
such conflicts, which suffer from poor scalability. Recently, and blocking the traffic?
owing to their sufficient alignment training, multimodal large A: No, all vehicles are moving smoothly.
language models (MLLMs) have emerged as a generalized Output: Normal (0).
solution for semantic understanding. However, the direct
application of MLLMs does not yield satisfactory anomaly (a) Challenges in motion perception due to platformdetection performance in aerial videos. First, aerial videos induced motion
often manifest platform-induced pseudo-motion, which obscures the true motion of objects and exacerbates detection
errors. Second, without sufficient labeled data for fine-tuning,
generic MLLMs often lack scene-level semantic guidance to
reliably distinguish abnormal events that include contextually
inappropriate behaviors. To address these challenges, we
propose SemAero, an MLLM-based framework to address
 GT: Abnormal (1)
these challenges by: 1) designing an ego-motion reduction
module to enhance model perception on object movement, Q: Is there an anomaly in this video?
2) generating scene-specific prompts adaptively with step-by-
 A: The traffic flow appears normal, and there are
step guidance for reasonable output, and 3) refining scores no unusual events observed. Output: Normal (0).
with dual-stream consistent feature for better domain-specific
anomaly detection. Evaluated across 8 diverse aerial scenes (b) Detection failures caused by insufficient domain
and 73 sub-datasets, SemAero achieves a 3.09% improvement knowledge
in AUC-ROC over the second-best model, demonstrating its
ability in aerial video anomaly detection.
 Fig. 1. Challenges in aerial video anomaly detection using multimodal
 Index Terms—Aerial video, Anomaly detection, Multimodal large language models: InternVL2-8B [5] (a) failed to detect stopped
large language model, Anomaly understanding vehicles due to platform-induced motion in aerial videos, and (b) were
 unable to identify a bus in a non-motor vehicle area due to insufficient
 logical guidance in system prompt design.
 I. I NTRODUCTION

V Ideo anomaly detection identifies behaviors or events
 that deviate from the norm, such as unauthorized
access, unusual parking, or illegal activities, with essential
 flexibility for large-scale monitoring. Drones, with their
 mobility and maneuverability, provide a valuable complement to modern surveillance systems [3] [4].
applications in intelligent surveillance systems [1], [2].
 Most existing aerial video anomaly detection methods
Traditional surveillance systems typically rely on groundfollow a self-supervised paradigm [4], [6], [7], where
based cameras, which offer fixed viewpoints and limited
 anomalies are identified as deviations from learned normal
 Manuscript received xx xx 2025; revised xx xx xxxx; accepted xx patterns [8], [9], [10]. However, such methods are often
xx xxxx. This work is supported by National Key Research and De- less capable of handling anomalies with semantic conflicts,
velopment Program of China under Grant No. 2024YFE0217600 and such as a complete object appearing in an inappropriate
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.62501140.
(Corresponding author: Xi Zhu.) region [11], [12]. Some earlier studies attempted to encode
 Ruoheng Li, Xi Zhu, and Xianbin Cao are with the School of Elec- semantics through knowledge graphs to detect anomalies
tronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, [11], [13], [14], which are effective but labor-intensive to
China, and also with the MIIT Key Laboratory of Aerospace Mobile
Communications, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: ruohengli@buaa.edu.cn, generalize across diverse aerial scenarios.
zhuxi@buaa.edu.cn, xbcao@buaa.edu.cn). Recent Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
 Xuhui Liu is with the School of Automation Science and Elec- and Vision-Language Models (VLMs) provide powerful
trical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China(e-mail:
xhliu.comp@gmail.com). semantic reasoning capabilities, and have recently been
 Yutao Hu is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, introduced into video anomaly detection tasks through
Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with the Key knowledge graph [12], knowledge sharing [15], and seman-
Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its
Interdisciplinary Applications, Ministry of Education, Southeast Univer- tic alignment mechanisms [16]. However, these advances
sity, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: huyutao@seu.edu.cn). are not directly applicable to aerial anomaly detection,
 Copyright © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted.
 However, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained
 from
 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, the IEEE
 including sending
 by text
 rights for anmining
 and data emailand
 to training
 pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
 of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

since most existing methods are developed under relatively II. R ELATED W ORK
stable viewpoints and do not explicitly address the pseudo- A. Research on Video Anomaly Detection
motion caused by moving aerial platforms. As shown in
Figure 1(a), camera motion may cause stationary vehi- Video anomaly detection methods can generally be catcles to appear as moving, which can mislead MLLMs to egorized into unsupervised, weakly supervised, and fully
misinterpret congested traffic as normal flow. In addition, supervised settings. In particular, self-supervised learnaerial anomaly detection is highly scene-dependent and ing has become an important paradigm for unsupervised
often requires domain-specific reasoning ability. As is video anomaly detection. These methods typically learn
illustrated in Figure 1(b), an abnormal event such as a bus normality-aware representations from anomaly-free data
appearing in a non-vehicle area may be overlooked without through auxiliary tasks, such as prediction or reconstruction
explicit contextual guidance. Although approaches such as [18]. During inference, samples that deviate from the
Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) [17] can partially learned normal patterns are regarded as anomalies. Selfaddress this issue, they typically rely on large annotated supervised methods are particularly valuable when anomadatasets, which are expensive and difficult to obtain. lous samples are scarce or unavailable. To strengthen normality modeling in this setting, Chang et al. [19] introduced
 To address these challenges, we propose SemAero, an an elegant clustering-driven framework together with a
MLLM-based framework for aerial video anomaly detec- highly effective spatio-temporal dissociation strategy [20],
tion without task-specific fine-tuning. Unlike conventional substantially enhancing the pattern representation capacity
baselines that primarily detect appearance deviations, Se- of self-supervised methods.
mAero integrates semantic reasoning with motion-aware Weakly-supervised methods utilize video-level anomaly
anomaly discrimination in a unified framework. It is also labels, often formulated as the Multiple Instance Learning
distinct from existing VLM- and MLLM-based methods in (MIL) problem [21], [22]. By maximizing the confidence
that it does not rely on task-specific fine-tuning to acquire difference between normal and abnormal instances, these
domain-specific knowledge, empowered by scene-specific approaches enhance detection performance while requirprompts and normal motion anchors to obtain the con- ing less precise annotations than fully-supervised methtextual awareness. Specifically, SemAero incorporates an ods. Fully-supervised methods rely on precise frame-level
adaptive ego-motion reduction module to suppress camera- anomaly labels for training, achieving high accuracy when
induced motion and reveal true object dynamics. It further abnormal behaviors are well-defined [14]. However, their
employs scene-specific prompt generation with Chain-of- dependence on high-quality labeled data poses a significant
Thought reasoning to provide contextual semantic guidance challenge in real-world applications.
without fine-tuning. Finally, a dual-stream consistency- Beyond conventional experimental settings, recent reguided module leverages normal feature anchors to refine search has increasingly turned to open-set video anomaly
anomaly discrimination. Through this design, SemAero detection to address unseen anomaly categories in complex
enables more reliable detection of semantic anomalies in real-world scenes [23]. To support semantic understanding,
dynamic aerial scenes. some recent approaches incorporate VLMs and LLMs to
 Our contributions are summarized as follows: exploit rich language priors [24], [25]. With text-driven
 prompts and reasoning capabilities, these methods provide
 a promising direction for zero-shot detection.
 1) We propose SemAero, a MLLM-based framework
 for semantic-aware aerial video anomaly detection
 without further fine-tuning. SemAero achieves good B. Research on Aerial Video Anomaly Detection
 domain-specific detection performance without re- Current research on aerial video anomaly detection preliance on large annotated datasets. dominantly employs self-supervised learning approaches
 2) We introduce an ego-motion reduction module to [7], formulating the task as prediction [6], [4], reconstrucdynamically estimate and mitigate platform-induced tion [8], or one-class learning [9], [10]. These methods
 motion, ensuring the model has more accurate per- identify anomalies by detecting frames that significantly
 ception of object behaviors in aerial videos. deviate from a learned normal pattern. However, they often
 3) We develop a scene-adaptive prompts generation fail to capture scene context, limiting their ability to detect
 mechanism using GPT-4o, with Chain-of-thought anomalies involving semantic conflicts, such as unexpected
 (CoT) reasoning to ensure consistent and robust objects or behaviors in specific scenarios.
 anomaly detection across diverse contexts. To address this limitation, subsequent studies [11], [14],
 4) We validate SemAero through extensive experiments [8] have integrated knowledge-based or ontology-driven
 across eight diverse scenes and 73 sub-datasets, approaches with object detection to identify semantically
 achieving an average performance improvement of conflicting anomalies. Despite these advancements, such
 3.09% in anomaly detection accuracy compared to methods rely heavily on rule-based frameworks, which
 the state-of-the-art methods. struggle to generalize across diverse scenes due to their
 inherent rigidity. Biswas et al. pioneered the use of vision-
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We review language models for aerial video anomaly detection [27],
related work in Section II and introduce the proposed leveraging multimodal capabilities to enhance performance.
SemAero in Section III. We present the experiments results However, their approach, MMVAD, falls short in addressto demonstrate the effectiveness of SemAero in Section IV, ing platform-induced dynamic motion and depends on
and conclude with limitation and future work in Section V. coarse labels for contrastive training. These shortcomings

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 3

 Stabilized frames and prompt Initial score 𝒔𝑰𝒊

 (i) Ego-motion Reduction Pretrained (iii) Anomaly Inference (iv) Dual-stream Consistency-
 Video frames
 MLLM guided Score Refinement
 Motion estimation ❄

 Frame Sampling
 1) Semantic-consistency score aggregation

 Visual encoder
 𝒔𝒊𝒎𝟏𝒔
 e 𝒔𝒊𝒎𝟐𝒔
 Motion smoothing Answer to prompts, e.g. sin
 co 𝒔𝒊𝒎𝟑𝒔
 …
 - Observation: The red bus is …
 𝒔𝒊𝒎𝒔𝒌
 seen moving...
 Semantic feature
 𝒔𝒔𝒊 =∑𝒋∈𝒕𝒐𝒑𝒌𝒔 𝐬𝐢𝐦𝒔𝒊𝒋 & 𝒔𝑰𝒋

 Large Language Model
 - Reasoning: Buses are not between test frames
 Motion compensation 𝒊
 supposed to be in the bike 2) Motion-consistent score refinement
 … roundabout.
 𝒅𝒎𝒊,𝟏
 - Conclusion: Yes, there is an - Euclidean 𝒅𝒎
 - - 𝒊,𝟐
 (ii) Prompt Generation and Formalization object (bus) illegally using - 𝒅𝒎

 …
 - … 𝒊,𝟑
 Scenario labels the bike roundabout. 𝒎
 𝒅𝒊,𝒌

 Prompts for user prompts generation
 ❄ Motion feature deviation
 from normal anchors 𝒔𝒎 𝒎
 𝒊 = ∑𝒂∈𝒕𝒐𝒑𝒌𝒎 𝒅𝒊,𝒂
 Bike roundabout Class Label: 𝒊

 Text encoder
 Based on the observations, the 3) Temporal-consistent score aggregation

 Vehicle roundabout {Scene}-Specific Prompts Generation
 ❄ class label is 1.
 𝒇 Original data
 Gaussian kernel
 Smoothed data
 𝒔𝒊 = 𝒔𝒔𝒊 + 𝒔𝒎
 𝒊

 Farmland Aggregated score Temporal smoothing
 … User prompt with CoT guidance

 ❄ ❄
 Imagebind RAFT
 …

 …

 …

 …
 …

 Optical features Hierarchical
 … … Patches statistics
 Dual-steam feature extraction: (1) Semantic feature (2) Hierarchical motion feature

Fig. 2. The overall model framework of SemAero. Raw frames are first stabilized and sampled through the (i) ego-motion reduction module. With
prompts generated by the (ii) prompt generation and formalization module, the MLLM produces the anomaly inference and initial anomaly score sI .
 f
The initial scores are then refined by the semantics consistency simsij and distance with normal motion features dm
 i,a , resulting in the fused score si ,
which is then smoothed by a Gaussian kernel to ensure temporal consistency [26].

underscore the need for a more generalized approach that an integrated way through verbalized learning.
effectively handles semantic-aware conflict detection while Beyond anomaly detection, cross-modal modeling has
mitigating the challenges posed by platform motion. evolved into a highly versatile paradigm for complex
 visual understanding. Notably, recent extensions to 3D
 scene understanding [39] and autonomous-driving naviga-
C. Research on Semantic-aware Anomaly Detection and
 tion [40] are particularly impressive, as they push cross-
Video Understanding
 modal reasoning into structurally rich and safety-critical
 Early semantic-aware video anomaly detection methods environments. A series of downstream studies also report
often relied on rule-based approaches to identify anomalies strong and consistent gains in few-shot action recognition
[28], [29], which relied heavily on labeled data and suffered [41], [42], event localization [43], zero-shot generalization
from limited scalability. Recently, the emergence of vision- [44], and robust gaze estimation [45], highlighting both the
language models [30] and large language models, has breadth and robustness of cross-modal transfer.
opened a new stage for semantic-aware anomaly anal- In summary, video anomaly detection has gradually
ysis [31], [32], [33]. Such pre-trained models leverage evolved from coarse anomaly localization toward more
large-scale aligned image-text data to learn shared embed- comprehensive anomaly understanding [33]. Unlike condings [34], enabling textual descriptions to directly support ventional anomaly detection, anomaly understanding reanomaly detection [35], [24]. However, these approaches quires not only identifying whether an event is abnoroften still require labeled data to achieve sufficiently dis- mal, but also explaining why it is abnormal in a scene
criminative capability, which limits their applicability in context. Nevertheless, research on aerial video anomaly
data-scarce scenarios. detection remains limited. Compared with ground-view
 Some semantic-aware methods adopt a staged pipeline videos, aerial videos present unique challenges, including
that separates visual observation from anomaly reasoning. platform-induced pseudo-motion, complex scene dynamics,
For example, LAVAD [25] first uses a captioning model and subtle object behaviors. These characteristics often lead
[36] to convert video content into textual descriptions, and existing MLLMs to produce hallucinated or overly generic
then relies on a large language model to infer whether responses and weaken their ability to identify motionanomalies are present based on the generated texts [37], related anomalies. Therefore, there remains a strong need
[31], [27]. This design has shown promising results in for specialized semantic-aware frameworks tailored to the
anomaly detection settings. However, missing details or unique characteristics of aerial videos.
descriptions in the first stage may directly affect the
reasoning in the second stage. In contrast, MLLMs, such III. M ETHOD
as Video-LLaVA and InternVL, integrates observation and
reasoning in a end-to-end manner [17], [26], [38]. For A. Problem Formulation and Model Framework
example, VERA [26] leverages MLLM to produce anomaly Let V = {It }Tt=1 denote a video sequence of T frames.
scores and interpretable explanations for video segments in We consider an offline video anomaly detection setting,

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 Smoothed matrix
 Video frames Homography matrix
 Apply homography
 where I˜r (x, y) and I˜t (x, y) denote the grayscale versions
 Initialize the reference frame Inliers
 sufficient?
 Yes No
 transformation of the reference and current frames, and H and W are the
 Scene
 change?
 Yes Change the
 reference frame
 Matrix
 decomposition
 Identity
 matrix
 Crop region calculation frame height and width. The reference frame is updated
 No
 Feature matching with SIFT Kalman Filter Crop image
 from Ir to It whenever dt > τs , with τs being a predefined
 threshold for scene change.
 Homography matrix estimation Smoothed matrix Resize image
 with RANSAC Given the reference frame Ir and current frame It , Scale
 Motion estimation Motion smoothing Motion compensation Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) keypoints are extracted
 and matched [46]. Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC)
 is then applied to robustly estimate the homography trans-
Fig. 3. Procedure of ego-motion reduction. formation from current frame to the reference frame:
 X 2
 Ht,r = arg min ∥H · pt,n − pr,n ∥ , (2)
 H
where the full video is accessible during inference. The n∈I
video is divided into overlapping temporal windows of
fixed length w with stride δ, with window centers defined where pt,n ∈ R3 , pr,n ∈ R3 are matched keypoints in hoas C = {δ, 2δ, . . . , ⌊T /δ⌋ · δ}. For each center c ∈ C, the mogeneous coordinates and I denotes the RANSAC inlier
corresponding temporal window is denoted by Wc . Our set. The ego-motion correction for frame It is discarded if
goal is to generate frame-level anomaly scores for the input the proportion of matched points that are outliers exceeds
video. Specifically, a pretrained MLLM first produces an a reliability threshold ζ.
initial anomaly score ScI associated with the center frame c, 2) Motion Smoothing: Homography matrices estimated
which are subsequently refined by the temporal smoothing from keypoint matching often exhibit noise due to mismodule to obtain the final frame-level anomaly scores. matches or environmental factors. To address this issue, a
 As illustrated in Figure 2, the proposed framework con- Kalman filter is used to smooth the homography parameters
sists of four components: Ego-motion Reduction, Prompt over time, under the assumption of limited acceleration
Generation and Formalization, Anomaly Inference, and of the platform. The homography matrix from frame t to
Dual-stream Consistency-guided Score Refinement. For reference frame r is given by:
each detection window, the raw video frames are first stabi- 
 h11 h12 h13
 
lized to mitigate platform-induced camera motion. A scene-
 Ht,r = h21 h22 h23  , (3)
  
specific prompt is then constructed, and CoT reasoning
is incorporated to guide inference. The stabilized video h31 h32 1
frames together with the generated prompts are fed into a
 where (h13 , h23 ) denote translation, and the linear terms
frozen pre-trained MLLM to produce initial anomaly scores
 h11 , h12 , h21 , h22 , h31 , h32 jointly encode rotation, scaling,
and textual rationales. The initial scores are subsequently
 shear, and perspective.
refined by a dual-stream consistency-guided module using
semantic and motion cues, followed by Gaussian temporal The homography matrix can then be divided into a
smoothing to obtain temporally stable anomaly estimates. measurement vector of eight parameters:
 The proposed framework does not perform task-specific Ẑt = [h13,t , h23,t , at , sx,t , sy,t , sht , px,t , py,t ]⊤ , (4)
fine-tuning on the MLLM backbone. Instead, it uses normal
training videos for motion-anchor construction and scene- 11 ) denoting the rotation, sx,t =
 with at = arctan 2(h21 , hp
category information for scene-specific prompt generation
 p
 h211 + h221 and sy,t = h212 + h222 denoting the scales,
({SCENE}). These inputs are used only for inference-time sht = arctan 2(h12 , h11 ) denoting the shear, and px,t =
support and do not update any model parameters. h31 , py,t = h32 denoting the perspective terms. Ẑt serves
 as the noisy observation of the latent state Zt . Assuming
 that the platform is moving with a constant velocity, the
B. Ego-motion Reduction
 state vector Zt can be defined as
 Videos captured from moving aerial platforms suffer
from undesired platform-induced motion, which confounds Zt = [ h13,t , h23,t , at , sx,t , sy,t , sht , px,t , py,t , vh13 ,t ,
the real motion of objects. We therefore design an ego- vh23 ,t , va,t , vsx ,t , vsy ,t , vsh,t , vpx ,t , vpy ,t ]⊤
motion reduction module to eliminate the induced effect. (5)
The procedure of Ego-motion Reduction module is illus- where the first eight entries represent translation, rotation,
trated in Figure 3, consisting of three steps include motion scales, shear, and perspective, and the latter eight denote
estimation, motion smoothing, and motion reduction. their velocities. Assuming that the state transition follows
 1) Motion Estimation: A reference frame Ir should a constant-velocity model, the predict state vector Ztp can
be selected and updated adaptively for motion reduction. be formulated as:
To determine whether an update of the reference frame " #
 p k I8 ∆tI8
is required, the normalized mean absolute difference of Zt = AZt−1 , A= , (6)
grayscale intensity between the current frame It and the 0 I8
reference frame Ir is computed:
 where A denotes the state transition matrix, and ∆t is the
 1
 W X
 X H
 | I˜r (x, y) − I˜t (x, y) | frame interval. Prediction uncertainty Ptp is updated as
 dt = , (1)
 H · W x=1 y=1 255 Ptp = APt−1
 k
 A⊤ + Q, (7)

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 5

 TABLE I
where Q is the process noise covariance controlling the S UMMARY OF H IERARCHICAL M OTION F EATURES .
trade-off between smoothness and responsiveness. Given
the observation Ẑt , we use the observation model Level Feature Description
 µa,b a,b
 mag , σmag Mean and std of magnitude in each cell
 a,b
 Ẑt = HZt + rt , H = [I8 08×8 ], (8) Mmax Maximum magnitude in each cell
 Local µa,b a,b
 u , µv Mean of flow components in each cell
with rt ∼ N (0, R) measuring noise and H denotes the a,b
 σu , σva,b Std of flow in each cell
observation matrix. The Kalman gain is then h̃ a,b ∈ RB Histogram of oriented flow in each cell
 µmag , σmag Mean and std of magnitude for the frame
 Kt = Ptp H ⊤ (HPtp H ⊤ + R)−1 , (9) Global Mmax Maximum flow magnitude for the frame
 M75 75th percentile of magnitude for the frame
where R is the measurement noise covariance that reflects Note: Local features are computed per patch Ca,b within the optical
the reliability of the homography estimate. flow field, while global features are computed over the entire frame. B
 The smoothed state and covariance can be updated: represents the number of bins in the HOF.

 Ztk = Ztp + Kt (Ẑt − HZtp ), Ptk = (I − Kt H)Ptp ,
 (10) task-aligned questions to enhance context-aware ability of
 The filtered homography Hkt,r is reconstructed from the the model. In the heuristic setting, they are automatically
smoothed parameters in Ztk as : generated by GPT-4o using a prompt-generation template,
 k k k k k k k k
  as shown in Figure 4(b). Given a scene category, GPTsx,t cos at sy,t (sin at cos sht − cos at sin sht ) h13,t
  4o generates a set of general questions. These questions
 sx,t sin akt sky,t (cos akt cos shkt + sin akt sin shkt ) hk23,t  . are then instantiated and incorporated into the prompt
 k

 pkx,t pky,t 1 presented to the MLLM to guide structured reasoning
 (11) during inference. In our implementation, prompt generation
 3) Motion Compensation: Once the smoothed homog- is performed via the GPT-4o API with temperature set as
raphy matrix Hkt,r is obtained, each frame It can be 0.8 and a maximum output length set as 300 tokens.
geometrically aligned to the reference frame Ir by inverse 2) Deterministic Scene-specific Prompt: While the
warping. Formally, for each target coordinate (x′ , y ′ ), the heuristic prompt strategy provides flexible scene-adaptive
corresponding source coordinate is recovered as guidance, it relies on an external model to generate prompt.
    ′
 x x To provide a more controllable and reproducible alternak −1  ′ 
  y  = (Ht,r ) y  , (12) tive, we further introduce a deterministic prompt variant.
  
 In this setting, a more fixed scene-conditioned user prompt
 w 1 template is employed: “The video frames are captured in
and the pixel value at (x′ , y ′ ) is interpolated from It {SCENE}. What is this environment intended for? Are there
using bilinear sampling. By warping frame It with the any anomalies in the video?”, where {SCENE} denotes the
transformation matrix Hkt,r , we map it to the coordinate scene category of specific scenario. This variant contributes
system of the reference frame Ir , thereby improving the to contextual awareness, enabling a more controlled evalalignment of background regions. Homography warping uation on the reasoning capability of MLLM.
inevitably introduces invalid border areas where mapped
pixels fall outside the image domain. To remove these D. Anomaly Inference and Dual-stream Consistencyartifacts, we identify the valid pixel set Ωvalid , which con- guided Score Refinement
tains all pixels whose mapped coordinates remain inside the
 1) Initial Anomaly Inference: We adopt uniform samimage domain. We then compute the axis-aligned cropping
 pling within each detection window to reduce redundancy
box using the set of valid pixel coordinates Ωvalid , which
 caused by the high frame rate. Specifically, for each
is then used to crop the output region.
 detection window, we select Tk frames at approximately
 equal intervals. Given the sampled stabilized video frames
C. Prompt Generation and Formalization and the scene-specific prompts, the pretrained MLLM
 1) Heuristic Scene-specific Prompt: In aerial videos, an produces an initial judgment for each detection window
event is considered anomalous not merely because of its Wc , including textual responses to the prompted questions
visual appearance, but also because it violates the expected and an initial anomaly score sIc ∈ {0, 1}.
functional of the scene. Effective anomaly detection there- Since the initial window-level predictions may be locally
fore requires the MLLM to capture scene semantics and unstable and general MLLMs often show limited sensitivity
contextual expectations. To explicitly introduce such scene- to motion-related anomalies, we introduce a Dual-stream
specific semantic priors into the inference process, we de- Consistency-guided Score Refinement module. It refines
sign a structured prompt generation mechanism that guides the initial scores from both semantic and motion perspecthe MLLM toward context-aware anomaly reasoning. tives. Specifically, it aggregates semantically related scores
 The overall prompt design is illustrated in Figure 4. to regularize prediction consistency and leverages motion
The system prompt (Figure 4 (a)) defines the task and similarity with normal anchor samples to better identify
constrains the output format. It incorporates a structured behavioral anomalies under limited training samples.
reasoning paradigm consisting of observation, reasoning, 2) Dual-stream Feature Extraction: To support the suband conclusion, encouraging the MLLM to ground its judg- sequent score refinement, both semantic and motion feament in visual evidence before producing a final decision. tures are extracted. For each center frame c in the test set,
The user prompts are scene-adaptive and formulated as we extract a semantic embedding fcs ∈ RDs using a frozen

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 System Prompt Template User Prompt Generation Template

 Developer Prompt
 You are designed to do binary classification. The
 input is a sequence of videos frames for identifying You are an expert in aerial video anomaly detection.
 whether there is an anomaly in the video. You need Your task is to generate concise questions that can help
 to output the class label, i.e., an integer in the a multimodal large language model identify anomalies in
 set {0, 1}. 0 represents normal video, and 1 aerial video scenes.
 represents abnormal video.
 User Prompt
 Data :{VIDEO_FRAMES}

 Prompt Questions : {SCENE_SPECIFIC_QUESTIONS} We assume that anomalies often present as semantic
 conflicts. Please generate five user prompts for
 Answer Format : For each question, describe the
 multimodal large language models to assist in their aerial
 reasoning behind your observation on the video
 video anomaly detection task in {SCENE) scenarios.
 frames, and provide a clear conclusion.
 Please formulate each prompt as concise general questions
 Final Decision: Based on the above answers, give the and provide the prompts in a JSON format.
 integer class label: [ 0 for for normal video, 1 for
 abnormal video.] Generation Setting:

 Model: GPT-4o, Temperature: 0.8, Max output tokens: 300

 (a) System prompt template for MLLM inference (b) Generation template for user prompts used in MLLM

Fig. 4. Prompt design for aerial video anomaly detection, including system and user prompt design. {VIDEO FRAMES} denotes the input video
frames, {SCENE SPECIFIC QUESTIONS} denotes the generated user prompts, and {SCENE} denotes the scene category of specific scenario.

vision encoder (ImageBind [47] in our implementation), neighbors are normalized into non-negative aggregation
where Ds denotes the feature dimension. weights:
 For motion representation, we compute optical flow
 s max(simsc,c′ , 0)
between frames i and i + ∆t to construct hierarchical simc,c′ = P s , (15)
motion features {fim }Ti=1 . Specifically, dense optical flow c′ ∈Ncs max(simc,c′ , 0) + ϵ
is estimated using RAFT [48], yielding a flow map Oi ∈ with ϵ > 0. Using these weights, we obtain a semantic-
RH×W ×2 with per-pixel vectors aggregated refined score for frame c that refined by its
 ⊤
 semantically related contexts:
 
 Oi (x, y) = ui (x, y), vi (x, y) , i = 1, . . . , T − ∆t,
 (13) X s
 Scs = simc,c′ ScI′ . (16)
where ui (x, y) and vi (x, y) denote the horizontal and vertic′ ∈Ncs
cal components, respectively, and ∆t is the frame interval.
To handle missing flows near the temporal boundaries, the 4) Motion Consistency Score Refinement: Motion anoptical flow of the nearest valid frame is replicated for the chors A are constructed exclusively from normal training
initial and final ∆t frames, ensuring temporal alignment. videos and serve as reference patterns of normal motion
 Based on the estimated flow field, we further construct behavior during inference. They are used only for motion
hierarchical motion descriptors. Specifically, the flow field consistency comparison and are not obtained through pais divided into L×L non-overlapping patches {Ca,b }L a,b=1 , rameter learning or optimization:
from which we extract statistics of flow magnitudes and
components, together with histograms of oriented flow A = {fam }N
 a=1 ,
 anc
 (17)
(HOF). In addition, global motion statistics are computed
over the entire frame. These local and global descrip- Motion anchors are similar with the idea of memorytors together form the hierarchical motion representation bank that used in self-supervised learning, while feature
 2
{fim } ∈ RL (7+B)+4 , where B denotes the number of representations in our framework are maintained as a fixed
HOF bins. A detailed summary of the extracted hierarchical reference set. The motion anchor does not involve any
motion features is provided in Table I. parameter learning or optimization, serving as reference
 3) Semantic Consistency Score Aggregation: To stabi- for measuring motion consistency during inference.
lize the initial output, we refine initial scores by aggregating For a test frame i with motion feature fim , we measure
information from semantic-similar neighboring segments. its deviation from normal motion by summing the L2
Specifically, for each center frame c ∈ C, we compute the distances to its K m nearest anchors in A:
pairwise cosine similarity between its semantic embedding X
fcs and those of the other center frames c′ ∈ C: dm
 i = ∥fim − fam ∥2 , (18)
 fam ∈Nim
 fcs⊤ fcs′ ′
 simsc,c′ = , c, c ∈ C. (14) where Nim ⊂ A contains the K m closest anchors. The
 ∥fcs ∥2 ∥fcs′ ∥2
 motion deviation score is then normalized across the video:
 For each center frame c, we then construct its semantic
neighborhood Ncs by selecting its top-K s semantic similar dm m
 i − minj dj
 Sim = , (19)
center frames, including c itself. The similarities of these maxj dm m
 j − minj dj + ϵ

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 7

with ϵ > 0 for numerical stability. A higher Sim indicates CVAE [51] regularizes the feature in latent space for robust
greater deviation from normal motion patterns. representation. GANomaly [52] and its extension Skip-
 For test frames lacking matched normal anchors, a GANomaly [53] use reconstruction error with adversarial
sparsity-based method inspired by Local Outlier Factor training and skip connections, respectively. adVAE [54]
(LOF) is employed. The average L2 distance from fim to models anomalies as deviations from normal Gaussian
its K m nearest neighbors among other test frames can be distributions through a self-adversarial VAE. MemAE [55]
computed as anomaly indicator. and MNAD [56] leverage memory banks, with the latter
 5) Temporal Smoothing: We interpolate both the Se- introducing compactness and separateness losses for betmantic consistency and motion consistency scores to the ter generalization. STD [20] jointly exploits spatial and
frame level and fuse them additively to produce the inte- motion streams. MKD [57] applies knowledge distillation
grated anomaly score. for feature discrimination. SSPCAB [58] enhances prediction with convolutional attention blocks. Aerial-specific
 Sif = Sis + Sim , (20)
 models include ANDT [6] and ASTT [4], predicting fuwhere Sif represents the integrated anomaly score for frame ture frames using vision transformers and cross-attention,
i. To mitigate temporal noise and ensure smooth anomaly respectively. DAD-FSM [59] employs a spatio-temporal
trajectories, we apply Gaussian smoothing to the fused relational cross-transformer for frame prediction.
scores: Weakly-Supervised Methods: These approaches lever-
 τ2
 Pn f
 =−n exp(− 2σ 2 ) Si+τ age sparse or noisy labels for training. TEVAD [31]
 S̃if = τP , (21)
 n τ2 integrates captioning with cross-modal enhancement.
 τ =−n exp(− 2σ 2 )
 MGFN [60] captures contextual and temporal dependenwhere the smoothing window spans 2n + 1 frames. Bound- cies. VadCLIP [61] adapts CLIP via learnable prompts
ary effects are mitigated using reflection padding. The and a local-global temporal adapter. MMVAD [27] uses
standard deviation is adaptively set as σ = αT to scale attention fusion and saliency-aware contrastive learning.
with video duration. Open-Set Supervised Methods: These handle limited
 known anomalies in training. MLEP [62] applies margin
 IV. E XPERIMENTS learning on rare events. HolmesVAU [17] fine-tunes an
 We conducted a series of experiments to answer the LLM on HIVAU-70k with multi-granular annotations and
following questions about our model: Q1. Accuracy. How anomaly-focused sampling. VERA [26] uses verbalized
accurately does our model detect anomalies compared learning to optimize MLLM prompts.
to other baselines? Q2. Explainability. Can our model Training-Free Methods: LAVAD [25] generates frameprovides reasonable explanations for detected anomalies? level scores and interpretations using captioning and LLMs.
Q3. Effectiveness. How does each module contribute to 3) Experimental Setting: All experiments were conthe model performance? Q4. Robustness. How does the ducted on a server running Ubuntu 20.04.5 LTS, equipped
performance vary under different parameter configurations? with an Intel Xeon Gold 6242R CPU @ 3.10 GHz, 192
 GB of RAM, and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.
A. Experimental Details The MLLM used in the main experiments is InternVL2-
 Below are the details of our experimental setup, includ- 8B. In the comparative study, we set the detection window
ing dataset configurations, baselines for comparison, key to ω = 2 seconds, corresponding to 60 frames in Droneparameters settings, and evaluation metrics. Anomaly (30 fps) [6] and 12 frames in UIT-ADrone
 1) Dataset Setup: For evaluation, we utilize two aerial (6 fps) [49]. Center frames are sampled every δ = 16
video anomaly detection datasets, comprising 73 sub- frames, and Tk = 8 frames are uniformly extracted within
datasets across various detection scenarios. The Drone each window to form the input. All main experiments
Anomaly dataset [6] includes 7 scenarios with 22 sub- were conducted using shared parameters setting across all
datasets, while UIT-ADrone [49] provides 51 sub-datasets scenes. The parameters are categorized and set as follows:
for various roundabout scenarios. We strictly follow the 1) Stabilization-related parameters include the Kalman
original self-supervised evaluation protocol for all 73 sub- filter parameters (P0 = 1000I16 , Q = 0.01I16 ,
datasets. For each sub-dataset, motion anchors are con- R = 0.1I8 ) and the motion-related thresholds (outlier
structed only from the normal videos in its training split. proportion threshold ζ = 0.8, scene-change threshold
Validation and test videos are not used in anchor con- τs = 0.17). These parameters were determined on a
struction. During inference, each test video is evaluated separate development set to ensure broad engineering
only against anchors derived from the training split of feasibility.
the same sub-dataset. No anchors are shared across sub- 2) Feature representation parameters include the semandatasets, thereby preventing both cross-split and cross- tic feature dimension Ds = 1024, patch level L = 2,
dataset information leakage. and frame interval ∆t = 1, which control the spatial
 2) Baselines: We evaluate SemAero against 21 and temporal granularity of motion features. Further
state-of-the-art baselines, spanning self-supervised, parameter analysis suggests that scenes with more
weakly-supervised, open-set supervised, and training-free complex motion may benefit from a larger ∆t.
paradigms. These are summarized below by category. 3) Score refinement parameters are used to stabilize
 Self-Supervised Methods: These approaches learn nor- frame-level anomaly scores, including neighborhood
mality patterns on training data. DSN [50] is a prediction- sizes K s = K m = 5 for consistency aggregation,
based method that uses spatial and motion features. and Gaussian temporal smoothing with half-window

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 TABLE II
 D ETAILED S CENE -S PECIFIC U SER P ROMPTS FOR VARIOUS A ERIAL S CENARIOS

 Scene Scenario Generated Prompts
 Bike Roundabout 1. Is there any vehicle in the bike roundabout area that is not a bicycle?
 2. Do any objects appear to be moving in the wrong direction inside the bike roundabout?
 3. Are there pedestrians or animals obstructing the flow of bicycles in the roundabout?
 4. Do you notice any stalled or fallen bikes creating blockage in the roundabout?
 5. Are motorized vehicles (e.g., motorcycles, cars) illegally using the bike roundabout path?
 Crossroads 1. Do any vehicles in the intersection violate traffic rules?
 2. Is there any vehicle stopped or parked in a location that creates a hazard in the intersection area?
 3. Are there any near-collision incidents or unusually close interactions between vehicles and pedestrians?
 4. Are there any objects not on the right position and posing threat to the normal function of the crossroad?
 5. Is the overall traffic behavior in the intersection inconsistent with normal flow patterns?
 Farmland Inspection 1. Are there unauthorized vehicles or people present in the farmland area?
 2. Do you notice any damage or destruction to the crops or irrigation infrastructure?
 3. Are drones or aircraft flying unusually close to or landing on the farmland?
 4. Is there any smoke, fire, or machinery operating abnormally within the farmland?
 5. Are animals intruding into the crop fields from surrounding areas?
 Highway 1. Are there any pedestrians on the highway that may cause danger?
 2. Do you observe any objects (e.g., barriers, cargo, animals) on the road that could interfere with traffic flow?
 3. Are vehicles moving against traffic, making U-turns, or otherwise behaving abnormally?
 4. Are there any signs of accidents, damage, or road degradation that affect the highway’s normal use?
 5. Is there any unauthorized activity (e.g., people walking, selling, or filming) taking place on the highway?
 Railway Inspection 1. Are there any objects or people present on or near the railway tracks that should not be there?
 2. Do the tracks, bridges, or nearby equipment appear damaged or disrupted in any way?
 3. Are there any vehicles or machinery obstructing the railway path?
 4. Do you observe smoke, fire, water, or structural instability that could endanger train operations?
 5. Are there any signs of illegal activity or unauthorized construction near the railway?
 Solar Panel Inspection 1. Are there any broken, missing, or visibly damaged solar panels in the inspection area?
 2. Is there any foreign object, such as debris or vegetation, obstructing the surface of the solar panels?
 3. Do all solar panels appear to be uniformly aligned and securely mounted in the expected formation?
 4. Is there any unauthorized person, animal, or vehicle present near the solar panel installation area?
 5. Are there any signs of fire, discoloration, or hotspots that could indicate overheating or electrical malfunction?
 Vehicle Roundabout 1. Are there any vehicles that are violating the roundabout’s traffic rules?
 2. Is there any unexpected congestion or traffic jam forming at the roundabout?
 3. Are there pedestrians or cyclists that should not appear in the vehicle roundabout?
 4. Do you observe signs of accidents or collisions that interrupt the roundabout’s operation?
 5. Is there any vehicle entering the roundabout causing disruption to other vehicles?
 UIT-ADrone (Roundabout) 1. Are any vehicles in the scene performing illegal or dangerous maneuvers that violate traffic rules?
 2. Is there any unusual congestion, blockage, or disruption in the normal flow of traffic?
 3. Are there any objects or people in inappropriate locations that could pose a risk to traffic safety?
 4. Are there any vehicles or pedestrians exhibiting unusual, erratic, or dangerous behavior?
 5. Is there any damage, obstruction, or abnormal situation affecting the infrastructure visible in the scene?

 TABLE III
 size n = 7 and standard deviation σ = T /16, where C OMPARISON OF THE F RAME - LEVEL AUC-ROC P ERFORMANCE (%)
 T is the total video length in frames. ON THE D RONE -A NOMALY DATASET WITH P REVIOUS M ETHODS

 The heuristic scene-specific user prompts are generated Categories Method AUC-ROC
through the GPT-4o API, with the temperature set to 0.8 TEVAD [31] 67.35
and the maximum output length set to 300 tokens. The MGFN [60] 68.92
scene-specific prompts used in the comparative study are Weakly-Supervised VadCLIP [63] 68.11
 MMVAD-RNet50 [27] 70.78
listed in Table II. The robustness of heuristic user prompts MMVAD-CSPDNet53 [27] 71.22
generation is further evaluated in the following study. Open-set Supervised MLEP [62] 53.55
 Following [27], [4], [6], we use frame-level AUC-ROC DSN [50] 53.36
 CVAE [51] 64.74
as the primary evaluation metric. Model performance was GANomaly [52] 63.69
evaluated using the heuristic variant as the default, except Skip-GANomaly [53] 66.21
for the metric comparison in the comparative study. adVAE [54] 66.34
 MemAE [55] 67.67
 Self-supervised
 MNAD [56] 66.30
B. Comparative Study STD [20] 52.49
 MKD [57] 68.13
 1) Metric Comparison: Table III presents the model SSPCAB [58] 68.91
performance, measured by AUC-ROC, on the Drone- ANDT [6] 60.35
Anomaly dataset [6]. SemAero with hubristic prompts ASTT [4] 67.80
 LAVAD [25] 49.35
achieved an average AUC-ROC of 77.99% across the seven HolmesVAU [17] 56.07
detection scenarios, while that with deterministic prompts MLLM/LLM-based VERA [26] 53.17
achieved an average AUC-ROC of 76.97%, surpassing SemAero (Deterministic) 76.97
 SemAero (Heuristic) 77.99
the leading weakly-supervised multimodal model MM-
VAD (71.22%). Other weakly-supervised methods leveraging cross-modal information, including MGFN (68.92%),
VadCLIP (68.11%), and TEVAD (67.35%), demonstrated samples, resulting in lower performance compared to Secompetitive performance. However, these models struggled mAero. Self-supervised methods, such as DSN (53.36%),
to detect behavioral anomalies due to limited training ASTT (67.80%) , ANDT (60.35%) , and CVAE (64.74%),

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 9

 TABLE IV
 C OMPARISON OF THE F RAME - LEVEL AUC-ROC P ERFORMANCE
 (%) ON THE UIT-AD RONE DATASET WITH P REVIOUS M ETHODS

 Categories Method AUC-ROC
 Frame 0 Frame 400 Frame 900 Frame 1000 Frame 1200 Frame 1400
 TEVAD [31] 63.46
 MGFN [60] 64.25
 Weakly-Supervised VadCLIP [63] 66.32
 MMVAD-RNet50[27] 67.40
 MMVAD-CSPDNet53[27] 69.56
 (a) Bike roundabout 03 Open-set Supervised MLEP [62] 53.55
 DSN [50] 57.94
 CVAE [51] 56.39
 MemAE [55] 59.07
 Frame 0 Frame 100 Frame 200 Frame 300 Frame 400 Frame 500 MNAD [56] 52.34
 Self-supervised
 STD [20] 57.05
 ANDT [6] 60.50
 ASTT [4] 65.45
 DAD-FSM [59] 68.13
 LAVAD[25] 51.32
 (b) Solar Panel Inspection 03
 HolmesVAU[17] 55.32
 Frame 0 Frame 40 Frame 210
 MLLM/LLM-based VERA [26] 51.69
 SemAero (Deterministic) 68.22
 SemAero (Heuristic) 71.07

 also underperformed SemAero, primarily due to their
 limited semantic-awareness capabilities. The incorporation
 (c) UIT-Adrone (DJI_065) of memory module, such as MemAE and MNAD, can
 improve the performance slightly by enforcing the reconstructed frames closing to the normality space.
 Frame 100
 The fine-tuned multimodal large language model,
 Frame 5 Frame 200
 HolmesVAU (56.07%), exhibited suboptimal performance,
 likely because its training dataset (HIVAU-70k) consists
 primarily of CCTV videos, which do not align well with
 the characteristics of aerial videos. Similarly, LAVAD
 (d) UIT-Adrone (DJI_081) (49.35%), a zero-shot approach relying on captioning and
 LLM for anomaly reasoning, struggled with motion under-
Fig. 5. Visualization of anomaly score rated by SemAero: (a) Bike standing due to platform-induced motion.
roundabout, (b) Solar panel inspection, (c) UIT-ADrone (DJI 065), and
(d) UIT-ADrone (DJI 081). The UIT-ADrone dataset [49] presents greater challenges, as its anomalies are subtle and primarily motionbased. Model performance comparisons are shown in Table IV. Despite these challenges, SemAero with hubristic prompts achieved the highest AUC-ROC of 71.07%,
 outperforming the leading weakly-supervised models
 MMVAD-CSPDNet53 (69.56%) and MMVAD-RNet50
 (67.40%). The performance with deterministic prompts was
 slightly worse, with the mean AUC-ROC reaching 68.22%.
 Other cross-modal methods, including TEVAD (63.46%),
 MGFN (64.25%), and VadCLIP (66.32%) , outperformed
 single-modal self-supervised models like ASTT (65.45%)
 and ANDT (60.50%) , underscoring the importance of
 (a) Bike roundabout 03 (b) Solar Panel Inspection 03
 semantic understanding in aerial video anomaly detection.
 HolmesVAU (55.32%) and LAVAD (51.32%) continued to
 perform poorly, reflecting their limitations in addressing the
 complex motion dynamics and semantic nuances of aerial
 videos. SemAero effectively integrates semantic-aware reasoning and motion compensation through its dual-stream
 consistency refinement module and ego-motion reduction,
 tailored specifically for aerial video challenges.
 2) Visualization of Results: We visualize the anomaly
 scores generated by SemAero on four distinct scenarios:
 (c) UIT-Adrone (DJI_065) (d) UIT-Adrone (DJI_081)
 (a) Bike Roundabout, (b) Solar Panel Inspection, and
Fig. 6. Confusion matrices corresponding to the detection results
 more challenging traffic roundabout scenes from the UITin Figure 5, illustrating the classification performance across the four ADrone dataset (Figure 5 (c) and (d)). To further illustrate
scenarios. the model’s performance, we also present their corresponding confusion matrices in Figure 6. Anomalies in the

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 Frame 0 Frame 500 Frame 800 Frame 1200 Frame 1600 Frame 1800 Frame 2200

 (a) Ground Truth

 A large field with a path running through
 it.

 (b) Scores rated by LAVAD LAVAD

 The video depicts a serene and peaceful
 scene of a rice field, with no unusual or
 out-of-the-ordinary events occurring
 throughout.
 (c) Scores rated by HolmesVAU HolmesVAU
 The video frames show motorcycles on the
 farmland, which are not typically
 authorized vehicles for such areas. Based
 on the above question answers, the
 condition is met for an abnormal video
 Therefore, the class Label is 1.
 (d) Scores rated by SemAero SemAero

Fig. 7. Comparison of semantic-aware anomaly detection models: Anomaly scoring and video understanding on the Farmland Inspection dataset.
Green-marked text represents the correct video or anomaly understanding, while the red-marked text represent the incorrect one.

 TABLE V
 A BLATION S TUDY FOR D IFFERENT M ODULES OF S EM A ERO ( HEURISTIC VARIANT )

 Bike Cross- Solar Vehicle
 Method S G M O C Farmland Highway Railway Mean
 Round roads Panel Round
 Vanilla MLLM 52.52 49.30 44.45 66.60 50.00 50.00 50.00 51.84
 VERA 51.99 50.00 50.91 61.10 50.00 58.21 50.00 53.17
 w/S ✓ 53.17 50.00 99.90 60.79 50.00 59.70 50.00 60.50 (+7.33%)
 w/S,G ✓ ✓ 72.52 50.00 99.80 66.47 50.00 54.68 54.31 63.97 (+3.47%)
 w/S,G,M ✓ ✓ ✓ 80.34 52.88 99.80 66.47 50.00 62.09 57.24 66.97 (+3.00%)
 w/S,G,M,O ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 80.34 64.97 99.60 80.48 50.33 70.79 73.26 74.25 (+7.28%)
 SemAero(w/all) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 85.69 74.00 99.86 81.45 50.33 78.80 75.80 77.99 (+3.74%)
 Note: S is the abbreviation for Scene-specific prompts module, G for CoT guidance module, M is for Motion reduction module, O is for motion
 consistency refinement module, and C is for the whole consistency refinement module that includes semantic consistency measurement. ✓denotes
 the module is included in testing.

Bike Roundabout and Solar Panel Inspection scenes are corresponding dataset (Figure 6(c) and Figure 6(d)).
mainly associated with semantic conflicts. For instance, a 3) Visualization Comparison: We present a comparawhite car appearing on a road that designed for non-motor tive analysis of our model, SemAero, against two video
vehicles (Figure 5(a)) and sheep intruding into the solar anomaly understanding models that leverages Large Lanpanel area (Figure 5(b)) are semantic anomalies. SemAero guage Models for video understanding: LAVAD and
correctly identified these anomalies, with the anomaly HolmesVAU. The evaluation focuses on two key aspects:
scores aligning well with the ground truth. The confusion frame-level anomaly scoring and semantic anomaly unmatrices in Figure 6(a) and (b) further confirm this, with derstanding. Results on Farmland datasets were visual-
SemAero achieving high F1 scores of 0.85 and 0.97 ized in Figure 7. SemAero outperformed both LAVAD
on corresponding dataset. Anomalies in the UIT-ADrone and HolmesVAU in anomaly detection and semantic undataset are mostly related to object behaviors and often derstanding. The frame-level anomaly scores rated by
occupy only a small portion of the frame. SemAero is also SemAero is aligned with the ground truth, have clear
capable of detecting such subtle anomalies, largely owing distinctive ability between normal and abnormal samples.
to the motion-consistency refinement modules. As shown in SemAero demonstrated superior robustness and semantic
Figure 5(c), between frames 20 and 70, a pedestrian failed awareness, accurately identifying anomalies such as a veto cross the street at the designated crosswalk. Between hicle on the farmland (Figure 7).
frames 180 and 280, a motorcycle illegally made a U-turn In contrast, LAVAD, which generates captions for video
at the pedestrian crossing. Similar anomalies occurred in segments to perform anomaly detection, exhibited signif-
Figure 5(d), with an illegal U-turn between frames 5 and 40 icant limitations in anomaly localization. LAVAD misinand dangerous pedestrian behavior between frames 190 and terpreted the scene as a ‘large field with a path running
250. SemAero assigned high anomaly scores when such through it,’ which is likely due to misinterpreting water
events occurred, achieving F1 scores of 0.92 and 0.77 on reflections as a path. This hallucination led to unstable

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 11

 TABLE VI
 A BLATION STUDY FOR QUANTIFYING THE CONTRIBUTION OF MLLM REASONING AND REFINEMENT MODULES IN S EM A ERO

 Bike Cross- Solar Vehicle
 Method Modules Farmland Highway Railway Mean
 Round roads Panel Round
 Vanilla MLLM (generic prompt) – 52.52 49.30 44.45 66.60 50.00 50.00 50.00 51.84
 Refinement-only, w/O,C O+C 52.08 70.90 97.54 65.42 50.33 66.52 73.06 67.98
 Heuristic prompt, w/S S 53.17 50.00 99.90 60.79 50.00 59.70 50.00 60.50
 Heuristic prompt, w/S,G S+G 72.52 50.00 99.80 66.47 50.00 54.68 54.31 63.97
 Heuristic prompt, w/S,G,M S+G+M 80.34 52.88 99.80 66.47 50.00 62.09 57.24 66.97
 Heuristic prompt, w/all All 85.69 74.00 99.86 81.45 50.33 78.80 75.80 77.99
 Deterministic prompt, w/S S 60.00 50.47 50.00 80.76 50.00 50.43 43.27 54.99
 Deterministic prompt, w/S,G S+G 61.07 63.64 82.44 61.67 50.00 65.02 50.00 61.98
 Deterministic prompt, w/S,G,M S+G+M 64.76 72.79 82.44 64.27 50.00 66.67 61.77 66.10
 Deterministic prompt, w/all All 65.12 82.50 98.10 82.33 50.33 83.82 76.58 76.97
 Note: Vanilla MLLM (generic prompt) denotes direct MLLM inference without scene-specific prompting or refinement. Refinement-only baseline
denotes anomaly scoring using only the refinement branch without scene-aware MLLM reasoning. S denotes scene-specific prompting, G denotes CoT
guidance, M denotes motion reduction, O denotes motion consistency refinement, and C denotes the full consistency refinement module including
semantic consistency. All indicates that all corresponding modules are enabled. This table is designed to distinguish the contribution of scene-aware
MLLM reasoning from that of the downstream refinement modules.

anomaly awareness and poor discriminative performance,
as evidenced by the frame-level scores.
 HolmesVAU, designed to provide semantic interpretations at the video level, struggled with anomaly detection
in aerial contexts despite its training on multi-granular
datasets. It failed to detect unauthorized vehicles and
viewed the scene as peaceful, which is likely due to the
anomalous feature in the trained datasets are much different
from that in aerial videos, resulting in poor scalability. (a) Frame 122 (Crossroad dataset) (b) Frame 1008 (Highway dataset)

C. Ablation Study Fig. 8. Effectiveness of video reduction with flow analysis

 1) Ablation Study of Core Modules: We evaluated the
contribution of each module in SemAero through an ablation study using various module combinations, including
scene-specific prompts (S), CoT guidance (G), motion
reduction (M), and consistency refinement (C). The results
of this ablation study are summarized in Table V. We
included two simplified baselines for comparison. The first
uses the vanilla MLLM with a generic static prompt:
“Is there any anomaly in this video? Output exactly: (a) Drone-Anomaly (b) Drone-Anomaly
 (Highway) (Solar Inspection)
Class label: < 0, 1 >. 0 means normal, and 1 means
abnormal.” This baseline is intended to directly evaluate
the performance of the chosen MLLM without the any
wrapper. The second baseline uses the prompt design from
VERA [26], which serves as an existing prompt-based
reference. Both baselines perform substantially worse than
the full SemAero framework, with average AUC-ROC
scores of 51.84% and 53.17 %, respectively. The results
reveal the limited ability of MLLM under insufficient
 (c) UIT-ADrone (d) UIT-ADrone
reasoning guidance. Introducing scene-specific prompting (DJI_065) (DJI_067)
alone improves the mean AUC-ROC by 7.33% over the
VERA baseline, indicating the importance of semantic Fig. 9. Distribution of Hierarchical Motion Feature Distances to Normal
contextualization for anomaly reasoning. This effect is Anchors: Normal vs. Anomalous Samples
particularly pronounced on the Farmland dataset, which
achieves a gain of +48.99%. Adding CoT guidance further
improves the mean AUC-ROC by 3.47%, suggesting that improves the mean AUC-ROC from 74.25% to 77.99%
explicit reasoning guidance benefits scene-aware anomaly across all evaluated scenarios. This result suggests that
judgment. Incorporating motion reduction brings an ad- semantic aggregation is overall beneficial on the evaluated
ditional improvement of 3.00%, indicating that motion- datasets. Overall, these results verify that all core modules
compensated visual input benefits subsequent reasoning. contribute positively to the final performance, with the full
We further compare the variant with motion-consistency SemAero framework achieving the best overall result.
only (O) with the full consistency refinement variant (C), 2) Analysis of MLLM Contribution: To clarify the conwhere C includes both motion and semantic consistency tribution of MLLM reasoning, we conduct a targeted
aggregation. As shown in Table V, extending O to C ablation, with results recorded in Table VI. A vanilla

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 (a) Model performance (b) Averaged cost (c) Inference time

Fig. 10. Quantitative evaluation of prompt robustness, inference time, and cost across five repeated generations.

MLLM with generic static prompts yields only 51.84%
mean AUC-ROC. Introducing scene-specific prompts con-

 AUC-ROC (%)

 AUC-ROC (%)
sistently boosts performance by 3.15–8.66%, highlighting
the importance of providing contextual information. Further adding CoT guidance (G) and motion reduction (M)
raises the score to 66.97% (heuristic) and 66.10% (deter-
 (a) Bike roundabout (03) (b) Farmland inspection
ministic), demonstrating the benefit of reasoning guidance
and motion compensation. Meanwhile, the refinement-only

 AUC-ROC (%)
 AUC-ROC (%)
baseline reaches 67.98%, which is promising but still lags
behind the full SemAero framework (77.99% for heuristic
and 76.97% for deterministic). These results indicate that
MLLM reasoning and refinement modules are complementary. The former supplies semantically anomaly cues, while (c) Solar panel inspection (02) (d) Vehicle roundabout (02)
the latter further refines their effectiveness by incorporating
motion awareness.
 Fig. 11. Model detection performance with varying patch number (L)
 and time interval (∆t) for hierarchical motion features extraction.
D. Module Analysis
 1) Effectiveness of Ego-motion Reduction Module: To
assess the effectiveness of ego-motion reduction, we visu- (0.00%), Farmland (0.63%), Solar (2.06%), and Highway
alized a comparison of the original and stabilized frames (2.31%). Larger variability is observed in more complex
(Figure 8), along with their corresponding optical flow traffic scenes such as Crossroads (7.64%) and Vehicle
maps relative to previous frames. Frames were selected (8.03%), suggesting that performance is more sensitive to
from the Crossroads (Figure 8(a)) and Highway datasets prompt variation when the scene contains richer semantic
(Figures 8(b)). As shown in the images, the original optical interactions. The middle and right panels report the mean
flow displays significant platform motion, which interferes estimated cost (USD) and mean inference time (s), respecwith the motion of foreground objects. In contrast, the tively, together with ±1 standard deviation. These results
motion of foreground objects in the optical flow of the indicate that the prompt generation and inference process
stabilized frames becomes more apparent. incurs low monetary cost and moderate runtime overhead
 2) Effectiveness of the Motion-consistency Score Refine- in practice.
ment Module: We visualize the distribution of the top-k
hierarchical motion feature distances from test samples to F. Parameter Study
normal anchor samples in Figure 9. As shown, anomalous
 We tested how our model perform under different paframes consistently result in larger distances with minimal
 rameters setting, including the parameters for hierarchical
overlap to the normal distribution. This clear separation
 motion feature extraction, size of detection window size,
in distance distributions validates the effectiveness of our
 and the number of user prompts.
hierarchical motion features in discriminating abnormal
 1) Parameters for Hierarchical Motion Features: In this
events from normal behavior.
 experiment, we evaluate the model detection performance
 under different patch numbers (L) and time intervals (∆t)
E. Analysis of Prompt Robustness and Inference Cost on four sub-datasets: Bike Roundabout 03, Farmland In-
 We evaluate the robustness of the heuristic scene-specific spection, Solar Panel Inspection 01, and Vehicle Roundprompts by repeating prompt generation five times for each about 02. L controls the spatial partition factor, and ∆t
detection scene and recording the corresponding model per- control the temporal interval for motion feature extraction.
formance, estimated cost, and inference time. The results is As illustrated in Figure 11, the impact of these parameshown in Figure 10. The left panel shows the mean AUC- ters is highly scene-dependent. Generally, the roundabout
ROC (%) across repetitions, with shaded areas representing datasets exhibit greater sensitivity to parameter variations
±1 standard deviation. For most scenes, performance re- compared to the inspection datasets, with ∆t having a more
mains relatively stable, with limited variation in Railway pronounced influence on performance than L.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 13

 Bike roundabout (03)
 0.50 Farmland inspection

 AUC-ROC (%)

 AUC-ROC (%)
 Solar panel inspection (02)
 0.45 Vehicle roundabout (02)
 Spectral entropy 0.40
 0.35
 0.30 (a) Bike roundabout (03) (b) Farmland inspection

 0.25
 0.20

 AUC-ROC (%)
 AUC-ROC (%)
 0.15
 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0
 Delta t

Fig. 12. Spectral entropy of different dataset under different time interval.
 (c) Solar panel inspection (02) (d) Vehicle roundabout (02)

 80
 78.96 Fig. 14. Model performance under varying threshold for outlier (ζ) and
 79 scene change (τs ).
 78.36
 77.99
 78
 77.21
 AUC-ROC (%)

 77 ity between normal and anomalous patterns.
 3) Parameters for Motion Reduction: To evaluate the
 76
 robustness of the stabilization module, we conducted a
 75 sensitivity analysis on the outlier proportion threshold ζ ∈
 74.21 [0.7, 0.9] with step 0.05 and scene-change threshold τs ∈
 74
 [0.07, 0.47] with step 0.05 across four representative sub-
 1 5 10 15 20 datasets. As shown in Figure 14, the AUC-ROC remains
 K s and K m
 highly stable across the entire tested range. Specifically,
Fig. 13. Overall model performance under various setting of Ks and Vehicle Roundabout 02 exhibits completely constant per-
Km . formance, while Farmland Inspection shows only negligible
 variation, smaller than 0.008%. Bike Roundabout 03 and
 Solar Panel Inspection 02 exhibit relatively larger but still
 To further investigate this phenomenon, we quantified minor fluctuations, with maximum variation within 1.07%,
the motion complexity of each dataset using spectral respectively. Overall, the ego-motion reduction module
entropy (Figure 12). The results indicate that the two benefits most from retaining more reliable inliers (high ζ)
roundabout datasets involve more intricate motions, in- while keeping the reference frame fresh (low τs ). These
creasing the temporal interval helps stabilize motion pat- results demonstrate that the module is highly robust within
terns and resulting in superior performance. Specifically, typical operating ranges, primarily due to the built-in
Bike and Vehicle Roundabout reaches its peak performance RANSAC rejection mechanism and the Kalman filter.
at ∆t = 12 and ∆t = 16, respectively. In contrast, 4) Detection Window Size and Number of Prompts: As
the two inspection datasets demonstrate higher robustness shown in Table VII, performance varies with the window
across different t settings. These observations suggest that size ω. At ω = 1s, the model achieves an AUC-ROC
complex scenes favor longer temporal intervals to establish of 75.86%. Increasing the window size to 2s improves
stable motion representations. L mainly impacts the gran- performance to 77.99%. However, further expansion to 4s
ularity of hierarchical motion features, which is also scene or 6s yields no additional gain, with performance slightly
dependent, but a moderate value can balance computation declining to 77.39% and 77.14%, respectively. The peak
efficiency and performance. Overall, these results indicate performance (80.05%) occurs at ω = 10s, suggesting that
that moderate values of L and ∆t provide a practical and longer temporal contexts enhance model stability.
reproducible compromise for unseen scenes, although they Regarding the number of prompts, a single prompt yields
do not eliminate the need for more adaptive parameter a relatively low AUC-ROC of 68.69%, likely due to limited
selection in future work. semantic guidance. Performance consistently improves as
 2) Parameters for Consistency Refinement: We further the number of prompts increases from 2 to 5, peaking at
investigate the sensitivity of our model to the number of 77.99%. This trend suggests that a higher prompt diversity
semantic and motion neighbors, Ks and Km (Figure 13). enhances semantic coverage and contextual understanding.
For simplicity, we set Ks = Km = K in this experiment. However, increasing the count to 6 causes a drop to
The results exhibit a rise-then-fall trend as K increases. 71.11%, likely due to redundancy from excessive prompts
Initially, increasing K from 1 to 15 yields a steady per- that confuses the model’s decision-making. These results
formance gain, suggesting that a broader context helps highlight that a balance between prompt diversity and
mitigate local noise and promotes model performance. The conciseness is crucial for maximizing detection efficacy.
performance reaches its peak at K = 15. However, a slight 5) Model Robustness under Various MLLM Models:
degradation is observed when K exceeds this threshold, Table VIII presents the detection performance and memory
which is likely because an excessively large K introduces usage of different MLLMs on the Drone-Anomaly dataset.
irrelevant neighbors, leading to reduced discriminative abil- Within the InternVL2 series, the AUC-ROC score consis-

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

 TABLE VII
M ODEL D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE ON D RONE -A NOMALY DATASET Nevertheless, several limitations of the current frame-
 UNDER D IFFERENT S ETTINGS OF D ETECTION W INDOW S IZE ω ( S ) work should be acknowledged. First, the current framework
 AND N UMBER OF P ROMPTS
 remains computationally expensive due to the combined
 ω (s) AUC-ROC (%) Prompts numbers AUC-ROC (%) cost of ego-motion reduction MLLM inference. Runtime
 1 75.86 1 68.69 analysis shows that the dual-stream refinement module
 2 77.99 2 76.85 introduces negligible overhead, whereas the dominant la-
 4 77.39 3 75.76
 6 77.14 4 77.82 tency arises from MLLM inference, followed by ego-
 8 78.67 5 77.99 motion reduction. As a result, the present implementa-
 10 80.05 6 71.11 tion is more suitable for offline analysis or near-online
 monitoring than for strict real-time onboard deployment
 TABLE VIII
M ODEL D ETECTION P ERFORMANCE OF D IFFERENT MLLM M ODELS on edge devices. Future work will investigate lightweight
 ON D RONE -A NOMALY DATASET motion estimation, more efficient multimodal models, and
 edge-cloud collaborative deployment to improve practi-
 Model Memory usage AUC-ROC
 InternVL2-1B 5716 MiB 62.06 %
 cal efficiency. Second, the proposed framework does not
 InternVL2-2B 7944 MiB 63.09 % fundamentally resolve hallucinations caused by imperfect
 InternVL2-4B 12160 MiB 76.06 % alignment between visual evidence and linguistic priors
 InternVL2-8B 20248 MiB 77.99 %
 Qwen3-VL-2B-Instruct 20034 MiB 60.97 %
 [64]. Although the semantic score aggregation strategy im-
 Qwen3-VL-2B-Thinking 23478 MiB 61.96% proves anomaly discrimination ability overall, it may also
 Note:The reported memory usage corresponds to the peak value propagate erroneously high scores to semantically related
 observed during the inference phase. normal clips. Future work will explore more principled
 approaches to improving the reliability of MLLM-based
 anomaly reasoning, including reinforcement learning [65],
tently improves with model size, increasing from 62.06 % and confidence-aware fine-tuning [66].
(1B) to 77.99 % (8B). This indicates that enlarging the
visual–language capacity significantly enhances the ability R EFERENCES
of model to capture subtle motion and contextual cues in [1] Y. Zhong, R. Zhu, G. Yan, P. Gan, X. Shen, and D. Zhu, “Inter-clip
aerial scenes. Meanwhile, the GPU memory usage grows feature similarity based weakly supervised video anomaly detection
nearly linearly with model parameters, from 5.7 GB to 20.2 via multi-scale temporal mlp,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and
 Systems for Video Technology, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1961–1970, 2025.
GB, showing good scalability for inference deployment. [2] Y. Fan, Y. Yu, W. Lu, and Y. Han, “Weakly-supervised video
 In contrast, both Qwen3-VL-2B variants require sub- anomaly detection with snippet anomalous attention,” IEEE Transstantially more memory than InternVL2-2B, reaching actions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 34, no. 7,
 pp. 5480–5492, 2024.
20.0–23.5 GB, owing to their deeper cross-modal attention. [3] J. Chen, X. Cao, P. Yang, M. Xiao, S. Ren, Z. Zhao, and D. O. Wu,
However, their detection performance does not surpass In- “Deep reinforcement learning based resource allocation in multiternVL2 models, with the Qwen3-VL-2B-Thinking variant uav-aided mec networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
 vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 296–309, 2023.
achieving only 61.96% AUC-ROC. [4] T. M. Tran, D. C. Bui, T. V. Nguyen, and K. Nguyen, “Transformer-
 Based Spatio-Temporal Unsupervised Traffic Anomaly Detection
 in Aerial Videos,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
 V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK Video Technology, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8292–8309, 2024.
 In this paper, we introduce SemAero, a novel framework [5] Z. Chen, J. Wu, W. Wang, W. Su, G. Chen, S. Xing, M. Zhong,
 Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, L. Lu, et al., “Internvl: Scaling up vision
that explores MLLMs for aerial video anomaly detection. foundation models and aligning for generic visual-linguistic tasks,”
SemAero can detect both behavior-related and semantic in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
anomalies, while providing not only frame-level anomaly and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 24 185–24 198.
 [6] P. Jin, L. Mou, G.-S. Xia, and X. X. Zhu, “Anomaly Detection
scores but also natural language explanations. We acknowl- in Aerial Videos With Transformers,” IEEE Transactions on Geoedge that the current framework does not automatically science and Remote Sensing, vol. 60, pp. 1–13, 2022.
determine the scene-wise optimal values for completely [7] X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Sui, C. Qin, Y. Che, and Z. Guo, “Anomaly detection in cropland monitoring using multiple view vision transformer,”
unseen scenes. A possible solution is to use unsupervised Scientific Reports, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 14147, Apr. 2025.
scene statistics to guide the selection. [8] I. Bozcan and E. Kayacan, “Context-dependent anomaly detection
 Although this work is evaluated on aerial video anomaly for low altitude traffic surveillance,” in 2021 IEEE International
 Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May 2021, pp.
detection benchmarks, several design elements of SemAero 224–230.
may also be useful for broader video understanding tasks. [9] S. Hamdi, S. Bouindour, H. Snoussi, T. Wang, and M. Abid, “End-
In particular, the ego-motion reduction module may gener- to-end deep one-class learning for anomaly detection in UAV video
 stream,” Journal of Imaging, vol. 7, no. 5, p. 90, May 2021.
alize to moving-platform settings, while the scene-specific [10] D. Avola, L. Cinque, A. Di Mambro, A. Diko, A. Fagioli, G. L.
prompting strategy and dual-stream consistency refinement Foresti, M. R. Marini, A. Mecca, and D. Pannone, “Low-altitude
may benefit video analysis tasks that require joint semantic aerial video surveillance via one-class SVM anomaly detection from
 textural features in UAV images,” Information, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 2,
and motion modeling under limited annotations. Recent Jan. 2022.
advances in few-shot action recognition [41], audio-visual [11] D. Cavaliere, A. Saggese, S. Senatore, M. Vento, and V. Loia,
event localization [43], compositional zero-shot learning “Empowering UAV scene perception by semantic spatio-temporal
 features,” in 2018 IEEE International Conference on Environmental
[44], and robust gaze estimation [45] further suggest the Engineering (EE), Mar. 2018, pp. 1–6.
broader value of structured semantic modeling and cross- [12] C. Chen, X. Liu, M. Song, L. Li, S. Yuan, X. Yu, and S. Pang,
modal reasoning. Exploring such broader applicability be- “Unveiling context-related anomalies: Knowledge graph empowered
 decoupling of scene and action for human-related video anomaly
yond aerial anomaly detection will be an important direc- detection,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
tion for future work. Technology, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 8071–8085, 2025.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

LI et al.:TOWARDS SEMANTIC-AWARE AERIAL VIDEO ANOMALY DETECTION BY EXPLOITING MULTIMODAL LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL 15

[13] D. Cavaliere, V. Loia, A. Saggese, S. Senatore, and M. Vento, “A [32] T. Yuan, X. Zhang, B. Liu, K. Liu, J. Jin, and Z. Jiao, “Surveillance
 human-like description of scene events for a proper UAV-based Video-and-Language Understanding: From Small to Large Multivideo content analysis,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 178, pp. modal Models,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
 163–175, Aug. 2019. Video Technology, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 300–314, Jan. 2025.
[14] G. S., M. P. M.M., U. Verma, and R. M. Pai, “Semantic segmentation [33] H. Du, S. Zhang, B. Xie, G. Nan, J. Zhang, J. Xu, H. Liu,
 of UAV aerial videos using convolutional neural networks,” in 2019 S. Leng, J. Liu, H. Fan, et al., “Uncovering what why and how:
 IEEE Second International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and A comprehensive benchmark for causation understanding of video
 Knowledge Engineering (AIKE), June 2019, pp. 21–27. anomaly,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
[15] X. Cai, Y. Qian, C. Wang, X. Peng, Y. Qian, and J. Wu, “Semantic Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 18 793–18 803.
 boosting via knowledge sharing and feedback for video anomaly [34] Y. Pu, X. Wu, L. Yang, and S. Wang, “Learning prompt-enhanced
 detection,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video context features for weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,”
 Technology, pp. 1–1, 2026. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 33, pp. 4923–4936,
[16] C. Xu, K. Xu, X. Jiang, and T. Sun, “Plovad: Prompting vision- 2024.
 language models for open vocabulary video anomaly detection,” [35] R. Liang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, and X. Li, “Text-driven traffic anomaly
 IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, detection with temporal high-frequency modeling in driving videos,”
 vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 5925–5938, 2025. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
[17] H. Zhang, X. Xu, X. Wang, J. Zuo, X. Huang, C. Gao, S. Zhang, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 8684–8697, 2024.
 L. Yu, and N. Sang, “Holmes-vau: Towards long-term video [36] K. Lin, L. Li, C.-C. Lin, F. Ahmed, Z. Gan, Z. Liu, Y. Lu,
 anomaly understanding at any granularity,” in Proceedings of the and L. Wang, “SwinBERT: End-to-end transformers with sparse
 Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. attention for video captioning,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on
 13 843–13 853. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). New Orleans,
[18] Y. Zhong, G. Yan, Y. Hu, D. Zhu, and R. Zhu, “A two-stage frame- LA, USA: IEEE, June 2022, pp. 17 928–17 937.
 work with memory for anomaly detection via video decomposition [37] J. Xie, G. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Sun, H. Chen, Y. Zhuang, and J. Li,
 and bidirectional consistency,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and “LLaMA-Unidetector: An LLaMA-Based Universal Framework for
 Systems for Video Technology, 2025. Open-Vocabulary Object Detection in Remote Sensing Imagery,”
[19] Y. Chang, Z. Tu, W. Xie, and J. Yuan, “Clustering driven deep IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 63, pp.
 autoencoder for video anomaly detection,” in Computer Vision – 1–18, 2025.
 ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August [38] Y. Tang, J. Bi, S. Xu, L. Song, S. Liang, T. Wang, D. Zhang, J. An,
 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XV. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer- J. Lin, R. Zhu, A. Vosoughi, C. Huang, Z. Zhang, P. Liu, M. Feng,
 Verlag, 2020, p. 329–345. F. Zheng, J. Zhang, P. Luo, J. Luo, and C. Xu, “Video understanding
[20] Y. Chang, Z. Tu, W. Xie, B. Luo, S. Zhang, H. Sui, and J. Yuan, with large language models: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on
 “Video anomaly detection with spatio-temporal dissociation,” Pat- Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, pp. 1–1, 2025.
 tern Recognition, vol. 122, p. 108213, 2022. [39] Q. Peng, B. Planche, Z. Gao, M. Zheng, A. Choudhuri, T. Chen,
[21] S. Sun, J. Hua, J. Feng, D. Wei, B. Lai, and X. Gong, “Delving into C. Chen, and Z. Wu, “3d vision-language gaussian splatting,” in
 instance modeling for weakly supervised video anomaly detection,” International Conference on Learning Representations, Y. Yue,
 IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, A. Garg, N. Peng, F. Sha, and R. Yu, Eds., vol. 2025, 2025, pp.
 2025. 61 008–61 031.
[22] Z. Yang, Y. Guo, J. Wang, D. Huang, X. Bao, and Y. Wang, [40] Q. Peng, C. Bai, G. Zhang, B. Xu, X. Liu, X. Zheng, C. Chen, and
 “Towards video anomaly detection in the real world: A binariza- C. Lu, “Navigscene: Bridging local perception and global navigation
 tion embedded weakly-supervised network,” IEEE Transactions on for beyond-visual-range autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the
 Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 4135– 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ser. MM ’25.
 4140, 2023. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025,
[23] A. Acsintoae, A. Florescu, M.-I. Georgescu, T. Mare, P. Sumedrea, p. 4193–4202.
 R. T. Ionescu, F. S. Khan, and M. Shah, “Ubnormal: New bench- [41] H. Qu, X. Shu, R. Yan, H. Gao, W. Wang, and J. Tang, “Spatiomark for supervised open-set video anomaly detection,” in 2022 temporal decoupled knowledge compensator for few-shot action
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
 (CVPR), June 2022, pp. 20 111–20 121. Intelligence, pp. 1–15, 2026.
[24] P. Wu, X. Zhou, G. Pang, Y. Sun, J. Liu, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, [42] H. Qu, R. Yan, X. Shu, H. Gao, P. Huang, and G. Xie, “Mvp-shot:
 “Open-vocabulary video anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the Multi-velocity progressive-alignment framework for few-shot action
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 27, pp. 6593–
 2024, pp. 18 297–18 307. 6605, 2025.
[25] L. Zanella, W. Menapace, M. Mancini, Y. Wang, and E. Ricci, [43] L. Xing, H. Qu, R. Yan, X. Shu, and J. Tang, “Locality-aware
 “Harnessing large language models for training-free video anomaly cross-modal correspondence learning for dense audio-visual events
 detection,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and detection,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
 Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE, June 2024, Technology, pp. 1–1, 2025.
 pp. 18 527–18 536. [44] H. Qu, J. Wei, X. Shu, and W. Wang, “Learning clustering-based
[26] M. Ye, W. Liu, and P. He, “Vera: Explainable video anomaly prototypes for compositional zero-shot learning,” in The Thirteenth
 detection via verbalized learning of vision-language models,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
 Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Con- [45] H. Qu, J. Wei, X. Shu, Y. Yao, W. Wang, and J. Tang, “Omnigaze:
 ference, 2025, pp. 8679–8688. Reward-inspired generalizable gaze estimation in the wild,” in The
[27] D. Biswas and J. Tesic, “Mmvad: A vision–language model for Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
 cross-domain video anomaly detection with contrastive learning and Systems, 2025.
 scale-adaptive frame segmentation,” Expert Systems with Applica- [46] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keytions, vol. 285, p. 127857, 2025. points,” International journal of computer vision, vol. 60, no. 2, pp.
[28] A. Singh, M. J. Jones, and E. G. Learned-Miller, “EVAL: Explain- 91–110, 2004.
 able video anomaly localization,” in 2023 IEEE/CVF Conference [47] R. Girdhar, A. El-Nouby, Z. Liu, M. Singh, K. V. Alwala, A. Joulin,
 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Vancouver, and I. Misra, “Imagebind: One embedding space to bind them all,”
 BC, Canada: IEEE, June 2023, pp. 18 717–18 726. in CVPR, 2023.
[29] A. Singh, M. J. Jones, and E. G. Learned-Miller, “Tracklet-based [48] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for
 explainable video anomaly localization,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Con- optical flow,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
 ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops 2020, pp. 402–419.
 (CVPRW), 2024, pp. 3992–4001. [49] T. M. Tran, T. N. Vu, T. V. Nguyen, and K. Nguyen, “UIT-ADrone:
[30] F. Liu, D. Chen, Z. Guan, X. Zhou, J. Zhu, Q. Ye, L. Fu, and A novel drone dataset for traffic anomaly detection,” IEEE Journal
 J. Zhou, “RemoteCLIP: A vision language foundation model for of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote
 remote sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 16, pp. 5590–5601, 2023.
 Sensing, vol. 62, pp. 1–16, 2024. [50] W. Liu, W. Luo, D. Lian, and S. Gao, “Future frame prediction for
[31] W. Chen, K. T. Ma, Z. Jian Yew, M. Hur, and D. A.-A. Khoo, anomaly detection - a new baseline,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference
 “TEVAD: Improved video anomaly detection with captions,” in 2023 on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 6536–6545.
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition [51] D. T. Nguyen, Z. Lou, M. Klar, and T. Brox, “Anomaly detection
 Workshops (CVPRW). Vancouver, BC, Canada: IEEE, June 2023, with multiple-hypotheses predictions,” in International Conference
 pp. 5549–5559. on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 4800–4809.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TCSVT.2026.3686230

16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. X, NO. X, X 2025

[52] S. Akcay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Ganomaly: Ruoheng Li received the B.S. degrees from
 Semi-supervised anomaly detection via adversarial training,” in Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astro-
 Asian conference on computer vision. Springer, 2018, pp. 622– nautics, Nanjing, China, and the Royal Mel-
 637. bourne Institute of Technology University, Mel-
[53] S. Akçay, A. Atapour-Abarghouei, and T. P. Breckon, “Skip- bourne, VIC, Australia, both in 2020, and the
 ganomaly: Skip connected and adversarially trained encoder-decoder M.S. degree from Nanjing University of Aeroanomaly detection,” in 2019 international joint conference on neural nautics and Astronautics in 2023. She is curnetworks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–8. rently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Beihang
[54] X. Wang, Y. Du, S. Lin, P. Cui, Y. Shen, and Y. Yang, “advae: A University, Beijing, China. Her research interests
 self-adversarial variational autoencoder with gaussian anomaly prior include data science and intelligent transportaknowledge for anomaly detection,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. tion.
 190, p. 105187, 2020.
[55] D. Gong, L. Liu, V. Le, B. Saha, M. R. Mansour, S. Venkatesh,
 and A. Van Den Hengel, “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly:
 Memory-augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Xuhui Liu is now pursuing his Ph.D. degree
 Vision (ICCV), 2019, pp. 1705–1714. in Beihang University, and received his B.S. de-
[56] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality gree and M.S. degree from Beihang University,
 for anomaly detection,” in 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Beijing, China in 2018 and 2021, respectively.
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020, pp. 14 360–14 369. His research interests include machine learning
[57] M. Salehi, N. Sadjadi, S. Baselizadeh, M. H. Rohban, and H. R. Ra- and computer vision.
 biee, “Multiresolution knowledge distillation for anomaly detection,”
 in 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), 2021, pp. 14 897–14 907.
[58] N.-C. Ristea, N. Madan, R. T. Ionescu, K. Nasrollahi, F. S. Khan,
 T. B. Moeslund, and M. Shah, “Self-supervised predictive convolutional attentive block for anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the
 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 2022.
[59] A. Fakhry, J. Lee, and J. Taek Lee, “Drone video anomaly detection Yutao Hu received his B.S. and Ph.D. degree
 by future segmentation prediction and spatio- temporal relational in the National Key Laboratory of CNS/ATM,
 modeling,” IEEE Access, vol. 13, pp. 22 395–22 406, 2025. School of Electronics and Information Engi-
[60] Y. CHEN, Z. LIU, B. ZHANG, W. FOK, X. QI, and Y.-C. neering, Beihang University, Beijing, China in
 WU, “Mgfn: Magnitude-contrastive glance-and-focus network for 2017 and 2022, respectively. From 2022 to 2024,
 weakly-supervised video anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in
 37th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, ser. HKU-MMLab, The University of Hong Kong.
 Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, He is currently an Associate Professor in the
 B. WILLIAMS, Y. CHEN, and J. NEVILLE, Eds., no. 1. AAAI school of computer science and engineering,
 press, June 2023, pp. 387–395. Southeast University. His research interests in-
[61] P. Wu, X. Zhou, G. Pang, L. Zhou, Q. Yan, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, clude machine learning, computer vision and
 “Vadclip: Adapting vision-language models for weakly supervised multimodal learning.
 video anomaly detection,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 6, 2024, pp. 6074–6082.
[62] W. Liu, W. Luo, Z. Li, P. Zhao, and S. Gao, “Margin learning embedded prediction for video anomaly detection with a few anomalies,”
 in Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference Xi Zhu received the B.E. degree in electronic
 on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19. International Joint Conferences and information engineering in 2010, and the
 on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 7 2019, pp. 3023–3030. M.E. degree in control science and engineering
[63] P. Wu, W. Su, G. Pang, Y. Sun, Q. Yan, P. Wang, and Y. Zhang, in 2013, both from Beijing University of Tech-
 “Avadclip: Audio-visual collaboration for robust video anomaly nology, Beijing, China, and the Ph.D. degree in
 detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04495, 2025. signal and information processing from Beihang
[64] X. Lyu, B. Chen, L. Gao, J. Song, and H. T. Shen, “Alleviating hal- University, Beijing, in 2018. He is currently
 lucinations in large vision-language models through hallucination- an Associate Researcher with the School of
 induced optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information Pro- Electronic and Information Engineering, Beicessing Systems, A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, hang University. His research interests include
 U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, Eds., vol. 37. Curran multivariate time series analysis, spatiotemporal
 Associates, Inc., 2024, pp. 122 811–122 832. data mining, and target behavior cognition.
[65] X. Zhu, K. Zhao, L. Yi, S. Wang, Z. Wang, B. Zhu, H. Zhang, and
 X. He, “Look carefully: Adaptive visual reinforcements in multimodal large language models for hallucination mitigation,” in The
 Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
 2026. Xianbin Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[66] Z. Zhang, W. Zhou, J. Zhao, and H. Li, “Robust multimodal the B.E. and M.E. degrees in computer aplarge language models against modality conflict,” in Proceedings plications and information science from Anhui
 of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. University, Hefei, China, in 1990 and 1993,
 Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh, M. Fazel, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in information
 D. Hsu, S. Lacoste-Julien, F. Berkenkamp, T. Maharaj, K. Wagstaff, science from the University of Science and
 and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 267. PMLR, 13-19 Jul 2025, pp. 77 233– Technology of China, Hefei, in 1996. He is
 77 253. currently a Professor with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang
 University, Beijing, China. His current research
 interests include intelligent transportation systems, air traffic management, and intelligent computation.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.