IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026 1633

 TraceHG: An Unsupervised Dual-View Framework
 for Microservice Anomaly Detection
 Ningning Han, Member, IEEE, Siyang Lu , Member, IEEE, Zaichao Lin, Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
 Bin Li, Member, IEEE, Nan Wang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, and Xin Luo , Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Traces and logs record the behaviors and interactions
between microservices, making them indispensable for diagnosing
system anomalies. However, the intricate and flexible architecture of microservices presents significant challenges for automated
anomaly detection. Existing approaches often struggle to capture
the internal dynamics and correlations among microservices, which
limits their ability to comprehensively detect anomalies arising
from synchronous or asynchronous calls. Therefore, we categorize three prevalent anomaly paradigms in microservice systems:
intra-service, inter-service, and joint anomalies. To address these
challenges, we propose a novel unsupervised learning framework
for dual-view anomaly detection, named TraceHG. Specifically,
it constructs the trace graph composed of logs, response times,
and traces. Besides, TraceHG utilizes hypergraph transformation
to establish two views, providing comprehensive information in Fig. 1. Relationship between trace, log, and response time. A trace consists
microservices. Furthermore, we introduce a dual-view framework of multiple spans, each containing multiple logs. Response time is defined as
that leverages both a hypergraph-view and a graph-view encoders the time interval between consecutive log events, capturing fine-grained runtime
to explicitly learn associations among microservices. These two dynamics.
views, employing GCN and HGNNs, capture representations of
internal dynamics, invocations, and their associated contexts in
microservices. By constructing two minimized hyperspheres and
measuring the distances from their centers in the latent space, enterprise applications. However, substantial challenges have inwe identify anomalies based on the anomaly scores. Extensive fluence on system reliability because of its intricate and dynamic
experiments on public benchmark datasets demonstrate that the constructions. Specifically, microservices are prone to failure
proposed framework outperforms several state-of-the-art baselines from various sources, such as hardware malfunctions, misconin microservice anomaly detection.
 figurations, implementation errors, and faulty coordination in
 Index Terms—Microservice, Big Data, anomaly detection, graph service interactions. Moreover, the uncertain environment creneural networks. ated by issues like data leakage and unauthorized access further
 complicates system maintenance. In light of these challenges,
 logs play a critical role, as they are widely used to record the
 I. INTRODUCTION behaviors of each service. Simultaneously, traces describe the
 ICROSERVICE architectures typically follow a dis- invocations between microservices, providing insight into these
M tributed design, decomposing applications into multiple
independent services, each executing within its own process or
 systemic challenges. A trace represents the complete execution
 path of a user request in a distributed system, spanning multiple
container [1], [2], [3]. Due to its efficient resource allocation services or components. It records the full invocation chain
and flexible deployment, it is widely appealing to industrial and corresponding to a single request. Within each trace, the system
 generates logs that capture fine-grained runtime events during
 service execution. Fig. 1. illustrates the relationship between
 Received 3 November 2024; revised 15 January 2026; accepted 18 February
2026. Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 10 April trace, and log. As presented in the existing work [4], [5], [6],
2026. This work was supported in part by the General Program of National trace and log-based anomaly detection methods are tailored for
Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62376023 and in part by the automatically identifying and mining potential issues within
State Key Laboratory of Internet Architecture, Tsinghua University, under Grant
HLW2025MS03. (Corresponding author: Siyang Lu.) distributed systems.
 Ningning Han, Siyang Lu, Zaichao Lin, and Bin Li are with the Recent research [7], [8], [9], [10] leverage deep learning-
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University, based trace and log analysis methods to automatically detect
Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: 22120493@bjtu.edu.cn; sylu@bjtu.edu.cn;
lzc_eastchina@bjtu.edu.cn; 24120434@bjtu.edu.cn). runtime anomalies of microservice systems. Owing to the unique
 Nan Wang is with the School of Cyberspace Science and Techonology, Beijing invocation relationships in microservices, many researchers [6],
Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China (e-mail: wangnanbjtu@bjtu.edu.cn). [11], [12], [13], [14] have utilized Graph Neural Networks
 Xin Luo is with the College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China (e-mail: luoxin@swu.edu.cn). (GNNs) and their variants to capture the topology structure
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSC.2026.3667576 among traces. By leveraging graph-based message passing,
 1939-1374 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1634 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Fig. 3. Overview of TraceHG. The proposed framework consists of two main
 stages: offline training and online detection. The offline training phase utilizes
 only normal microservice logs to learn the normal behavior patterns, while the
 online detection phase applies the trained model to incoming traces for real-time
 anomaly detection.

 being unconditional. These anomalies arise from issues
 in the deployment environment, such as CPU or memory
 contention caused by co-located processes or container
 resource limits. Since these factors impact the runtime
Fig. 2. Illustration of a normal trace and three typical anomalies in the performance of services, they usually result in gradual or
microservice framework. Arrows represent invocations between microservices, persistent increases in response time for specific services
with orange indicating abnormal invocations, whereas black represents normal
 or invocation paths.
ones. The numbers above the arrows represent the microservice response time.
 r Joint anomaly: The joint anomaly can be triggered when
 strong dependencies between microservices, long invocathese models effectively capture latent relationshipes in invo- tion chains, or a critical service fails [17], [18]. It can
cation chains of microservices. cause a cascading reaction across multiple distributed
 Despite the success of existing trace and log-based mi- nodes. Unlike intra- or inter-service anomalies that are
croservice anomaly methods they still suffer from a significant localized, joint anomalies often manifest as a series of
limitation. Specifically, the significance of response time as a abnormal response times across multiple services along the
manifestation of microservice behavior has been overlooked, invocation path. For instance, if a payment service slows
which hinders comprehensively detecting anomalies. To de- down, upstream services like order processing, inventory,
scribe system performance at a more granular level, we define the and even user-facing APIs may not immediately fail, but
response time as the time interval between every two consecutive will experience progressively increasing delays. This lalog events. In practice, anomalies in microservice systems often tency propagation leads to queuing, retries, and eventually
manifest as abnormal patterns in response time sequences. As system-wide degradation.
shown in Fig. 2, there are three commonly observed types of These three scenarios demonstrate that response time is a key
anomalies, each exhibiting distinct temporal characteristics. The behavioral signal that reflects both local processing conditions
following summarizes their representative behaviors: and the dynamic state of microservice interactions. However,
 r Intra-service anomaly: intra service anomalies are typi- many existing trace-based approaches overlook response time
 cally caused by issues internal to a microservice, such or capture the response time implicitly, leading to the omission
 as a corrupted cache or file I/O errors, and are gener- of anomalies, particularly in the case of inter-service and joint
 ally unrelated to interactions between services [15]. These anomalies.
 anomalies usually do not have an immediate impact on the To address this issue, we propose a novel unsupervised
 response time of the overall invocation chain. However, learning framework that explicitly incorporates response time
 they can still result in localized latency spikes or irregular as a core component. Our approach is designed to capture
 timing patterns within the affected service. If such anoma- fine-grained spatiotemporal patterns from traces and logs, inlies occur frequently or persist under high load, they may troducing response time and explicitly modeling spatiotempoeventually affect downstream services, thereby evolving ral features, to improve the detection of complex anomalies,
 into inter-service anomalies and leading to broader perfor- especially, inter-service and joint anomalies in microservices.
 mance degradation. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the proposed framework is divided
 r Inter-service anomaly: The inter-service anomalies stem into offline training and online detecting. During offline trainfrom the environmental configurations under which mi- ing, normal microservice logs are used for model training.
 croservices are deployed [16]. For instance, other pro- After training, a refined anomaly detection model is employed
 cesses running in the same environment as microservices to detect microservice anomalies. To construct TraceHG, we
 occupy memory or CPU, resulting in the microservices first reorganize the recorded microservice events into traces in
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1635

chronological order. Each trace is then transformed into a graph. DeepLog [5] employs LSTM networks trained exclusively
In parallel, the log events are parsed and embedded into the graph on normal log sequences to detect deviations in real-time.
structure. Besides, the hypergraph transformed from the original LogAnomaly [8] further integrates semantic features such as
trace graph is designed to explicitly represent response time synonyms and antonyms, improving the representation of norand interaction information among microservices. Moreover, we mal behaviors without requiring anomaly labels. Similarly,
design two views: a graph view and a hypergraph view to learn LogBERT [24] utilizes transformer-based architectures with
temporal and spatial information from the trace graph and the self-supervised learning tasks to model normal log sequence
hypergraph. The trace graph and hypergraph are employed as distributions. Besides, Li et al. [25] proposed an unsupervised
inputs for the graph-view encoder and hypergraph-view encoder, multi-parameter log anomaly detection method to address the
respectively. We facilitate mutual detection by swapping the challenge of dataset diversity. Zhang et al. [26] introduced a
surrounding contexts of graph and hypergraph views. Subse- multivariate log-based anomaly detection approach tailored for
quently, two minimized hyperspheres are generated by graph distributed database systems and released a new dataset specifand hypergraph views, respectively. Finally, by combining both ically designed for such environments. Nevertheless, anomaly
graph-view and hypergraph anomaly scores calculated from detection approaches that rely solely on sequence or semantic
hyperspheres, we obtain a comprehensive objective to detect representations of log events are inadequate for meeting the
complex microservice anomalies thoroughly. In summary, the specific and complex architectural requirements of microservice
main contributions of the proposed work are as follows: anomaly detection systems.
 r We propose an unsupervised learning model based on dual
 graph and hypergraph views, capturing the correlations B. Trace-Based Anomaly Detection Methods in Microservices
 and internal dynamics in microservices to enhance the
 Traces record the execution paths, dependency relationships,
 capability of comprehensively detecting anomalies.
 r We additionally incorporate temporal information to assist and interactions among different services, offering a rich source
 of information for microservice anomaly detection [27], [28],
 in the construction of the hypergraph, explicitly detect-
 [29], [30]. Given the complex and dynamic architecture of
 ing inter-service and joint anomalies that are related to
 microservices, trace-based methods have become increasingly
 response time.
 r Extensive experiments on the public benchmark datasets popular. In particular, unsupervised trace anomaly detection
 methods have shown great promise, as they avoid the need
 show that TraceHG achieves superior performance on
 for labeled data while effectively modeling intricate service
 anomaly detection compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA)
 interactions. For example, Meng et al. [31] proposed a structurebaselines.
 based detection method that computes anomaly scores using
 The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
 tree edit distances between execution traces and identifies faulty
Section II, we survey recent related work. Section III proposes
 components by analyzing structural differences. Similarly,
our approach. Section IV shows the experiment setup and ex-
 Li et al. [32] designed a dynamic sliding window mechanism
perimental results. Section V discusses the comparison between
 and a threshold-based decision boundary to detect anomalies
single-view and dual-view approaches, as well as different log
 based on call tracking information.
processing methods. Section VI summarizes this paper and
 Recent methods further incorporate GNNs to model both
presents our future work.
 topological and temporal features of traces. TraceGra [14]
 adopts an unsupervised encoder-decoder framework combining
 II. RELATED WORK
 GNNs and LSTM networks to extract both structural and se-
 In this section, we provide an overview of log anomaly quential patterns. Likewise, BSDG [33] leverages a dual-GCN
detection and trace anomaly detection, with a focus on methods architecture with mutual attention mechanisms to learn effecbased on GNNs. We will also briefly introduce several widely tive representations from attribute dependency graphs. Other
used approaches for anomaly detection within each category. approaches explore advanced learning strategies. For instance,
 UAC-AD [34] introduces adversarial contrastive learning to
A. Unsupervised Log-Oriented Anomaly Detection Methods enhance representation learning on hard-to-distinguish samples.
 Both Li et al. [35] and Wang et al. [36] incorporate contrastive
 Traditional anomaly detection approaches for systems and
 learning and utilize multi-modal inputs, including logs and KPIs,
applications are mainly based on log analysis. When a machine
 to improve anomaly detection performance in microservice
learning or statistical model [19] on the normal state of the
 environments. Overall, unsupervised and graph-based methods
system, deviations from established behavioral patterns in new
 have emerged as effective solutions for microservice anomaly
logs are identified as anomalies. Farzad et al. [20] employed
 detection, as they can robustly handle unlabeled data and capture
radius-based fuzzy C-means and a multilayer perceptron (MLP)
 the structural complexity of modern service interactions.
network to detect suspect logs. Besides, Ying et al. [21] improved the KNN algorithm using average weighting technology,
achieving higher accuracy on unbalanced log data. III. METHODOLOGY
 More recently, unsupervised deep learning techniques have In this section, we introduce the proposed method TraceHG,
become prevalent due to the scarcity of labeled anomaly data which comprises three modules: Log and Trace preprocessand the complexity of log patterns [22], [23]. For instance, ing, Model Training and Anomaly Detection. The fine-grained
1636 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 4. Detailed architecture of TraceHG. The model operates in three stages: 1) Log and trace parsing, which includes log parsing and embedding, response time
extraction, and trace construction; 2) Model training, where the graph and hypergraph views are encoded using specialized modules; and 3) Anomaly detection, in
which anomaly scores from both views are combined to detect anomalous traces.

pipeline is shown in Fig. 4. In the Log and Trace parse module, semantic information from each word within a processed log
we preprocess the raw log sequences and response time into event into a d-dimensional vector, where d is 300 in GloVe word
log vectors and temporal vectors, separately. Simultaneously, vectors. Notably, there are composite tokens (e.g. Frameintricate relationships in microservices are extracted into trace workServlet) that must be decomposed into individual
graphs from log events. After that, in the Model Train module, words (e.g., Framework Servlet) before processing.
an unsupervised dual-view framework is used to learn poten- Simultaneously, non-character tokens such as delimiters or
tial representations. Lastly, anomaly scores generated from the operators are dropped. After each word is transformed into
dual-view framework determine whether the microservice logs a d-dimensional vector through word embedding, TraceHG
are abnormal or not. The following subsections detail the log and converts a log event into a semantic vector by aggregating
trace preprocessing, model training, and anomaly detection. all word vectors within the log event. The proposed approach
 employs TF-IDF [39], a well-established method in information
 retrieval, for aggregation, taking into account the significance
A. Log and Trace Preprocessing of each word. TF-IDF effectively measures the importance
 In this subsection, we aim to reserve as much latent infor- of words within the log event, allowing for an understanding
mation as possible from microservice logs by constructing a of the event’s semantic content during aggregation. TF (Term
trace graph that integrates monolithic log data, response times, Frequency) quantifies the frequency of occurrence of a word.
and invocation relationships. The trace graph is composed of Meanwhile, IDF (Inverse Document Frequency) gauges the
log vectors, temporal vectors, and traces, which are generated commonality or rarity of a word across all log events. The weight
through log parsing and embedding, response time extraction, of each word in the log event can be produced by T F × IDF .
and trace construction, respectively. Subsequently, the trace Subsequently, the log vector of a log event can be computed by
graph is then input into the anomaly detection model. multiplying the average of all words in the log event with their
 1) Log Parsing and Embedding: To convert raw logs TF-IDF weights. By log parsing and embedding, we standardize
into structured data, TraceHG employs the widely-used log log data, enabling subsequent analysis and anomaly detection.
parsing method called Drain [37]. This method extracts 2) Response Time Extracting: Each log timestamp records
log templates from log messages. Log messages typically when the log event occurred. To boost the proficiency of detectconsist of both constant parts, known as log templates, and ing inter-service anomalies, TraceHG extracts the time interval
variable parts, which include elements like IP addresses between two corresponding log events. Next, the time spans are
and file IDs. We retain the log templates while filtering combined by trace ID. Moreover, the significant variance in time
out the variable parts. For example, the log message: across different traces [40] (ranging from dozens to thousands
cancel.service.CancelServiceImpl-[Cancel of milliseconds) complicates the convergence of corresponding
Order]calculate refund - 18.00 can be resolved to weights, thereby posing challenges in model training. Therefore,
cancel.service.CancelServiceImpl -[Cancel significant differences between time intervals are accounted for
Order]calculate refund - <*>, where 18.00 is in the proposed approach by normalizing the extracted time
filtered. vectors. An interval between log events can be denoted by Δt.
 After log parsing, each log message is mapped to a log Furthermore, the time vector of g-th trace graph is suggested by
template. To semantic information as much as possible, log Tg = [Δt1 , Δt2 . . .Δtm ], where m is the length of the trace k.
templates are embedded using a state-of-the-art pre-trained Also, each time vector is standardized for serving as the response
embedding algorithm named GloVe [38]. GloVe extracts temporal weight WT of hyperedge.
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1637

Fig. 5. The schematic diagram of hypergraph transformation. The left part represents a graph, and the right part represents a hypergraph. The yellow log event
in the graph denotes an invocation between two microservices which correspond to the flesh pink hexagon in the hypergraph.

 3) Trace Graph Constructing: Microservice traces, rep- both graph-view and hypergraph-view encoders to map the
resented as spans, typically exhibit a complex structure graph and hypergraph into hidden space. By leveraging both
characterized by a hierarchy of service invocations. TraceHG view structures, TraceHG captures complementary relational
extracts these microservice invocations from log events. There information within microservice traces. Finally, the one-class
are four key relationships between these log events: sequential SVDD model is employed as the loss function for both views,
execution within the microservice, synchronous calls, asyn- optimizing the encoders to confine normal patterns within hychronous calls, and asynchronous responses [13]. perspheres in latent space.
 Firstly, to organize sequential execution, TraceHG gathers all 1) Hypergraph Transformation: In order to explicitly learn
logs belonging to a trace and arranges them in chronological the edge information in the log graph, the proposed model
order. Secondly, TraceHG inserts and organizes the entire trace adopts hypergraph transformation. Inspired by edge represengraph based on the type of span. For each span, we establish tation learning and message-passing mechanism [41], [42], the
its linkage with the parent span based on the communication hypergraph transformation constructs a hypergraph based on the
pattern. In the case of a Client/Server interaction, we construct original graph. Given the paramount importance of accurately
a synchronous request edge from the client-side request event in acquiring information on edges, we adopt a meticulous approach
the parent span to the corresponding server-side request event by explicitly employing message passing across edges to rein the current span. Similarly, a synchronous response edge is fine edge representations optimally. The schematic diagram is
added from the server-side response event in the current span denoted as Fig. 5. It demonstrates the process of converting a
to the client-side response event in the parent span. For Pro- normal trace graph into a hypergraph.
ducer/Consumer spans, we define an asynchronous edge from The original trace graph can be denoted by G = {X, A},
the producer event of the parent span to the consumer event in where X ∈ Rn×d is the embedding feature matrix of each trace
the current span. graph, A ∈ Rn×n is the adjacency matrix of G. According to
 Lastly, we construct the trace graph by treating each log hypergraph duality and the concept of edge representation [42]
event as a node. Directed edges are established between nodes within graphs, the edges and nodes of the original trace graph
based on their invocation relationships, with the corresponding are transformed into the nodes and hyperedges of a hyperresponse time used to define the edge weight. The edge attributes graph. Given the origin graph G = {X, A}, the hypergraph
indicate the type of interaction, including synchronous calls, G ∗ = {E, Z ∗ } is transformed by converting graph edges and
asynchronous messages, or sequential execution. The processed nodes. Nodes embedding feature matrix in the hypergraph can
response time vector is thus naturally integrated into the graph be represented by:
structure through edge weights and serves as a key feature for
hypergraph construction. 1
 E[k, :] = WT · X ∗ = WT · (X[i, :] + X[j, :]) , (1)
 2
B. Model Training
 where ek = (vi , vj ) and WT is the temporal interval weight.
 In this subsection, a dual-view anomaly detection approach Besides, Z ∈ Rn×m is the incidence matrix of the origin trace
is employed to enhance the comprehensiveness of microservice graph that represents the relationship between each node and
anomaly detection. This phase begins by transforming the pro- edge. Z ∗ = Z T ∈ Rm×n is defined as the hypergraph incidence
cessed trace graph into a hypergraph. Additionally, we introduce matrix. Since the structural and attribute information of the
1638 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

trace graph is equivalent to the derived hypergraph, we intro- {E, Z ∗ } is fed into the HGNN, generating the hypergraph-level
duce a simple yet effective augmentation during the hypergraph representation ĥe , which is defined as follows:
transformation process. TraceHG drops unnecessary edges from
the hypergraph. To mitigate the risk of introducing additional ĥe = fHyperGN N (E, Z ∗ ), (8)
anomalous nodes or edges, we randomly remove nodes from  
 −1 −1
the hyperedges according to an i.i.d. Bernoulli distribution. It he (l) = σ Dv 2 Z ∗ We Dh−1 Z ∗T Dv 2 h(l−1)
 e η (l) , (9)
is worth noting that the partial disruption of high-order rela-
 (l)
tions does not significantly affect the semantics of hyperedge where he denotes the l-th hidden layer representation. When
 (0)
representations. On the contrary, it can provide abundant repre- l = 0, he = E. And, σ(·) is a nonlinear activation function
 
sentations of the vanilla trace graph. and the T anh is adopted here. η (l) ∈ Rd×d denotes learnable
 2) Graph-View Encoder: Graph view and hypergraph view parameters of HyperGNN. The weight matrix of hyperedges,
are used to explicitly learn the representations of nodes and denoted as We , is defined as the identity matrix.
edges in the trace graph, respectively. Therefore, n (node) and e The diagonal node degree matrix Dv and hyperedge degree
(edge) are employed as subscripts for these two perspectives of matrix Dh of Z ∗ are represented as follow:
representation. Given the capability of extracting latent features 
from trace log events, Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) [43] Dv (i, i) = Z ∗ (i, j), (10)
is adopted as the off-the-shelf graph encoder in graph view. The j

graph-view encoder takes the graph G as input, and outputs the 
 Dh (j, j) = Z ∗ (i, j). (11)
graph-level context embedding ĥn :
 i
 ĥn = fGCN (X, A), (2) (L)
 The representation he is obtained from the hypergraph-view
where A represents the adjacency matrix of the trace graph G. encoder. Furthermore, the hypergraph-level representation ĥe is
 (l)
In the GCN model, the representation of nodes hn is computed generated from the average readout function:
as follows:
     1  hN
 −1 −1
 hn (l) = σ Dn 2 ÃDn 2 h(l−1)
 n θ(l) , (3) ĥe = Readout h(L)
 e = h(L) [i, :] (12)
 Nh i=1 e
 hn (0) = X, (4)
 where Nh represents the number of nodes in hypergraph G ∗ .
where σ(·) is nonlinear activation function and the P ReLU 4) Loss Function: The behavior of normal trace events con-
 
is adopted here; θ ∈ Rd×d is learnable parameters of the l-th sistently exhibits similarity, whereas abnormal trace events show
 (l)
hidden layer; hn denotes the representation of the l-th hidden greater variability. Therefore, One-class SVDD [45] is employed
 (0) to train a minimized hypersphere using normal embedding veclayer. Specifically, hn is assigned by the initial feature embedding matrix X. Dn denotes the diagonal node degree matrix as tors, which serve as the loss function. Both the graph view and
follows: hypergraph view utilize the minimized hypersphere. The graph
  loss function is defined as follows:
 Dn (i, i) = Ã(i, j), (5)
 j 1 
 N  
 Lgraph = max ||ĥn − cg || − Rg2 , 0
where Ã is the self-connected adjacency matrix suggested by: μg N n=1

 Ã = A + I. 1  (l) 2
 (6) L
 + Rg2 + ||θ ||F , (13)
 (L)
 The representation hn from the L-th layer serves as the λ
 l=1
representation of the final node in the graph-view encoder. The
graph-level representation ĥn of the trace graph can be derived where cg is the center of the graph-view hypersphere; N is
utilizing an average readout function: the number of trace graphs; L is the number of layers in the
 graph-view encoder, 2 is adopted here; Rg is the radius of the
   1  (L)
 Ng
 hypersphere. It is important to note that frequent updates to
 (L)
 ĥn = Readout hn = h [i, :], (7) the centers of the hypersphere have negligible effects, and as
 Ng i=1 n
 aresult, the centers are not updated after the initial epochs.
 1 L (l) 2
where Ng represents the number of nodes in trace graph G. λ l=1 ||θ ||F is a weight decay regularizer of graph-view
 3) Hypergraph-View Encoder: Following the hypergraph parameters. Additionally, μg is a hyperparameter that balances
transformation, the hypergraph is obtained. A hypergraph con- the volume of the hypersphere and also controls the updates to
sists of a set of hyperedges and nodes, which are respectively Rg . In TraceHG, Rg is updated only after the warming epochs.
transformed from the nodes and edges of the original trace We train the hidden representations of normal trace graphs to
graph. Similarly, we adopt the hypergraph-view encoder to map be as compact as possible, in order to distinguish them from
features of the hypergraph into the hidden space. The two-layer abnormal trace graph representations. Similarly, the hypergraph
hypergraph graph neural network (HyperGNN) [44] is employed view also defines a hypersphere. The hypergraph-view loss
as the hypergraph-view encoder network. Hypergraph G ∗ = function, Lhypergraph , is analogous to that of the graph view.
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1639

 TABLE I
 SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS Algorithm 1. Anomaly Detection Algorithm of TraceHG
 Require: Raw Logs R; Batch Size B; Number of training
 epoch E.
 Output: Anomaly detection function fGCN and fHyperGN N .
 Initialize graph-view encoder parameter θ and
 hypergraph-view encoder parameter η.
 Initialize two hypersphere centers cg and ch .
 Initialize hyperparameters μ and α.
 Extract log vector and trace graph from raw logs. Then,
 construct graph-view input G{X, A}
 Transform G to hypergraph-view input G ∗ {E, Z ∗ }
 / ∗ T raining Stage ∗ /
 for epoch = 1 to Epoch do
 batch ← − G and G ∗ is divided with batch size by random.
 for batch ∈ Batch do
 Obtain the graph-view representation ĥn via
 (2) and (7).
 Obtain the hypergraph-view representation ĥe
 via (8) and (12).
 Calculate the graph-view loss Lgraph via (13).
The center ch and radius Rh of the hypergraph hypersphere are Calculate the hypergraph-view loss Lhypergraph .
also obtained. Calculate the total loss Ltotal through Lgraph and
 In the training phase, the train dataset only contains normal Lhypergraph via (14).
trace graphs. The total loss function is composed of the graph Back propagate and update trainable parameters θ
loss function and the hypergraph loss function: and η depends on Ltotal .
 end for
 Ltotal (θ, η) = (1 − α)Lgraph + αLhypergraph , (14) Update Rg and Rh after warming epochs.
where α ∈ (0, 1) is hyperparameter to balance graph-view and end for
hypergraph-view loss. / ∗ Inf erence Stage ∗ /
 To reduce oscillations of the gradient, the momentum update for Gi ∈ G, Gi∗ ∈ G ∗ do
is involved in optimization: Calculate graph-view anomaly score Sgraph via (16).
 Calculate hypergraph-view anomaly score Shypergraph
 − optimize(θ, ∇θ Ltotal (θ, η), γ),
 θ← (15) via (17).
where γ represents the learning rate. In this context, the updates end for
are calculated solely from the gradients concerning θ, employing
the Adam [46] optimizer. Additionally, TraceHG uses the total
loss function to optimize the hypergraph-view encoder in order IV. EXPERIMENT
to ensure the consistency of optimization goals.
 In this section, we conduct a series of experiments on bench-
C. Anomaly Score Computation mark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
 model. Specifically, we aim to answer the following questions:
 In the inference phase, the processed trace graphs are fed into RQ1: How efficient is the proposed method compared with
the graph-view encoder and the hypergraph-view encoder, which SOTA baselines? RQ2: Can graph-view and hypergraph-view
generate anomaly scores, respectively. The scores are calculated benefit each other and enhance their anomaly detection capabilias follows: ties? RQ3: How do different components affect the performance
 Sgraph (G) = ||fGCN (X, A) − cg ||2 − Rg2 , (16) of TraceHG? RQ4: How does response time affect the performance of TraceHG? RQ5: How is the scalability of TraceHG
 Shypergraph (G ∗ ) = ||fHyperGN N (E, Z ∗ ) − ch ||2 − Rh2 . (17) on the large-scale synthetic dataset? RQ6: How do different
 The anomaly scores measure the shortest distance from the hyper-parameter values affect the performance of the proposed
graph-view and hypergraph-view representation vectors to the approach?
centers of their respective hyperspheres. Normal log samples
exhibit a relatively compact hypersphere, while abnormal samples are usually distributed outside the hypersphere. If either A. Experiment Settings
anomaly score is greater than zero, the trace is classified as an 1) Datasets: Our research is based on three public datasets:
anomaly. The algorithm for the entire pipeline is presented in Train Ticket, MicroSS, and TraceBench. The details of these
Algorithm 1. datasets are outlined below.
1640 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 TABLE II TABLE III
 THE SUMMARY OF ADOPTED BENCHMARK DATASETS THE SUMMARY OF ADOPTED BASELINES

 Train Ticket: [47] is a medium-scale open-source microservice system based on distributed architecture. The latest release
version of the Train Ticket microservice system is applied for
our research. Train Ticket consists of 45 microservices utilized
for accomplishing the related business of train ticket booking.
The Train Ticket dataset contains 14 types of anomalies. The
number of traces and each type of anomaly is shown in Table II.
Based on the causes of anomalies, we categorize them into three
paradigms of anomaly.
 MicroSS: [48] is a large-scale microservice dataset compris- log sequences as False Negatives (FN). Then we calculate the
ing detailed trace data continuously collected over a period of following metrics:
two weeks, containing more than 20 million traces. This dataset r Precision: P = T P
 T P +F P
is designed to simulate anomalies that frequently occur in real- r Recall: R = T P
 T P +F N
world industrial systems. Although the dataset provides detailed
 r F1-score: F 1 = 2×(P recision×Recall)
anomaly annotations for each node within the traces, these labels P recision+Recall
are restricted to status codes (e.g., 200, 400, 500) and do not To further evaluate the comprehensiveness of anomaly deexplicitly indicate the root causes. Therefore, by re-analyzing tection, we add the accuracy of each type of anomaly into the
the manifestation patterns of these faults, we categorize them evaluation metrics.
into three distinct paradigms. The detailed statistics regarding 4) Experimental Setup: We implement the model using apthe number of traces and the distribution of each anomaly type plying Pytorch [52]. All experiments are conducted on a server
are presented in Table II. with 3.60 GHz Intel CPU and 31 G of RAM. The proposed
 TraceBench: [49], [50] is an open-source dataset designed for model is trained to employ the Adam optimizer [46]. We apply
trace-based monitoring, collected using MTracer on an HDFS a weight decay λ of 0.0001 and initialize the learning rate γ to
system deployed in a real IaaS environment. It includes traces 0.001. The parameter α is set to 0.5.
from both normal HDFS operation and scenarios with 17 in- DeepLog and TraceAnomaly offer open-source code, enjected faults, covering functional and performance issues. Over abling us to adopt them on the applied datasets. However, since
180 hours of data collection resulted in more than 300,000 traces. DeepTraLog and LogAnomaly lack public implementations, we
The data distribution is shown in Table II. TraceBench does implement their frameworks based on their papers. Notably, both
not provide specific causes or detailed categories for anomalies DeepLog and LogAnomaly operate at the log event level for
within the data, which limits our analysis to identifying anoma- anomaly detection. We arrange all log events chronologically
lies without classifying them. While conducting the experiment, and input them into the model. In the case of TraceAnomaly and
we reorganized all logs into trace graphs and used these to DeepTraLog, we provide traces and logs as input.
evaluate the methods.
 2) Baselines: To assess the effectiveness of the proposed
method, we compare TraceHG with several state-of-the-art B. RQ1: How Efficient is the Proposed Method Compared
anomaly detection approaches. Specifically, we employ four With SOTA Baselines?
leading log-based or trace-based anomaly detection methods as To validate the effectiveness of TraceHG, we compared
baselines, as described in Table III. DeepLog and LogAnomaly TraceHG with four state-of-the-art methods. The experiments
are representative log-based methods, while TraceAnomaly and were conducted on publicly available datasets. The results of
DeepTralog integrate both log and trace data to detect microser- the Train Ticket dataset, as presented in Table IV, demonvice anomalies. strate that the proposed approach consistently outperforms the
 3) Evaluation Metrics: We use several evaluation metrics, four comparison methods in all evaluation metrics. Specifically,
including Precision, Recall, and F1-Score, which are commonly TraceHG achieves the highest F1-score of 96.3%, surpassing
employed in binary classification scenarios. We designate the TraceAnomaly by 26.9%, DeepTraLog by 7.0%, DeepLog by
correctly detected anomalous log sequences as True Positives 38.3%, and LogAnomaly by 34.9%. This indicates TraceHG’s
(TP), the normal log sequences erroneously identified as anoma- superior capability in identifying abnormal behaviors within
lies as False Positives (FP), and the undetected anomalous system processes. Furthermore, the proposed method achieves
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1641

 TABLE IV
 THE COMPARISON OF FOUR STATE-OF-THE-ART MODELS ON TRACEBENCH AND TRAIN TICKET

 TABLE V demonstrates superior performance, achieving the highest F1-
 THE COMPARISON OF FOUR STATE-OF-THE-ART MODELS ON MICROSS
 score of 94.1% and a precision of 95.2%. Specifically, in terms
 of F1-score, TraceHG outperforms TraceAnomaly by 36.3%,
 DeepTraLog by 0.8%, DeepLog by 16.9%, and LogAnomaly
 by 10.5%. Similarly, TraceHG achieves notable precision gains
 of 43.2%, 0.9%, 27.9%, and 22.9% over TraceAnomaly, Deep-
 TraLog, DeepLog, and LogAnomaly, respectively. It is worth
 noting that while LogAnomaly achieves the highest recall, its
 precision is considerably lower compared to TraceHG. Consistent with observations in TraceBench, log-based anomaly
 detection methods, such as LogAnomaly and DeepLog, exhibit
 a tendency to classify unseen or rare samples as anomalies.
 Consequently, TraceHG achieves a better trade-off between
the highest recall of 94.2% compared to the other four base- precision and recall, remaining the superior approach in terms
lines, showing a significant improvement over TraceAnomaly of overall detection performance.
by 27.4%, DeepTraLog by 6.1%, DeepLog by 34.3%, and To further verify TraceHG’s comprehensiveness of anomaly
LogAnomaly by 41.0%. These results suggest that TraceHG detection, we investigated the recall of three types of anomalies
consistently outperforms the four comparison methods across in the Train Ticket and MicroSS datasets. In comparison to the
all evaluated metrics. most competitive baselines, TraceHG demonstrates the compre-
 Furthermore, we conducted experiments on the TraceBench hensive capability of anomaly detection. Specifically, in terms of
dataset. TraceHG shows significantly better performance than joint anomalies, TraceHG achieves the best recall of 92.6%, outthe other approaches. As shown in Table IV, TraceHG achieves performing TraceAnomaly by 20.5%, DeepTraLog by 10.3%,
the best F1-score of 94.5%, outperforming TraceAnomaly DeepLog by 44.1%, and LogAnomaly by 50.7%. Similarly, on
by 26.1%, DeepTraLog by 4.9%, DeepLog by 14.0%, and the MicroSS dataset, TraceHG achieves superior performance
LogAnomaly by 12.0%. This highlights the superiority of in both inter-service and joint anomalies. Specifically, regarding
TraceHG in the microservice anomaly detection task. To be inter-service anomalies, TraceHG reaches 96.7% recall, surpassspecific, TraceHG achieves notable precision gains of 30.3%, ing TraceAnomaly, DeepTraLog, DeepLog, and LogAnomaly
0.03%, 26.8%, and 19.9% over TraceAnomaly, DeepTraLog, by 53.5%, 1.9%, 27.1%, and 53.6%, respectively. For joint
DeepLog, and LogAnomaly, respectively. anomalies, TraceHG achieves 93.8% recall, outperforming the
 It is important to note that while DeepLog demonstrates the aforementioned baselines by 38.1%, 0.1%, 7.5%, and 14.5%,
highest recall among all methods in TraceBench, its precision respectively.
is significantly lower compared to other approaches. This can It is important to note that since the quantity of intra-service
be attributed to the fact that DeepLog exhibits a tendency to anomalies far exceeds that of other categories in the MicroSS
classify unknown samples as anomalies, leading to a high false dataset, the overall recall is predominantly determined by this
positive rate. Therefore, in terms of overall detection perfor- type of anomaly. Consequently, although some baselines (e.g.,
mance, TraceHG remains the superior approach. LogAnomaly) achieve high overall recall, they fail to capture
 Moreover, we conducted experiments on the large-scale Mi- complex inter-service and joint anomalies effectively. Overall,
croSS dataset. As presented in Table V, the proposed TraceHG we observe that log-based methods show poorer performance
1642 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

Fig. 6. Performance comparison of different models on Train Ticket dataset. Fig. 7. Performance comparison for different types of anomalies on Train
 Ticket dataset.

than trace-based approaches in these complex scenarios. This
indicates that trace-based methods can detect microservice captures more associations between microservices. It is crucial
anomalies more efficiently by mining more structured informa- to adopt both views for detection simultaneously. Leveraging
tion. both views synergistically yields optimal anomaly detection
 Apart from these evaluation metrics, the Wilcoxon results.
signed-ranks test [53], a statistical strategy, was introduced to
further analyze the experimental results. The Wilcoxon signed- D. RQ3: How Do Different Components Affect the
ranks test is one of the simple yet effective non-parametric Performance of TraceHG?
testing methods. It evaluates the significance of the proposed To assess the contributions of different components to the
TraceHG compared to the other methods. The p-values repre- proposed model, we performed an ablation study by replacing
senting the significance are shown in Table IV. It can be observed various components in TraceHG and evaluating the impact on
that the p-values of the four baselines (TraceAnomaly, DeepTra- performance.
Log, DeepLog, and LogAnomaly) are lower than 0.05. These 1) Anomaly Score Strategy: We employed distinct anomaly
results demonstrate that TraceHG significantly outperforms the scoring strategies to determine abnormal traces while maintainother baseline methods at a significance level of 0.05. ing stability in both the GNN encoder and HGNN encoder.
 Nevertheless, the absence of specific anomaly categories in We introduced two variants of TraceHG: TraceHG-SB and
the TraceBench dataset limited our ability to evaluate the perfor- TraceHG-OCSVM. TraceHG-SB utilizes a soft boundary apmance of TraceHG in identifying each type of anomaly. Despite proach [45] instead of a conventional one-class decision boundthis limitation, we can still observe the remarkable performance ary, while TraceHG-OCSVM [54] incorporates one-class SVM
of TraceHG through the overall classification metrics. for anomaly detection instead of DeepSVDD. Analysis from
 Table IV reveals that TraceHG outperforms the other variants.
C. RQ2: Can Graph-View and Hypergraph-View Benefit Each These findings underscore the efficacy of the anomaly-scoring
Other and Enhance Their Anomaly Detection Capabilities? strategies.
 2) Encoder Model: We trained different encoder models in-
 To delve deeper into the impact of both the graph view and
 stead of the original one. In order to ensure that the dual-view
hypergraph view on TraceHG, we conducted an ablation study
 framework remained valid, only the graph-view encoder was
using the Train Ticket dataset. For clarity, TraceHG (w/o GV)
 substituted. We introduced three TraceHG variants: TraceHGand TraceHG (w/o HV) denote scenarios where only the hyper-
 GRU, TraceHG-LSTM, and TraceHG-GGNN, where the
graph view or the graph view is utilized, respectively. TraceHG
 GCN was replaced by GRU [55], LSTM [56], and GGNN [57],
indicates all components are available. As depicted in Fig. 6, we
 respectively. Results are presented in Table IV. Across both
observe that TraceHG achieves the highest F1-score at 96.3%,
 datasets, TraceHG consistently achieves either the best or the
outperforming TraceHG (w/o GV) by 11.9% and TraceHG (w/o
 second-best performance on all evaluation metrics, underscoring
HV) by 14.8%. This underscores the indispensability of both the
 the effectiveness of incorporating GCN in its design.
graph view and hypergraph view in anomaly detection.
 Meanwhile, we investigated the effect of the two views on the
 E. RQ4: How Does Response Time Affect the Performance of
accuracy of different anomaly types. As shown in Fig. 7, it is
 TraceHG?
evident that the absence of either view significantly impacts the
accuracy of detecting the three types of anomalies. This suggests To quantify the specific contribution of response time, we
that the combination of the graph view and hypergraph view conducted an ablation study by replacing response time with a
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1643

 TABLE VII
 PERFORMANCE OF TRACEHG ON SYNTHETIC DATASETS WITH VARYING
 SCALES

Fig. 8. Performance comparison with different hidden dimensions of TraceHG
on Train Ticket dataset.

 TABLE VI
 ABLATION STUDY OF RESPONSE TIME

 Fig. 9. Performance comparison with different batch sizes of TraceHG on
 Train Ticket dataset.

constant value, denoted as TraceHG with RT = 0 and RT = 1.
For the graph view, we replaced edge weights with constants increased complexity. However, TraceHG still maintains an F1-
to force the model to rely solely on topological dependencies. score above 80% (specifically, 83.3% in the 300-node setting),
Crucially, for the hypergraph view, simply removing unique time demonstrating its robust capability in identifying anomalies
values would have caused structural collapse. Therefore, we within large-scale microservice traces.
preserved the original incidence matrix constructed from the
raw trace but masked the input node features with constants. This G. RQ6: How Do Different Hyper-Parameter Values Affect the
strategy effectively eliminated response time while maintaining Performance of the Proposed Approach?
the structural integrity of the hypergraph topology.
 As presented in Table VI, TraceHG with response time con- In this section, we conducted a series of experiments on the
sistently exhibits superior performance in both ablation settings. impact of different hyper-parameters on the proposed model.
Specifically, in terms of F1-score, TraceHG outperforms the We compared TraceHG with different Hidden Dimensions and
variants with RT = 1 and RT = 0 by 3.4% and 4.0%, respec- Batch Sizes on the Train Ticket dataset.
tively. This advantage is particularly pronounced in the recall of 1) Hidden Dimension: To investigate the impact of hidden
inter-service and joint anomalies. For inter-service anomalies, dimensions on TraceHG, we varied the hidden dimension of
TraceHG surpasses the RT = 1 and RT = 0 settings by 2.1% the graph encoder within the range of 32, 64, 128, 256 and
and 3.5%, respectively. Similarly, for joint anomalies, it achieves evaluated the corresponding precision, recall, and F1-score. The
gains of 0.5% and 1.6%, respectively. These results empirically outcomes are depicted in Fig. 8. Analysis of Fig. 8 reveals that
verify that response time plays a pivotal role in distinguishing the effectiveness of the proposed method steadily enhances with
inter-service and joint anomalies. an increase in hidden dimension within the range of [32, 128].
 Nevertheless, the rate of performance improvement diminishes
 as the hidden dimension exceeds 128. Consequently, we opted
F. RQ5: How is the Scalability of TraceHG on Large-Scale
 to set the hidden dimension at 128.
 To investigate the scalability of TraceHG, we constructed 2) Batch Size: In order to explore the influence of the selecsynthetic datasets by expanding the scale of traces based on the tion of batch size, we experimented with values ranging from
Train Ticket dataset. To ensure that the original topological rela- 64, 128, 256, 512 and analyzed the corresponding metrics. The
tionships within the trace were preserved, we first identified the results are consolidated in Fig. 9. Broadly, we observe a smooth
invocation dependencies and then randomly performed cyclic enhancement in performance as the batch size escalates from 64
duplication of entire call branches. We generated two distinct to 256. However, beyond this point, augmenting the batch size
settings where traces were expanded to exceed 100 and 300 yields negligible improvements in performance. Consequently,
nodes, respectively. we settled on a batch size of 256. It is noteworthy that the selec-
 As shown in Table VII, when the trace scale increases to 100 tion of batch size impacts the construction of the hypersphere.
and 300 nodes, TraceHG exhibits a slight decline due to the The optimal batch size configuration heavily depends on the
1644 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

dataset’s characteristics, often determined by the prioritization to mine the hidden representations of microservice traces. Two
between precision and recall. hyperspheres were constructed for each view, and anomaly
 scores were computed accordingly. Across two trace datasets
 V. DISCUSSION from microservice systems, the proposed TraceHG consistently
 outperforms all baselines, achieving outstanding F1-scores. No-
 In this section, we discuss and compare single-view and dualtably, the proposed approach is capable of dealing with all types
view anomaly detection, and different log processing manners.
 of anomalies. The results on the ablation study demonstrate the
 effectiveness of the model design and the synergistic combina-
A. Single-View Vs. Dual-View tion of the graph view and the hypergraph view.
 The introduction of dual-view anomaly detection has demon- Limitations and Future Work: Although TraceHG achieves
strated unparalleled performance compared to single-view and comprehensive anomaly detection, it lacks a significant advanother methods. In the proposed TraceHG, the original trace tage in terms of detection time due to the integration of both
graph is constituted by log events and time intervals, which graph view and hypergraph view branches. In the future, we
map to nodes and edges, respectively. Single-view graph en- will continue to explore holistic microservice anomaly deteccoder learns graph-level representation which reflects semantic tion solutions that balance detection efficiency and accuracy.
information of logs and invocations between microservices. Furthermore, we aim to extend TraceHG to accommodate a
Correspondingly, in the hypergraph, the nodes and hyperedges variety of application scenarios within microservice systems.
are mapped from the edges and nodes of the original trace graph. Additionally, we plan to evaluate TraceHG across a broader
On the one hand, graph-view anomaly detection focuses on spectrum of microservice system architectures.
mining information from nodes and only implicitly captures
edge information. It is merely proficient in detecting individ- REFERENCES
ual microservice or partial invocation anomalies. On the other
 [1] A. Balalaie, A. Heydarnoori, and P. Jamshidi, “Microservices architecture
hand, hypergraph view could capture invocation and topology enables DevOps: Migration to a cloud-native architecture,” IEEE Softw.,
relationships between microservices. Moreover, it supplements vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 42–52, May/Jun. 2016.
the absence of explicit response time anomaly detection in traces [2] T. Erl, Service-Oriented Architecture: Concepts, Technology, and Design.
 Noida, India: Pearson Education India, 1900.
and perceives abundant information from microservice logs. [3] T. Cerny, M. J. Donahoo, and M. Trnka, “Contextual understanding of
Hence, the incorporation of hypergraph-view anomaly detection microservice architecture: Current and future directions,” ACM SIGAPP
enhances the capability of detecting response time and joint Appl. Comput. Rev., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 29–45, 2018.
 [4] N. Han, S. Lu, D. Wang, M. Wang, X. Tan, and X. Wei, “SKDLog:
anomalies. Self-knowledge distillation-based CNN for abnormal log detection,” in
 Proc. IEEE Smartworld, Ubiquitous Intell. Comput., Scalable Comput.
B. Topological Vs. Sequential Microservice Trace Commun., Digi. Twin, Privacy Comput., Metaverse, Auton. Trusted Veh.,
 2022, pp. 796–805.
 The proposed TraceHG treats trace and log as topology [5] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “DeepLog: Anomaly
 detection and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,”
data. On the contrary, other approaches process logs in time in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., 2017,
sequential order. Trace reflects calls and interactions between pp. 1285–1298.
microservices. Unilateral and simple sequential log processing [6] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end-to-end
 troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source data,” in
ignores the asynchronous or parallel calling relationships be- Proc. IEEE/ACM 45th Int Conf. Softw. Eng. (ICSE), 2023, pp. 1750–1762.
tween microservices. For example, when a microservice calls [7] S. Nedelkoski, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Anomaly detection from system
two sub-microservices, one exhibits swift response times while tracing data using multimodal deep learning,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf.
 Cloud Comput., 2019, pp. 179–186.
the other responds slowly. In the time dimension, the promptly [8] W. Meng et al., “LogAnomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential and
responding service holds greater relevance to the parent service. quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif.
Nonetheless, as both are sub-microservices of the parent ser- Intell., 2019, pp. 4739–4745.
 [9] R. Chen et al., “LogTransfer: Cross-system log anomaly detection for
vice, they should maintain equal importance in terms of their software systems with transfer learning,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int. Symp.
invocation relationships. Utilizing topological relationship ex- Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 37–47.
traction can retain crucial the characteristics of microservice and [10] Z. Xie et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection on microservice traces
 through graph VAE,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 2874–2884.
alleviate this issue. In the topological structure, these two sub- [11] L. Wu, J. Tordsson, E. Elmroth, and O. Kao, “MicroRCA: Root cause
microservices are assigned equal importance. Simultaneously, localization of performance issues in microservices,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP
the proposed method incorporates response time reasonably into Netw. Operations Manage. Symp., 2020, pp. 1–9.
 [12] A. Nandi, A. Mandal, S. Atreja, G. B. Dasgupta, and S. Bhattacharya,
the topology graph, ensuring it does not cause false negatives in “Anomaly detection using program control flow graph mining from exedetecting response time anomalies. cution logs,” in Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data
 Mining, 2016, pp. 215–224.
 [13] C. Zhang et al., “DeepTraLog: Trace-log combined microservice anomaly
 VI. CONCLUSION detection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proc. 44th Int. Conf.
 Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 623–634.
 In this paper, we proposed a novel unsupervised dual-view [14] J. Chen et al., “TraceGra: A trace-based anomaly detection for microsermethod named TraceHG. In TraceHG, we incorporated the vice using graph deep learning,” Comput. Commun., vol. 204, pp. 109–117,
response time of traces into our framework to effectively identify 2023.
 [15] X. Zhou et al., “Fault analysis and debugging of microservice systems:
inter-service, intra-service, and joint anomalies. Furthermore, a Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study,” IEEE Trans.
graph view and a hypergraph view were adopted simultaneously Softw. Eng., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 243–260, Feb. 2021.
HAN et al.: TRACEHG: AN UNSUPERVISED DUAL-VIEW FRAMEWORK FOR MICROSERVICE ANOMALY DETECTION 1645

[16] R. Tighilt et al., “On the study of microservices antipatterns: A catalog [42] J. Jo, J. Baek, S. Lee, D. Kim, M. Kang, and S. J. Hwang, “Edge represenproposal,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Pattern Lang. Programs, 2020, pp. 1–13. tation learning with hypergraphs,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
[17] Y. Song, R. Xin, P. Chen, R. Zhang, J. Chen, and Z. Zhao, “Autonomous 2021, pp. 7534–7546.
 selection of the fault classification models for diagnosing microservice [43] L. Yao, C. Mao, and Y. Luo, “Graph convolutional networks for text
 applications,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 153, pp. 326–339, 2024. classification,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 7370–7377.
[18] A. Ikram, S. Chakraborty, S. Mitra, S. Saini, S. Bagchi, and M. Kocaoglu, [44] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph neural
 “Root cause analysis of failures in microservices through causal discov- networks,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 3558–3565.
 ery,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 31158–31170. [45] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
[19] S. Lu, X. Wei, Y. Li, and L. Wang, “Detecting anomaly in Big Data Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
 system logs using convolutional neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 16th Int. [46] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 Conf. Dependable, Autonomic Secure Comput., 16th Int. Conf. Pervasive 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
 Intell. Comput., 4th Int. Conf. Big Data Intell. Comput. Cyber Sci. Technol. [47] X. Zhou et al., “Latent error prediction and fault localization for microser-
 Congr., 2018, pp. 151–158. vice applications by learning from system trace logs,” in Proc. 27th ACM
[20] A. Farzad and T. A. Gulliver, “Log message anomaly detection with fuzzy Joint Meeting Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., 2019,
 C-means and MLP,” Appl. Intell., vol. 52, no. 15, pp. 17708–17717, 2022. pp. 683–694.
[21] S. Ying et al., “An improved KNN-based efficient log anomaly detection [48] FlyFish, “Gaia,” 2024. [Online]. Available: http://docs.aiops.cloudwise.
 method with automatically labeled samples,” ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. com/en/gaia/
 Data, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 1–22, 2021. [49] J. Zhou, Z. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Trace bench: An
[22] S. Lu, N. Han, M. Wang, X. Wei, Z. Lin, and D. Wang, “SSDLog: A open data set for trace-oriented monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf.
 semi-supervised dual branch model for log anomaly detection,” World Cloud Comput. Technol. Sci., 2014, pp. 519–526.
 Wide Web, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 3137–3153, 2023. [50] J. Zhu, S. He, P. He, J. Liu, and M. R. Lyu, “Loghub: A large collection of
[23] S. Lu et al., “Black-box attacks against log anomaly detection with system log datasets for AI-driven log analytics,” in Proc. IEEE 34th Int.
 adversarial examples,” Inf. Sci., vol. 619, pp. 249–262, 2023. Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2023, pp. 355–366.
[24] H. Guo, S. Yuan, and X. Wu, “LogBERT: Log anomaly detection via [51] P. Liu et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice trace anomalies
 BERT,” in Proc. IEEE 2021 Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw., 2021, pp. 1–8. through service-level deep Bayesian networks,” in Proc. IEEE 31st Int.
[25] H. Uchida, K. Tominaga, H. Itai, Y. Li, and Y. Nakatoh, “Multi- Symp. Softw. Rel. Eng., 2020, pp. 48–58.
 parameter log anomaly detection with an unsupervised learning ap- [52] A. Paszke et al., “Automatic differentiation in PyTorch,” 31st Conf. Neural
 proach,” in Proc. 2024 Int. Symp. Parallel Comput. Distrib. Syst., 2024, Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA, 2017.
 pp. 1–5. [53] J. Demšar, “Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets,”
[26] L. Zhang, T. Jia, M. Jia, Y. Li, Y. Yang, and Z. Wu, “Multivariate log-based J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 7, pp. 1–30, 2006.
 anomaly detection for distributed database,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD [54] L. M. Manevitz and M. Yousef, “One-class SVMs for document classifi-
 Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4256–4267. cation,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 2, pp. 139–154, 2001.
[27] G. Yu, Z. Huang, and P. Chen, “TraceRank: Abnormal service localization [55] K. Cho et al., “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoderwith dis-aggregated end-to-end tracing data in cloud native systems,” J. decoder for statistical machine translation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical
 Softw., Evol. Process, vol. 35, no. 10, 2023, Art. no. e2413. Methods Natural Lang. Process. (EMNLP), 2014, pp. 1724–1734.
[28] C. Zhang et al., “TraceCRL: Contrastive representation learning for mi- [56] A. Graves and A. Graves, “Long short-term memory,” Supervised Secroservice trace analysis,” in Proc. 30th ACM Joint Eur. Softw. Eng. Conf. quence Labelling Recurrent Neural Netw., 2012, pp. 37–45.
 Symp. Foundations Softw. Eng., 2022, pp. 1221–1232. [57] Y. Li, D. Tarlow, M. Brockschmidt, and R. Zemel, “Gated graph sequence
[29] J. Bogatinovski, S. Nedelkoski, J. Cardoso, and O. Kao, “Self-supervised neural networks,” 2015, arXiv:1511.05493.
 anomaly detection from distributed traces,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 13th Int.
 Conf. Utility Cloud Comput., 2020, pp. 342–347.
[30] K. Aktaş and H. H. Kilinc, “Interaction prediction and anomaly detection Ningning Han (Member, IEEE) received the BS dein a microservices-based telecommunication platform,” in Proc. 2024 Int. gree in software engineering from Yanshan Univer-
 Conf. Softw. Syst. Processes, 2024, pp. 56–65. sity, Qinhuangdao, China, in 2022. She is currently
[31] L. Meng, F. Ji, Y. Sun, and T. Wang, “Detecting anomalies in microservices working toward the MS degree in cyberspace secuwith execution trace comparison,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 116, rity with the School of Computer Science and Techpp. 291–301, 2021. nology, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China.
[32] M. Li, D. Tang, Z. Wen, and Y. Cheng, “Microservice anomaly detection She is also a visiting student with the University
 based on tracing data using semi-supervised learning,” in Proc. 4th Int. of Electro-Communications, Tokyo, Japan. Her re-
 Conf. Artif. Intell. Big Data, 2021, pp. 38–44. search interests include deep learning, data mining,
[33] K. Shi, J. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Chang, and X. Li, “BSDG: Anomaly detection of and anomaly detection.
 microservice trace based on dual graph convolutional neural network,” in
 Proc. Int. Conf. Serv.-Oriented Comput., 2022, pp. 171–185.
[34] H. Liu et al., “UAC-AD: Unsupervised adversarial contrastive learning for Siyang Lu (Member, IEEE) received the PhD deanomaly detection on multi-modal data in microservice systems,” IEEE gree in computer science from University of Central
 Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 3887–3900, Nov./Dec. 2024. Florida in 2019. He is currently an associate professor
[35] Z. Li, J. Zhao, and J. Kang, “Multi-source anomaly detection for microser- with the School of Computer Science and Technolvice systems,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 46th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng., Companion ogy, Beijing Jiaotong University. His research inter-
 Proc., 2024, pp. 414–415. ests include anomaly detection and deep learning. He
[36] P. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Chen, and Z. Cao, “Unsupervised microservice has held one search grant from the National Science
 system anomaly detection via contrastive multi-modal representation clus- Foundation of China (NSFC).
 tering,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 62, no. 3, 2025, Art. no. 104013.
[37] P. He, J. Zhu, Z. Zheng, and M. R. Lyu, “Drain: An online log parsing
 approach with fixed depth tree,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Web Serv., 2017,
 pp. 33–40.
[38] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors for Zaichao Lin (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 word representation,” in Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. received the BS degree in digital media technol-
 Process., 2014, pp. 1532–1543. ogy from North China University of Technology,
[39] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic text Beijing, China, in 2023. He is currently workretrieval,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 513–523, 1988. ing toward the postgraduation degree with Bei-
[40] Y. Li, N. Du, and S. Bengio, “Time-dependent representation for neural jing Jiaotong University, Beijing. His research
 event sequence prediction,” 2017, arXiv:1708.00065. interests include information security and artificial
[41] E. R. Scheinerman and D. H. Ullman, Fractional Graph Theory: A Rational intelligence.
 Approach to the Theory of Graphs. North Chelmsford, MA, USA: Courier
 Corporation, 2011.
1646 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICES COMPUTING, VOL. 19, NO. 2, MARCH/APRIL 2026

 Bin Li (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree in Xin Luo (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
 software engineering from Hebei University, Baod- computer science from the University of Electronic
 ing, China, in 2024. He is currently working toward Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China,
 the postgraduation degree with Beijing Jiaotong Uni- in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science
 versity, Beijing, China. His research interests include from the Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2011.
 information security and artificial intelligence. He is currently a Distinguished Professor of Data
 Science and Computational Intelligence, and serving
 as the Dean of the College of Computer and Information Science, and School of Software, Southwest
 University, Chongqing, China. He has authored or
 coauthored over 400 papers (including over 190 IEEE
 Transactions/Journal papers) in the areas of Artificial Intelligence and Data
 Nan Wang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) re- Science, receiving 22,000+ Google Scholar citations with the H-Index of 87.
 ceived the BE degree from the Harbin Institute of Dr. Luo was the recipient of the Outstanding Associate Editor Award from
 Technology, Weihai, China, in 2016, and the PhD IEEE Access in 2018, IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica in 2020,
 degree from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in and from IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems in
 2021. She is currently an assistant professor with 2022-2024. He is currently serving as an Associate Editor for IEEE Transthe School of Cyberspace Science and Techonology, actions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, and IEEE/CAA Journal
 Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing. of Automatica Sinica. His Google Scholar page is given at the link https:
 //scholar.google.com/citations?user=hyGlDs4AAAAJ&hl=zh-CN.