1290 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 Ultimate Encrypted Traffic Feature Engineering:
 HTTPS Encrypted Traffic Classification Using
 Restored Application Data Unit Length
 Zihan Chen , Member, IEEE, Guang Cheng , Member, IEEE, Dandan Niu , Student Member, IEEE,
 Yuyu Zhao , Member, IEEE, Yuyang Zhou , Member, IEEE, and Shanqing Jiang , Member, IEEE

 Abstract—Over-the-top (OTT) applications mainly communi- According to the Google Transparency Report [2], as of Occate through HTTPS, the most famous encryption protocol family tober 2023, the percentage of Chrome Web pages that are
on the Internet. The classification of HTTPS encrypted traffic can encrypted has reached 98%, and almost 100% of traffic across
effectively obtain fine-grained OTT application information for
network management and cyber security. As the most expressive all Google products and services is encrypted. Despite the
feature, the side-channel length sequence is widely used by current fact that QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections, i.e. HTTPresearch, especially the packet length sequence. However, these 3.0) has been embraced by certain applications, HTTP-TLSattempts ignored interferences from protocol piecewise decoupling TCP ecosystem still constitutes the mainstream at present.
and encryption covering, leading to poor performance. Based on Encrypted traffic provides users and companies with data sethe application layer feature engineering theory, we proposed a
new metric called Application Data Unit (ADU) length to elimi- curity and privacy protection [3]. However, it brings trouble
nate the interferences. However, ADU length cannot be obtained to Internet Service Providers (ISPs) in network management
directly from packets as the TLS encryption protocol covers the (e.g. traffic acceleration), information forensics (e.g., behavior
entire application layer, which contains an intrusive and variable auditing), and cyber security (e.g., intrusion blocking), espe-
HTTP header. Hence, we designed a Length-Correction Multiple cially for Over-the-top (OTT) services and applications. Traf-
Regression Neural Network (LC-MRNN) algorithm to restore the
real ADU length sequences accurately. Exhaustive experiments in fic encryption makes it difficult to use the traditional Deep
two scenarios of the real CERNET network show that no matter the Packet Inspection (DPI) [4] method based on plaintext. There-
HTTP-1.1 or HTTP-2.0 protocol, the LC-MRNN model can achieve fore, current research on encrypted traffic classification focuses
significantly accurate ADU length restoration. In classification, on HTTPS traffic, which is also the main concern of this
with the assistance of the LS-LSTM classifier, our method outper- paper.
forms the state-of-the-art methods with about 4.2% improvement
in F1-score (93.52%). To tackle this problem, the academic realm has put forward
 encrypted traffic classification methods [5] to uphold the merits
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, application layer of timeliness, large-scale processing, transparency, and privacy
feature engineering, application data unit, length-correction
multiple regression neural network, HTTPS.
 protection in traffic-side analysis. These methods make use
 of features that are not obscured by encryption to categorize
 or identify the actual kinds of Internet services, applications,
 I. INTRODUCTION functions, and malicious intent underlying the current traffic.
 They are capable of offering effective intelligence support for
 NCRYPTED traffic has become an inevitable trend, led
E by the HTTPS (HyperText Transfer Protocol over TLS
(Transport Layer Security)) encryption protocol family [1].
 currently impaired network management and security. Nonetheless, distinct from natural language and images, encrypted traffic
 is structured sequence data in a non-Euclidean space [6]. Packets
 serve as the fundamental transmission unit, and flows act as
 Received 14 December 2023; revised 23 September 2025; accepted 25 the atomized service support. As a typical supervised learn-
September 2025. Date of publication 29 September 2025; date of current version
14 January 2026. This work was supported by the General Program of the ing problem, when disregarding data sources, encrypted traffic
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172093, in part by classification currently confronts two of the most formidable
the Joint Funds of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant challenges: (1) In the context of ever-evolving protocols, net-
U22B2025, in part by the Youth Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62402101, and in part by the Jiangsu Funding Program for work environments, and applications, which features should be
Excellent Postdoctoral Talent under Grant 2024ZB494. (Corresponding author: employed for classification? (2) Which model is most appropri-
Guang Cheng.) ate for representing these features? At present, the research in
 Zihan Chen, Dandan Niu, Yuyu Zhao, and Yuyang Zhou are with the School of
Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211102, China. this domain predominantly centers on feature engineering and
 Guang Cheng and Shanqing Jiang are with the School of Cyber Science classifier optimization.
and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211102, China, and also with Considering that features establish the upper bound of classifithe Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: chengguang@seu.edu.cn). cation performance, while models merely strive to approximate
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3615592 it, the most critical aspect in the realm of encrypted traffic

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1291

Fig. 1. HTTPS encrypted traffic transmitting protocol stack and source of
interference. Fig. 2. Procedures in encrypted traffic classification with the current research
 focuses.

analysis persists as feature engineering. Although the accuracy
upper limit is classifier-dependent [7], the gradual improve- in Fig. 2 from the perspective of the HTTPS network protocol
ment of classification accuracy shows that the limit of feature stack. Based on the Application Layer Feature Engineering
information disclosure is also gradually increasing. In other (ALFE) and Application Data Unit (ADU) length sequence
words, improving classification accuracy, especially the lower feature proposed earlier [11], we instantiate the concept of ADU
limit of classification accuracy, requires the input features to under HTTPS protocol and theoretically prove the superiority
contain as much information disclosure as possible. At present, of the ADU length sequence feature under HTTPS encrypted
feature engineering for encrypted traffic predominantly centers traffic classification. Furthermore, aiming at the problem that the
around three categories of features: residual plaintext header real ADU length is disturbed by TLS encryption and underlying
features, inter-arrival time distribution features, and length se- HTTP header with variable length, we study the sources of interquence features. Regarding generalization capabilities, length ference, including systematic error and random error. Based on
sequence features have been empirically demonstrated to exhibit removing systematic errors, we propose the Length-Correction
superior performance in the majority of classification scenarios Multiple Regression Neural Networks (LC-MRNN) algoassociated with data behavior [8]. rithm for random error reduction to restore the real ADU length
 However, the current encrypted traffic classification meth- sequences from the TLS segment length sequences. We further
ods predominantly utilize packets as the input unit. Only a instantiate LC-MRNN with the state-of-the-art LS-LSTM claslimited number of studies have employed Protocol Data Units sifier [9] into the LC-MRNN with Application Classification
(PDUs) of high-level protocols (e.g., TLS) as input units [9], (LC-MRNN-AC) model in HTTPS scenarios with both the
[10]. From the perspective of protocol engineering design, HTTP-1.1 and HTTP-2.0 application layer protocol. Finally, the
higher-level protocols are more intricately associated with the application classification of encrypted traffic with high precision
application’s behavior, whereas lower-level protocols are more is realized.
closely related to the network environment. The encrypted traffic Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
classification methods based on the length sequence of packets r On the basis of previous work ALFE [11], we have broken
or TLS segments encounter feature interference resulting from through the concept of BBP’s (Bit-Per-Peak) description of
piecewise decoupling. For instance, in the case of HTTPS, the application transmission data under streaming media [12],
data generated by OTT applications is successively encapsulated and innovatively defined the concept of ADU - a new
and segmented by the HTTP, TLS, TCP, and IP protocols. metric of encrypted traffic inputs in the HTTPS scenario
Consequently, when packets or TLS segment sequences are and use the ADU length sequence to classify encrypted
used as the source for encrypted traffic feature extraction, the traffic. By further proposing three new evaluation criteria,
disclosure of information regarding encrypted traffic features is we prove the theoretical advantages of ADU in encrypted
restricted compared to the original data. This is mainly because traffic classification compared with TLS segment and TCP
the encrypted traffic introduces two instances of segmentation packet.
and one instance of encryption interference, as depicted in Fig. 1. r We design LC-MRNN, a transformer-based ADU length
As a result, there is inconsistency between the actual data volume restoration algorithm, which can accurately restore the
and the total length of the packets, which causes errors in ADU length sequence of HTTPS traffic (both HTTP-1.1
classification. and HTTP-2.0 protocols are included). The restoration of
 In this paper, we focus on the ultimate encrypted traffic ADU length through decoding the application layer segfeature engineering, aiming to classify encrypted traffic using mentation semantics becomes the key to breaking through
the features most relevant to the data transmitted by encrypted the bottleneck of classification accuracy for encrypted traftraffic in the protocol stack. The work we have done is shown fic - this is precisely the core contribution of this paper.
1292 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE I
 ALL THE ACRONYMS USED IN THIS PAPER

 Moreover, we further instantiate LC-MRNN with our pre- In the single base model, the most classical CNN was piovious work LS-LSTM classifier [9] and A3C system [13] neered for encrypted traffic classification [15] to take advaninto the LC-MRNN-AC model. It guarantees that the clas- tage of its end-to-end learning features. And then, MLP [16],
 sification can be realized effectively and efficiently. RNN (LSTM) [17], Text-CNN [18], CapsNet [19] are used
 r We have deepened the open-world scenario and proposed in encrypted traffic classification to deal with the problem of
 the concept of the small world and the big world. We then poor representation of sequential data features by CNN. These
 collect and publish real-world HTTPS data in the large- methods use the binary or byte information of the raw packet
 scale CERNET environment with pure real application for classification.
 labels and corresponding decrypted HTTP plaintext data in However, the automatic feature extraction ability of a single
 reassembled data form. Experiments conducted in the big deep learning model is limited, which is manifested in the
 and small worlds show that LC-MRNN can effectively re- different attention to the classification accuracy of different catestore the real ADU length sequence and greatly improve the gories [20]. Therefore, with the development of semi-supervised
 classification effect of existing encrypted traffic classifiers. learning and hardware computing power, some studies tend to
 LC-MRNN-AC outperforms state-of-the-art methods. use multiple deep learning models to classify encrypted traffic
 The rest of the paper is shown as follows. Section II introduces to improve the classification effect. The most direct way is the
the main research directions of existing encrypted traffic from model overlay. It uses multiple models (usually models with
two perspectives: classifier and length feature engineering. In different structures) to make up for the feature presentation
Section III, we theoretically prove the ADU length sequence’s shortcomings of a single model.
effectiveness and formalize this paper’s research problems. In the model overlay, the representive ones are STNN [21]
Section IV puts forward the LC-MRNN algorithm and imple- (LSTM and 3d-CNN), TEST [22] (CNN and LSTM), CNN and
ments it concretely in HTTP-1.1 and HTTP-2.0 scenarios. In LSTM combined with distributed training [23], DISTILLER [6]
Section V, we conduct experiments from two perspectives to (CNN and MLP), CENTIME [24] (ResNet and AutoEncoder).
prove the method’s effectiveness. Finally, we summarize our re- Another way to combine multiple models is the model fusearch and discuss the existing problems and further research in sion, which combines multiple base model elements into a
Section VI. All the abbreviations mentioned in this paper are new neural network classifier. It includes CLD-NET [25] (seshown in Table I. rialized CNN, LSTM and Fully-Connected Network (FCN)),
 II. RELATED WORK ICLSTM [26] (Inception CNN juxtaposed with LSTM),
 SAM [27] (self-attention combined with CNN), tree-RNNs [28],
 Encrypted traffic classification pursues good performance, I2 RNN [29] (using each round of output during the itand the evaluation indexes can be accuracy, precision, recall, etc. eration of an LSTM classifier as a fingerprint), ensemble
The optimization of these indexes is reflected in each procedure Graph Neural Networks (GNN) [20]. Model fusion can furof encrypted traffic classification. ther coordinate the feature expression capabilities of different neural network elements but relies more on expert
A. Classifiers of Encrypted Traffic knowledge.
 Encrypted traffic classification is a typical supervised learning A summary of the three different schema of deep learning
problem for which the labeled sample dataset is critical [14]. In classifiers is shown in Table II.
the classification of encrypted traffic, the current mainstream In addition, some studies have applied other deep learning
classification methods have transitioned from machine learning optimization techniques to existing deep learning base models.
methods to deep learning methods. These deep learning clas- For example, incremental learning [30], explainable artificial
sifiers can be divided into three categories: single base model, intelligence [31], unknown application clustering [32], triple
model overlay, and model fusion. attention mechanism [33], multimodal learning [34].
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1293

 TABLE II TABLE III
CURRENT DEEP LEARNING MODELS IN ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION REPRESENTATIVE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC LENGTH FEATURE ENGINEERING
 WORKS

 obtained by further calculation or reconstruction of the packet
B. Encrypted Traffic Length Feature Engineering length values. The most typical is to reconstruct the PDU of the
 Feature is an essential basis of classification. A good feature packet sequence, using the PDU of the higher layer protocol as
can effectively represent the gap between different categories to the input unit to eliminate the error caused by packet-level data
achieve classification effectively. However, the current research segmentation.
suggests that direct input of all raw bytes of the flow does not In this kind of research, the representative features include
perform well in the cases of high encryption ratio [35]. It further TLS segment length sequence [46], TLS bidirectional Applievidences that the selected features are not necessarily the best cation Data (a special message type, different from ADU in
and cannot be interpreted [6]. this paper) length sequence [10], TLS bidirectional flow length
 The main reason is the non-high-dimensional optimization sequence [47] and multi-PDU length sequence [45] with its
of features (similar to natural language, traffic data will be N-gram length hyper-sequence [9] in our previous studies.
segmented into different PDUs due to the network protocol In addition to high protocol level length features, there are
stack, and the direct input of the original traffic data will lead also studies on cumulative length features [3], graphic length
to the loss of high-dimensional features) and local optimal features [48], and multi-flow features [49].
with structural features ignorance [6] (encrypted traffic, unlike A summary of different length feature engineering works
images, is structured data containing security protocols and is shown in Table III. The feature determines the upper limit
network protocol stacks, and the original traffic directly input of the classification effect, and the model only approximates
will erase such features). This phenomenon creates a serious it. However, the premise for practical feature engineering and
concept drift [36]. model building is that there should be no errors or interferences
 Encrypted traffic is essentially a packet sequence in the net- in the input. Otherwise, the significance of selected features will
work [37]. Therefore, the existing research on feature optimiza- be suppressed. This is also the problem that this paper needs to
tion mainly starts from its serialization characteristics, especially overcome.
the Markov features between packets.
 Korczy M. et al. [38] first proposed the FoSM to depict the
 III. APPLICATION DATA UNIT LENGTH SEQUENCE
change relation of message type in TLS headers. Further, TLS
handshake certificates and the first application data length were In this section, we first introduced and defined the concept
proposed, named SoB [39]. Then, Chang Liu et al. first proposed of ADU in encrypted HTTPS traffic classification. Then, we
LaFFT [40] based on fast Fourier transform, then proposed prove that the ADU length sequence is more efficient than TLS
MaMPF [41] based on message type sequence and length block segment and TCP packet length sequences. Afterwards, the
sequence, and finally proposed FS-Net [8] based on full packet ADU length interference is analyzed, and the problems to be
length and representation learning. So far, the classification of solved in this paper are also formally defined.
encrypted traffic has mainly adopted the feature of the length
sequence [42], [43], [44].
 As a result of the layered design of network protocols, data A. Application Data Unit
needs to be segmented during actual transmission. As a result, It is worth noting that ADU is not a completely new concept in
the length of packets obtained at the network layer or transport the field of networks. It has already been introduced in the QoE
layer differs greatly from that at the application layer. Subse- estimations and classifications domain (although not named
quent studies pay more attention to the high dimensional length strictly as ADU, the meaning is highly relevant), and it mainly
sequence features of encrypted traffic length sequences [45]. focuses on the fragments after the video is segmented [12].
The high dimensional length sequence feature refers to the one However, during this process, these concepts are mainly used
1294 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

to calculate the statistical features of streaming media trans- sequence exhibits the optimal classification performance in these
mission such as BBP, rather than focusing on the relationship PDUs.
between the variable headers and core body of the encrypted In addition to information gain, we also need to consider the
application layer. For the classification scenarios of encrypted real network characteristics because network protocols impose
traffic, especially the HTTPS, in our previous work, we proposed new restrictions on different PDU lengths.
the theory of ALFE [11]. In ALFE, ADU is a general name If Ethernet is used as the data link layer protocol, the length
for all PDU at the application layer. However, currently in of captured IP packets cannot exceed the default MTU (1500
the field of encrypted traffic classification, ADU has not been bytes). Therefore, the length of the TCP payload does not
clearly defined. Therefore, considering different message queue exceed 1460 bytes (the IP header is fixed at 20 bytes, and the
patterns, taking the HTTPS protocol stack as an example, we TCP header is at least 20 bytes). Therefore, two new concepts,
define the ADU in HTTPS encrypted traffic classification as namely Projection Ratio (PJR) and Occupation Ratio (OPR),
follows. are proposed to describe this feature.
 Definition 1 (ADU). ADU is all data transmitted by HTTP PJR is proposed to represent the proportion of the packet
protocol in a single request or response process: From the length value in the valid length range. OPR represents the
definition, it is evident that the distinction between BBP and coverage ratio of the number of length values in the current
ADU lies in the following aspects. Regarding encrypted videos, sample space. It is worth noting that since the TLS segment and
BBP constitutes a part of the entire encrypted protocol and ADU do not have a clear and fixed upper limit, the value interval
encompasses the application layer header. In the case of the between the maximum and minimum length values in the current
downlink stream response, ADU represents the actual size of the sample is selected as the length interval to be projected.
video fragments without the header. When it comes to HTTPS, Suppose that the sample set is X, the PDUs used in the current
BBP can be likened to the aggregation of TLS Segments. Simul- classification are u, all length values of the current PDU are L(u)
taneously, BBP depends on well-defined boundaries. It is more (including duplicates, equal to all length data), its quantity is
appropriate for streaming media videos that are transmitted in n(u) , and the number of length values that do not duplicate is
fragments. However, it is less suitable for application scenarios s(u) , then the formal expression of PJR and OPR is as follows:
such as web pages.     
 In an actual network environment, if an ADU is needed, we P JR = s(u) / max L(u) − min L(u)
only need to obtain the HTTP request body and response body,
that is, the data transmitted in the HTTP communication process. OP R = s(u) /n(u) (1)
However, TLS encrypts all HTTP contents (including headers Given the differences in the size of flows and the splicing of
and bodies). PDUs among applications, we select 50% of the PDU quantity
 of the flow with the largest number of PDUs in a certain category
 of the current dataset as the selection threshold. According to
B. Superiority of ADU Length Sequence the arrival order of PDUs (i.e., the position of PDUs in the flow,
 starting from 1), PDUs with positions less than this threshold in
 The HTTPS protocol stack has three different PDUs without each flow will be included in the calculation.
considering the IP layer. They are packet length sequence, TLS Why do we choose the position of PDU as the selection metric
segment length sequence, and ADU length sequence. The reason and set the threshold at 50%? The reasons mainly come from
for not considering the IP layer is that its fixed IP header four aspects.
length and the existence of DHCP make its features irrelevant to r Firstly, the PDU sequence input in the process of encrypted
classification. Since the ADU length is consistent with the data traffic classification is continuous, and there is a Markovian
block length transferred in each request-response pair, it strongly relationship between adjacent PDUs. The position of PDU
correlates with the data standing back from the application to be directly represents the arrival stage of data, and starting
classified. from the first position can meet the complete characteriza-
 In our prior research [11], we theoretically established the tion of the flow.
superiority of the ADU features. According to the principle [7], r Secondly, the number of packets in network flows can be
within the context of the same dataset and classification objec- approximately fitted by a Zipf distribution [50], allowing
tive, the greater the feature information gain, the more effectively us to select a moderate proportion and still obtain a large
it can differentiate samples and fulfill the classification task. proportion of PDUs.
To illustrate the superiority of the ADU length sequence in
 N
encrypted traffic classification based on datasets, we chose the 1/k s 1
CERNET-1.1 Dataset (to be detailed later) for a preliminary P (k; s, N ) = , HN,s = s
 (2)
 HN,s i=1
 i
experiment. We directly compared the relative information gains
of the ADU length sequence, the TLS Segment length sequence, During this process, the PDUs from a very small number
and the packet length sequence. The results indicate that the of flows without similar volume references can be elimrelative information gain of ADU (0.9978) exceeds that of the inated. When s = 1, the proportion of considered PDUs
TLS segment (0.9950) and is significantly higher than that of to all PDUs is approximately 1 − 0.5/ ln(N ). When N is
the TCP packet (0.8483). Hence, theoretically, the ADU length 1000, the acquisition ratio can reach 92.76%. For actual
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1295

 TABLE IV
 PJR, OPR AND FEC OF THREE DIFFERENT PDUS

 Fig. 3. Illustration of systematic and random errors in HTTPS ADU length.
 networks, the N value is much larger, and the distribution
 of flows within the same type is more concentrated, so the
 actual proportion of obtained PDUs will be even higher. C. ADU Length Interference and Restoration
 r Thirdly, we verified this theoretical result through a pre-
 However, TLS effectively encrypts the entire HTTP applicaexperiment. Taking the CERNET-1.1 dataset as an exam- tion layer. Therefore, the real features of ADU, especially the
 ple, we can calculate that at the 50% threshold, the propor- length features, cannot be obtained directly. The ADU length
 tion of ADU obtained is 98.80%, that of TLS Segment is read from the PDU segments of TLS has systematic and random
 99.79%, and that of TCP packets is 98.58%. This selection errors. The systematic errors are caused by the plaintext TLS
 ratio is completely in line with expectations. header and the encrypted fixed part in the HTTP header. It is
 r Fourth, given that there may be differences in the distribuworth noting that the fixed HTTP header length is derived from
 tion of long and short flows among different categories, we the fixed-length field in the HTTP header. Random errors are
 adopted the principle of median robustness, which means more varied than systematic errors, including non-fixed fields
 that for skewed flow features, the median is more resistant and variable-length fields of HTTP headers. Systematic errors
 to the interference of outliers than the mean. Therefore, we need to be compensated by analyzing their causes, while random
 selected 50% as the threshold. errors can only be reduced by estimation. The two errors are
 Since PJR reflects the proportion in the value space, the lower illustrated in Fig. 3.
PJR is, the looser distribution of features relative to the value Systematic errors can also be reduced using models, but it is
space is, and the lower the probability of feature similarity is. better to remove them directly. As TLS headers are all plaintext
OPR reflects the proportion in the sample space, so the higher (in TLS-1.3, the encrypted handshake part is determined as data),
OPR is, the lower the probability of feature similarity is. In order the systematic errors caused by the TLS layer can be directly
to effectively combine these two evaluation criteria, we further removed. However, systematic errors in the HTTP layer need
propose a new concept called Feature Efficiency Coefficient to be further calculated. After statistical analysis of massive
(FEC): samples, typical systematic errors in HTTP layer (include both
   HTTP-1.1 and HTTP-2.0) are listed in Table V. It can be seen
 1
 F EC = log + OP R (3) that the systematic error of HTTP-2.0 is much less than that of
 P JR HTTP-1.1. It is because HTTP-2.0 uses standardized static and
 dynamic parameter tables and the HPACK dynamic compression
 We take logarithm base 2 of reciprocal of PJR. The main
 mechanism to compress the original fixed-length content greatly.
reason is that the maximum value determines the value space of
 After the systematic error is removed, the remaining random
PJR in ADU or segment in the current sample (to avoid almost
 error needs to be reduced by the model, which is the core
zero PJR when a potential PDU max size is too large). If the
 problem to be solved in this paper. The essence of ADU accurate
logarithmic constraint is not used, the utility of OPR will be
 restoration is to restore the TLS segment length sequence to the
significantly reduced.
 real ADU length sequence.
 Table IV shows the PJR and OPR of the eight representative
applications of HTTP-1.1 under three different PDUs, as well
 D. Problem Definition
as the FEC of each PDU. Noted that if there is only one possible
length, the PJR at that position is 0. Before the real ADU length restoration, the problem of en-
 We also conducted statistics on the HTTP-2.0 dataset crypted traffic classification based on length should be formally
(CERNET-Web-2.0). The FEC presented by the three different described. The problem of encrypted traffic classification based
PDUs is consistent with Table IV, that is, the FEC contained in on length is to classify encrypted traffic to a specific service or
the ADU is higher than that of the other two PDUs. The results application, using only the length sequence of the traffic as the
show that the ADU length sequence is the most expressive. original input. Assuming there are N samples to be classified
Therefore, we select the ADU length sequence as the optimized and C different categories, then the k-th sample (assuming
 (k) (k) (k) (k)
feature to classify encrypted traffic. the sequence length is m) xk = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lm ], where lu
1296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE V
 TYPICAL SYSTEMATIC ERRORS OF ADU LENGTH IN HTTP LAYER OF HTTP-1.1 AND HTTP-2.0

refers to the length of the u-th unit (ADU, in this paper) in the Therefore, the Markov properties between ADUs are not only
sequence. If it is a service classification and the real category of reflected in the values but also in the positions of the sequences.
xk is Sk , the goal of the encrypted traffic service classification In an actual network environment, the HTTP header length
is to build a model ϕ(xk ) to get a predicted label Sk which is will continue to change as the transmission progresses. In HTTPexpected to be the real label Sk . 1.1, we call this inter-flow header length variability. It refers
 (k) to the effect that HTTP headers vary in length across different
 For ADU restoration, we aim to make lu closer to the real
length we need. Therefore, assume that the current sample for flows, even when the same data is transmitted. In HTTP-2.0,
classification is x (the sequence length is m), the observation the presence of HPACK makes this more variable, which we
sequence length is x = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lm ], and the corresponding call intra-flow header length variability. Through an extensive
real ADU length sequence is r(x) = [l1 , l2 , . . . , lm ]. The goal sample collection, it is found that in the vast majority of traffic,
of restoring ADU length sequence is to create a model that the length of ADU is much larger than the length of the HTTP
 header. Therefore, we restore the ADU length sequence directly
makes the length value of each ADU lu (1 ≤ u ≤ m) in the
 from the TLS segment length sequence. Since the browser’s
sequence closer to its corresponding real length lu . It is ascaching mechanism only affects the resource, there is no need
sumed that the ADU length are independent and identically
 to consider the impact of browser caching in this process.
distributed, and since the minimum systematic error Eω is
 In recent years, Google has proposed Transformer [51], a
removed, the observed value must be greater than the real ADU
 deep neural network architecture for machine translation in NLP,
length value. It means if the random error of ADU length is
 which can make good use of self-attention of the sentence for
Eδ , for ∀1 ≤ u ≤ m, E δ (u) = lu − Eω − lu ≥ 0. Hence, this
 translation. The ADU restoration process can be considered as
paper aims to build a model μ that is according to the minimum
 translating the spliced TLS segment length sequence into the real
sum of the differences between all the observed lengths and true
 ADU length sequence. The relationship between length values
lengths in a sequence, namely argmin m u [μ(lu − Eω − lu )]. before and after the restoration is not strictly corresponding and
 the values are discrete, similar to the translation problem.
 IV. LENGTH-CORRECTION MULTIPLE REGRESSION NEURAL Therefore, we propose a Length-Correction Multiple
 NETWORK Regression Neural Network (LC-MRNN) algorithm based on
 In order to restore the ADU length, we propose a LC-MRNN Transformer to achieve the ADU restoration. The algorithm is
model, which takes the spliced TLS segment length sequence shown in Fig. 4. It is worth noting that although LC-MRNN has a
as input and restores each value to the real ADU length in the similar architecture to the standard Transformer, we have introsequence. duced additional local dependency-enhanced padding screening
 layers and hierarchical normalization strategies to adapt to the
A. LC-MRNN Overview scenario where the PDU number of encrypted flow is variable.
 To improve computational efficiency (the embedding size is
 The essence of ADU length restoration is to convert one much larger than natural language), we have also introduced
length sequence into another length sequence, and the two dynamic attention scaling and gradient clipping. Additionally,
length sequences can be equal in size. The relationship between we customize and construct pad-aware loss and direction-aware
each ADU length value in the ADU length sequence represents filtering. Therefore, while focusing on global dependencies, we
the relationship underlying the original data to be transmitted. also explicitly enhance the ability to extract local features.
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1297

Fig. 4. Neural network overview of LC-MRNN algorithm.

 ADU restoration uses one model, while application classification requires another. The output of the restoration model
 is related to the input of the classification model. Both models
 have their own training and prediction stages, so it is necessary
 to consider what data the two models use as input in the training
 and prediction stages, respectively.
 For LC-MRNN, its training stage requires the TLS segment
 length sequence and the corresponding real ADU length sequence as inputs. The real ADU length sequence is masked by
 encryption, so it can only be obtained by decryption. Based on
 the A3C system [13] in our previous research, we can effectively
 obtain application-level encrypted traffic with labels and only
 need to decrypt it to obtain the real ADU length sequence.
 However, since the decryption of encrypted traffic must be
 carried out using the key of the controllable end during visiting
 and requires the authorization of the visitor (involving personal
 privacy), it is difficult to deploy on a large scale. We call such
 nodes A3C core collection points.
 However, for the classifier, because it only cares about clas-
Fig. 5. Illustration of two different length sequence encoding ways. sifying the input into a specific application category, it also
 needs a large number of labeled samples for training to cover
 the diversified functions and behaviors within the application.
 We first encode the input length sequence by embedding, Therefore, it must be supported by a labeled dataset that can be
and then, in order to reflect the position relationship between obtained on a large scale. The A3C system without decryption
the length values, we encode the position. Then, we use the does not involve any privacy issues, and its ability to deploy on
multi-head self-attention mechanism to dig into the significance a large scale without affecting normal use is also proven. Thereand relationship between the values in the length sequence and fore, we can use many volunteered devices to obtain encrypted
finally restore the ADU length sequence. traffic samples corresponding to massive TLS segment length
 Since encoding of length sequences is involved, there are two sequences and application category labels.
ways to do this. The first way is to encode the length value of the Due to the need to use the ADU length sequence as the input
spliced TLS segment directly, that is, treat the length value as a of the classifier to improve the classification effect, we choose
numerical value. The second way is similar to the encoding in to use the restored ADU length sequence after the LC-MRNN
NLP, which first converts a word to an index and then encodes it. model as the input of the classifier (the training stage is the same
The two encoding paths are shown in Fig. 5. The specific choice as the prediction stage). It can effectively solve the problem that
of which way we further in-depth in the follow-up experiment. the two models have different emphases on input requirements.
In this paper, we finally choose the word-to-index scheme. Hence, we propose a new composite model called LC-
 MRNN-AC (LC-MRNN with Application Classification) for
 ADU restoration and encrypted traffic application classification.
B. Application Classification Based on Restored ADU Length The model combines the LC-MRNN restorer and the classi-
 ADU length sequence restoration is to improve the effect of fier. As this paper does not explicitly study the classifiers, our
encrypted traffic classification, so we associate ADU restoration previous work - the current state-of-the-art LS-LSTM model’s
with encrypted traffic application classification. classification layer [9] is selected as a classifier (N-gram layer
1298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 6. The relationship between two submodels in LC-MRNN-AC and the overall deployment structure diagram.

is deprecated). The structure and process of the LC-MRNN-AC TABLE VI
 STATISTICS OF CERNET-1.1 DATASET AND CERNET-WEB-2.0 DATASET
model are shown in Fig. 6.
 It is worth noting that because some HTTP requests do not
contain data body, the ADU length is restored to 0, which will
cause certain information loss and may also affect the expression
ability of the classifier. Therefore, we add a positive value to
supplement to solve the problem that the input is 0 and the
embedding input cannot be negative simultaneously.

 V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
 In order to prove the methods in this paper, we carried out
three stages of experiments. First, we conducted experiments
to prove the significance of ADU length restoration. Then, we be available at https://data.iptas.edu.cn/web/tbps. The statistics
performed restoration experiments to prove the effectiveness of of two datasets are shown in Table VI.
LC-MRNN. They were done in conjunction with the classifica- To make the experiment more practical, we conducted the
tion experiment, which included two different scenarios of the experiments on a workstation cluster (the primary device is
small world and the big world. Then, we made a deep comparison AMD 5950x + RTX 3090). Although the cluster contains devices
between LC-MRNN-AC and existing state-of-the-art methods with different computility, we ensured the computing units were
in classification, including classification effect and performance consistent in each experiment.
cost, to prove the superiority of our method. For the experimental scenario, because the data scene classification faced is different from ADU restoration, it is inappropriate
 to apply the close-world and the open-world directly. Therefore,
A. Dataset & Experimental Settings we deepen the concept of the open-world and propose small-
 As this paper involves the restoration of ADU, current public world scenarios and big-world scenarios.
datasets are difficult to support our experiment. Therefore, based Since this paper does not consider sample similarity measureon the improved A3C system [13], we collected traffic from ment, we use time and cyberspace span as the distinction criteria
nine mainstream web-based applications on the current Chinese of small-world and big-world scenarios. In terms of time, we use
Internet, covering video, e-commerce, social media, news, and the year as a unit, much larger than the application version update
other service types. Traffic samples were collected in the actual cycle, representing the difference in application data version
CERNET network environment from November 2021 to May or function. In cyberspace, we distinguish the geographical
2023, and each sample has a complete encrypted flow with the location of the server cluster (obtained by querying the IP home),
corresponding ADU sequence decrypted as HTTP-1.1. such as the cloud center in Beijing and Shanghai, which can
 Meanwhile, to test the method’s validity under the HTTP-2.0 effectively represent the difference in user habits.
protocol, we collected another dataset and named it CERNET- Therefore, a small-world scenario refers to a scenario where
Web-2.0. CERNET-Web-2.0 consists of 300 pages with 155194 the feature distribution of the application or data is similar. In
samples (including article pages, blog pages, news pages, course addition, the real ADU length can be acquired by the A3C
pages, and resource pages) from CSDN blog website which core point in a small-world scenario, as the sphere of influence
is frequently visited in China. It is worth noting that due to is limited. On the contrary, the big-world scenario represents
the multiplexing characteristics of HTTP-2.0, the protocol is the data scene where the real length of the ADU cannot be
currently mainly used for website access. The two datasets will effectively obtained. The data feature distribution, application
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1299

Fig. 7. Convergence curves of three different PDU length sequences under three models.

 TABLE VII
 COMPARISON OF THREE DIFFERENT LENGTH SEQUENCE INPUTS UNDER
 CERNET-1.1 HTTPS SAMPLES

type, and function are significantly different from the smallworld scenario.
 Before the experiments, we divided the two datasets into 60%
 Fig. 8. Count distribution of adjacent ADU length interval.
small-world dataset and 40% big-world dataset according to the
time and server IP of sample data collection. The small-world
dataset is used for LC-MRNN model training and testing, and the
big-world dataset is not used for training. The big-world dataset This figure shows that the ADU length sequence features
is only used for the testing of models trained by small-world a faster convergence speed. In LS-CapsNet, the continuous
datasets. oscillation is caused by the specialty of the model itself (CapsNet
 uses dynamic routing instead of gradient descent). The overall
 results demonstrate that the ADU length sequence has the best
B. ADU Restoration Significance Experiment
 effect, which further verifies the effectiveness and necessity of
 As ADU serve for encrypted traffic classification in practical, ADU restoration.
we conducted a controlled experiment to prove the ADU length
sequence’s optimization effect on encrypted traffic classifica-
 C. Small-World LC-MRNN Superiority Experiment With
tion. Classifiers used for the experiment include LS-LSTM [9],
 Numerical Encoding
LS-CapsNet [45], and FS-Net [8], which are currently the most
representative encrypted traffic classification models based on After determining the necessity of restoration, we conducted
length sequence. experiments on the effect of the LC-MRNN algorithm on the
 When the input size is limited to 24, the full traffic classifica- small-world dataset. We selected six representative applications
tion results under CERNET-1.1 dataset are shown in Table VII of HTTP-1.1 with relatively uniform length distribution and
(Pr represents precision and Rc is Recall). similar ADU length values (which are more challenging to
 Taking the amount of input packet counts as the independent restore accurately) for the LC-MRNN restoration experiment.
variable (it is worth noting that since traffic is collected in the In the meantime, we first experimented with numerical coding.
packet granularity and TLS Segment and ADU are spliced on Since the theoretical maximum length of ADU is infinite, and
packets, the packet is taken as the input unit), we further con- sequences are embedded in the LC-MRNN algorithm, the vast
ducted experiments on the classification effects of three different ADU size will also cause a colossal memory occupation for the
PDUs under LS-LSTM in this scenario. model. Therefore, we first made statistics on the size of adjacent
 In addition, to prove the advantages of ADU length sequence intervals of all ADU length values in the CERNET-1.1 dataset,
in model training, we evaluated the convergence experiments which are shown in Fig. 8. Since these statistics aim to find the
under the three models based on a fixed number of input TCP factor of scaling, the distribution is represented as an exponential
packets of 800, as shown in Fig. 7. form with a base of 10.
1300 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE VIII
 SMALL-WORLD: RESTORATION RESULT UNDER FIVE CRITERIONS

 TABLE IX
 BIG-WORLD: RESTORATION RESULT UNDER FIVE CRITERIONS

Fig. 9. Model memory size cost under different MATR after scaling.

 The results show that the most ADU lengths are more than
100 bytes. Since the scaling will cause a loss of accuracy, we
finally use 10 as the scaling factor to pre-compress the maximum
length of ADU. When the ADU length is restored and the real
ADU length is used as LC-MRNN model input, they will be Among them, D̄, M ax(D) and δ(D) refer to the average,
scaled first and divided by 10. maximum and standard variance of D, respectively. Zero rates
 Further, although we have scaled down the ADU length upper r(0) refer to the ratio that the distance between two sequences
limit to one-tenth of the original size, the upper limit is still a is 0 (totally same). The higher the r(0) is, the more precise the
variable. The input of the neural network requires that the upper restoration is. The restoration rate β refers to the length ratio of
limit of ADU length should be a certain value, and the selection the restored part to the part that should be restored. It is used
of this value should balance the model’s size and effect. to evaluate the overall restoration effect, and the restoration
 Therefore, we conducted experiments to fix the maximum size rate should be about 1. It can be seen from the results that
of ADU, which is determined by the Maximum ADU Threshold the restoration effect of the small-world dataset is excellent.
Rate (MATR). MATR is the ratio of the chosen ADU length Although the restoration distance of a few sequences is large,
upper limit to the maximum value of all ADUs in the sample. almost identical restoration can be achieved on the whole.
The relationship between MATR (from 50% to 99%) and model Further, we carried out the classification experiment under the
size is shown in Fig. 9. small-world dataset, and the experimental results are shown in
 The results show that with the increase of MATR, the model’s Fig. 11.
size increases significantly, and the higher the MATR, the faster The results show that the classification is outstanding under
the rise. It is because an enormous ADU value is also a tiny the small-world dataset. In other words, when there is a cerpercentage of the sample space, but it will greatly increase model tain similarity between the sequence to be classified and the
size. Therefore, we need to limit the model size through MATR labeled sample sequence, it can achieve almost 100% accurate
on the premise of ensuring accuracy. Otherwise, models over classification.
1 GB are unacceptable on common traffic acquisition analysis
points like gateways. Meanwhile, during the period from 50% to
 D. Big-World LC-MRNN-AC Classification Experiment With
80%, the accuracy rate increases significantly with the increase
 Index Encoding
of MATR. The accuracy also improved from 80% to 99%, but
the improvement was slight. In an actual network open-world environment, a model trained
 In order to determine the final MATR and obtain the fixed in a controlled domain will likely be used nationally or globally.
embedding size, we choose four representative MATRs from In the non-controllable domain, it is impossible to train LCthe above experimental results to carry out in-depth experiments, MRNN. Therefore, based on the LC-MRNN instance trained in
namely, 98%, 95%, 90%, and 80%. After we numeralize them, small-world datasets, we use big-world datasets for restoration
the four MATRs correspond to 83030, 55670, 43910, and 23450, tests and classification experiments. The results are shown in
respectively. The classification results of four MATR by LC- Table IX.
MRNN-AC are shown in Fig. 10. There is a particular gap between this restoration result and
 The results show that 83030 has the fastest convergence speed the small-world dataset’s result. Although the average and maxiwith the best accuracy. Therefore, we choose 83030 as the ADU mum restoration distances are negligible compared with the total
length upper limit (after scaling), and any value exceeding this length, the zero rates are too low and the restoration rates are
length will be transformed into 83030. far higher than those in the small-world experiment. Therefore,
 On this basis, we further experiment with the restoration effect if numerical coding is used, there may be problems of overof the core LC-MRNN restoration model. The experimental reduction and insufficient accuracy in the big-world scenario,
results are shown in Table VIII. It is worth noting that the so we use index encoding instead. We name it isomorphic
distance D used here is the Euclidean distance of the sequences. length-to-index. In other words, the lengths of PDU and ADU
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1301

Fig. 10. LC-MRNN-AC Classification Results with Increasing Epoch of Four MATR: (a) Accuracy, (b) Restoration Loss.

 In order to prove the universal superiority of the LC-MRNN-
 AC model, we compare the classification effect of the LC-
 MRNN-AC model with other state-of-the-art models using different feature engineering models on the big-world dataset. In
 order to ensure fairness, other models use their preset inputs
 and parameters. The models used for comparison are the most
 basic CNN [15] (modified to fit length sequences), SAE extracted from Deep Packet, FS-Net [8] for flow length features,
 LS-LSTM (without N-gram) [9] for the PDU length sequence
 features, GGNN [20] for the graphical packet length sequence,
Fig. 11. Small-world: Classification precision/recall curve and confusion and miniflowpic [52] for both time and the sequence of lengths.
matrix. Firstly, we used the restored ADU length sequence for training
 the LS-LSTM classifier in the LC-MRNN-AC. Then, we conducted tests using the original TLS segment length sequence
 (LCMRNNAC-TLS-24) and the restored ADU length sequence
 (LCMRNNAC-RADU-24). The experimental results showed
 that LCMRNNAC-RADU-24 was superior to LCMRNNAC-
 TLS-24, which in turn was superior to LSLSTM-TLS. This
 proved the superiority of ADU restoration in classification. In
 addition, since we found that ADU restoration may lead to the
 existence of most 0 values in the request (HTTP request is
 likely to contain no data, only headers), which will cause the
 classifier’s poor effect to a certain extent, we proposed three
 feature enhancement schemes in big-world scenarios. The first
 is the direct addition of spliced PDU values and ADU values
Fig. 12. Big-world: Index encoding accuracy and loss curve. for calculation (Direct PDU and ADU Sum, DPAS), the second
 is the absolute value addition of spliced PDU values and ADU
(which could contain the same value) are encoded to form two values (ABsolute PDU + ADU, ABPAS), and the third is the
dictionaries, respectively. substitution of ADU sequences with non-zero values in the
 Since the brand new PDU and ADU length values will always spliced PDU sequence (PDU-ADU Replacement, PAR). The
exist in the big-world environment, we adopt the dynamic coding results are shown in Table X.
extension method to encode the new values continuously. For the The round-wise classification results are shown in Fig. 13.
problem that it is difficult to restore new values that have never The results show that LC-MRNN-AC has a classification
appeared accurately, we rely on the robustness of the classifier effect far exceeding the existing state-of-the-art and is better than
to support it. The restoration accuracy curve of the LC-MRNN the complex and huge LS-LSTM model with the same amount of
model encoded by an index is shown in Fig. 12. data input. The superiority of LC-MRNN-AC under HTTP-1.1
 It can be seen from the results that the overall restoration is proved.
accuracy is not very high due to the existence of fresh values
(corresponding to zero rate in numerical encoding), but it is
far higher than the effect of numerical encoding. Since the E. Applicability of Classification for Extremely Similar
purpose of restoration is ultimately classification, it is necessary Samples Under HTTP-2.0
to consider the effect of classification in the context of the big In addition to HTTP-1.1, HTTP-2.0 is now HTTPS’s mainworld. stream application layer protocol. However, HTTP-2.0 is mostly
1302 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE X
 BIG-WORLD HTTP-1.1: CLASSIFICATION RESULTS OF DIFFERENT SOTA
 METHODS WITH DIFFERENT PDUS AND INPUT SIZES

 Fig. 13. Big-world HTTP-1.1: Comparison of state-of-the-art methods with
 different input features.

 Fig. 14. Big-world HTTP-2.0: Convergence Curves of Loss and Test Accuracy
 of LC-MRNN restorer.

 very similar, each sequence is very short, and the PDU sequence
 that does not meet the input requirements is aligned by filling in
 0. In addition, using encrypted traffic application classification
 classifiers for web page classification can better reflect the generalization ability of the architecture. It is worth noting that due
 to the nature of HTTP-2.0, the distributed correlation between
 the training set and the test set generated by random partitioning
 will be weak.
 First, we conducted a restoration effect experiment, and the
 experimental results are shown in Fig. 14. The training and test
 sets still follow the 60% vs. 40% rule of the big and small worlds.
 The results show that even with the existence of multiplexing
 and HPACK head compression, which seriously interfere with
 the ADU length restoration, the LC-MRNN model can still
 realize the ADU restoration of HTTP-2.0 protocol encrypted
 traffic, and the restoration accuracy is even higher than that of
 HTTP-1.1.
 On this basis, we also compared the LC-MRNN-AC model
used for web pages, which makes in-app confusion very serious. with the control group used in HTTP-1.1, and the experimental
Therefore, we conducted experiments on the restoration per- results are shown in Fig. 15.
formance of the LC-MRNN-AC model for HTTP-2.0 samples Results show that the classification effect is not good, no
and its classification applicability in extremely similar sample matter what kind of classifier, which is as expected. There are
environments under the CERNET-Web-2.0 dataset. three main reasons. First, the structural design of the above
 This is an extremely difficult classification scenario because classifier is not for the unified website webpage classification
the data length changes every time we access it and the number but for the broad category of applications. Second, HTTP-2.0
of classes is large. Moreover, the pages on the same website are header compression and multiplexing significantly impact the
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1303

Fig. 15. Big-world HTTP-2.0: Extreme classification convergence curves of Fig. 17. Training time cost of different models under HTTP-1.1 data.
five methods.

 Then, we experimented on the training time of the overall
 encrypted traffic classification, and the experimental results are
 shown in Fig. 17.
 As can be seen from the results, the training time of the
 classifier in LC-MRNN-AC has obvious advantages. With far
 better results than other classifiers, it has less training time (the
 model structure is simpler). This is due to the characteristic
 advantages brought by ADU restoration, which is consistent
 with the theoretical analysis in Section III.
 However, it is worth noting that the training time of the
 LC-MRNN-AC restorer (LC-MRNN) model is relatively high,
Fig. 16. Memory usage of different models under HTTP-1.1 data. requiring 3714.1659 seconds to complete the training of 200
 epochs in a single workstation and completing convergence
 in about 170 epochs. Because there is no free lunch in the
characteristics of different web pages visited within the website, classification task, however, the asynchronous separation deand the distribution of training sets and test sets is inconsistent. ployment and the separation of big and small world datasets that
Third, the number of classification categories is about fifty LC-MRNN-AC relies on, in practical applications, the training
times that of the application, which may exceed the upper limit cost of LC-MRNN reducers will not affect the classification
of the current classifier hyperparameters. However, it can be (offline advance payment).
clearly seen from the results that the training accuracy of the
LC-MRNN-AC model has been improving, indicating that the G. Analysis & Discussion
ADU length restoration still has obvious significance under
 1) Why is the ADU Length Sequence Restored From the Big-
HTTP-2.0. It can effectively extract stable ADU length sequence
 World Dataset Used as the Input of the Classification Model?:
features from unstable TLS Segment length sequences (features
 A labeled sample dataset with a decrypted HTTP plaintext data
used by other classifiers). The significance of ADU restoration
 counterpart to the encrypted traffic is extremely challenging
and ALFE is further proved.
 to obtain compared to an encrypted traffic dataset with only
 category labels. As a result, if a real ADU length sequence is
F. LC-MRNN-AC Performance Overhead Experiment used, the training and retraining process will be restricted by the
 Since the LC-MRNN-AC model is very complex, especially amount of data, and the toughness to obtain enough samples will
the LC-MRNN itself, it is necessary to conduct experiments lead to a poor effect.
on its performance overhead to consider its applicability and Although our LC-MRNN sequence is designed to restore the
suitable scenarios in the actual network environment. encrypted traffic length sequence into a real ADU length se-
 First, we experimented on memory usage, and the experimen- quence as accurately as possible, the precise restoration requires
tal results are shown in Fig. 16. similar features with a high degree found in the experiment. It
 It can be seen from the results that LC-MRNN-AC has no is not realistic to acquire a large enough dataset of real ADU
obvious advantage in memory occupancy due to the use of trans- length sequences to cover all the scenarios of the applications.
former architecture (restorer) and huge embedding (classifier), Coupled with the difference in the network environment and
which even consumes more resources to some extent. This is the rapid iteration of application, concept drift is more likely to
mainly because the Transformer is a complex and large archi- occur.
tecture, and LC-MRNN-AC consists of two models. However, By comparing small-world datasets with big-world datasets
the two models can be deployed separately in the engineering in experiments, we find that since the ultimate goal of restoration
implementation to reduce the resource overhead. is classification, the problem of concept drift can be transferred
1304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE XI
 COMPARISON OF THREE ADU LENGTH SEQUENCES AS INPUT

from the restorer to the classifier. Compared with the restorer, the value no longer has a numerical adjacency relationship, and
negative effect caused by concept drift can be suppressed by the the restorer can pay more attention to the sequence context.
classifier’s insensitivity to hits. Moreover, obtaining ADU length In addition, index encoding does not need to take into account
sequence labeled samples is more accessible after restoration. the effects of MATR because no matter how large, the value
As an alternative, a restored ADU length sequence as the classi- is converted to an equal-length alternative encoding. However,
fier’s input can significantly decrease the difficulty of classifier conversely, this is also the potential disadvantage of index entraining by giving the classifier sufficient samples, which is also coding compared to numerical encoding. First, index encoding
helpful in dealing with concept drift. needs to consume more encoding space when the length value
 In this paper, though, the big-world dataset is derived from distribution is relatively dense, and the encoding codex itself
the CERNET-1.1 dataset same as the small-world dataset, which needs to be stored, occupying additional memory. Second, index
has the corresponding decrypted HTTP data. However, in the encoding does not solve the problem of values that have not
LC-MRNN-AC model, its plaintext counterpart is not used. So occurred, which is also a dilemma often encountered in NLP
this experiment is representative. The big-world dataset at the translation. It is more common in encrypted traffic and can
moment is a good representation of easily accessible labeled only be achieved by adding encodings, negatively impacting
sample data using A3C normal nodes. The qualitative compari- restoration. Third, the length sequence is different from the
son was made among the three, as shown in Table XI. text sequence, and there is a similar relationship between the
 2) Why is the ADU Restoration Accuracy Rate of HTTP-2.0 length values; the similar values are theoretically beneficial for
Protocol With Many Interference Technologies Higher Than classification. Index encoding ignores this feature, which results
That of HTTP-1.1?: HTTP-2.0 should theoretically be more in a loss of information gain to some extent. Therefore, the
challenging to restore than HTTP-1.1 because it has a more coding method is also a key area worthy of further study.
complex protocol structure. However, in practice, because the 5) Why Do the Effects of LCMRNNAC-DPAS-24 and
header and data body of HTTP-2.0 are transmitted separately, LCMRNNAC-ABPAS-24 Turn Out to Be Better Than Those of
even if they are out of order, they are separated, which brings LCMRNNAC-RADU-24?: The experimental results of Table X
the possibility of direct accurate restoration to some samples in show that some augmentation methods have achieved a furnon-multiplexing cases. On the other hand, CERNET-Web-2.0 ther improvement in classification performance compared to
datasets are all Web traffic, and the ADU of Web traffic is far using only the restored ADU. This indicates that although TLS
less than the average value of conventional applications in terms segment contains less information gain than ADU, there is a
of the overall distribution, especially compared with multimedia slight difference in the information coverage provided by the
applications with extremely large data volumes. Therefore, the two. This suggests that in some cases, the network performance
coding space of HTTP-2.0 is relatively small, and thus, better parameters contained in the TLS segment fragments and the
restoration accuracy is obtained. HTTP header length hidden in the data may also have some
 3) Is It Worthwhile to Optimize the Input Using the LC- effect on classification. This situation has also been indirectly
MRNN Model in Order to Improve the Precision and Recall Rate demonstrated in the papers using time interval sequences for
by About 4.2%?: It is worth it. The LS-LSTM model can achieve classification. This is also one of the reasons why miniflowpic
89% F1-score under TLS segment length sequence. However, can function under the TLS segment length sequence.
encrypted traffic classification is a massive data supervised 6) Why Choose the Transformer Architecture Instead of
learning problem (backbone Tbps level). In this situation, the Other Models That are More Suitable for Local Dependencies?:
number of flows to be classified can be in the billion range, and The variation of TLS segment length is mainly determined by
a four percent improvement might correspond to millions of local dependencies, especially in multimedia transmission scecorrectly classified samples. The accurate classification of en- narios. However, in practical applications, many TLS segment
crypted traffic is an essential basis for ISP network management lengths do not reach the maximum value. At the same time, the
and network security decision, which is of great economic value length variation of variable-length HTTP headers is globally
and security protection significance. All it costs is a little extra dependent (the global correlation of HTTP parameters) and
computing resource. even has dependency relationships in multiple visits (application
 4) What are the Advantages and Disadvantages of Index cookies), and this phenomenon is more obvious in HTTP-2.0
Encoding?: The most significant advantage of index encoding (with the HPACK compression mechanism). Therefore, conis that it can achieve more accurate restoration in the big-world sidering these two situations, we chose the Transformer archienvironment because after index encoding, the original length tecture to build our restorer. It is undeniable that Transformer,
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1305

as a heavyweight architecture, has a large training cost for Future research needs to pay more attention to three points:
LC-MRNN. However, with the optimization of our model ar- r The encoding method of length sequence is very different
chitecture, this cost is acceptable (it can run on consumer-grade from the conventional text sequence, which needs further
graphics cards ranging from 3090 to 4090). At the same time, study.
due to the architectural advantages of LC-MRNN-AC, it can be r The webpage-oriented classifiers with more capabilities
used for a long time after training and reduces the long-term should be designed to make LC-MRNN adapt to webpage
cost. classification. The current application of classification clas-
 7) Is ADU Suitable for QUIC? What are the Difficulties in sifiers does not perform well under the multi-page on the
Using ADU Under QUIC?: Since ADU is oriented towards the same site.
data being transmitted, it can be used for classifying QUIC r With the wide application of the QUIC (HTTP-3.0) proencrypted traffic. However, QUIC encrypts more metadata and tocol, encrypted QUIC traffic classification with ADU
has two formats of long and short headers. Moreover, more restoration will also become necessary research. Its chalvariable-length fields and binary encoding modes make the lenges are inherently related to the life cycle. These chalsystematic error less. Specifically, for the long header, there lenges span multiple aspects, including the acquisition of
are 9 bytes in total, including the header form (1 byte), fixed labeled samples, the development of decryption tools, the
bit (1 byte), packet number (at least 1 byte), long packet type (2 rapid evolution of the QUIC protocol, the recombination
bytes), and version (4 bytes). For the short header, there are only of ADU during restoration (since QUIC functions at the
3 bytes, including the header form, fixed bit, and packet number. packet level), and the alterations in data splitting tech-
Nevertheless, it still has a relatively stable header structure that niques. All these areas hold significant research value.
can support the restoration process.
 In addition, the implications of QUIC streams and HTTP
frames are different. Although QUIC does not, like HTTP-2.0, ACKNOWLEDGMENT
introduce an additional binary framing layer, streams and mul- This paper is part on the topic of the encrypted traffic clastiplexing on top of the TCP mechanism, it directly implements sification. Manuscript created March, 2023; This work was
streams, and each QUIC connection can carry multiple indepen- developed by the IEEE Publication Technology Department.
dent streams, with each stream handling one request-response This work is distributed under the Project Public License (LPPL)
interaction. Nicely, its stream ID (connection ID) is in plaintext, (http://www.latex-project.org/) version 1.3. A copy of the LPPL,
and the number of streams currently existing in the connection version 1.3, is included in the base LaTeX documentation of
can be directly known through statistics. This is also beneficial all distributions of LaTeX released 2003/12/01 or later. The
for the precise restoration of ADU. opinions expressed here are entirely that of the author. No
 warranty is expressed or implied. User assumes all risk.
 Finally, I would like to express my deep remembrance to my
 VI. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
 beloved wife Yuying Shi, who passed away during the course
 In this paper, we focus on the feature engineering of encryp- of this research. Throughout my life and work, she provided me
tion traffic and propose a new input metric called ADU. We with unwavering support, understanding, and encouragement,
first propose three evaluation criteria to prove the theoretical which were a tremendous source of strength for me. Her influadvantages of ADU features in classifying encrypted traffic. ence is deeply embedded in this work. May she rest in peace.
Then, we propose the LC-MRNN algorithm to solve the problem
of the real ADU length being interfered with and masked. In
the next step, we deepen the open-world concept and propose REFERENCES
big-world and small-world scenarios that more closely fit the [1] J. Muehlstein et al., “Analyzing HTTPs encrypted traffic to identify user’s
actual Internet to prove the method’s adaptability in the real operating system, browser and application,” in Proc. 14th IEEE Annu.
network environment. According to this setting, two datasets of Consum. Commun. Netw. Conf., 2017, pp. 1–6.
 [2] Google, “HTTPS encryption on the web–Google Transparency Report,”
application layer protocol HTTP-1.1 and HTTP-2.0 are collected 2023. [Online]. Available: https://transparencyreport.google.com/https/
respectively in the CERNET network environment. Based on overview
the LC-MRNN algorithm, combined with the characteristics of [3] S. Xu, G. Geng, X. Jin, D. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic paths:
 Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE Trans.
HTTP-1.1 and HTTP-2.0 under the actual network environment, Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
we propose the LC-MRNN-AC model. We experimented exten- [4] B. Yang and D. Liu, “Research on network traffic identification based
sively with multiple angles and finally chose index encoding on machine learning and deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Inf.
 Technol. Netw. Electron. Automat. Control Conf., 2019, pp. 1887–1891.
as the encoding method for the length sequence. The reduction [5] P. Velan, M. Čermák, P. Čeleda, and M. Drašar, “A survey of methods
experiments in big and small worlds show that LC-MRNN can for encrypted traffic classification and analysis,” Networks, vol. 25, no. 5,
restore ADU length sequences effectively. After the reduced pp. 355–374, Sep. 2015.
 [6] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, A. Nascita, and A. Pescapé, “Encrypted
features are used in classification experiments, the results show multitask traffic classification via multimodal deep learning,” in Proc.
that the precision and recall of the proposed LC-MRNN-AC IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
model are about 4.2% higher than that of the state-of-the-art [7] S. Li, H. Guo, and N. Hopper, “Measuring information leakage in website fingerprinting attacks and defenses,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
method. Moreover, it has some advantages in memory, training Comput. Commun. Secur., Toronto, ON, Canada, 2018, pp. 1977–1992,
time, and other performance indicators. doi: 10.1145/3243734.3243832.
1306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 [8] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-net: A flow sequence [28] X. Ren, H. Gu, and W. Wei, “Tree-RNN: Tree structural recurrent neural
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. network for network traffic classification,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 167,
 Commun., 2019, pp. 1171–1179. 2021, Art. no. 114363. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
 [9] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, S. Guo, Y. Zhou, and Y. Zhao, “Length matters: com/science/article/pii/S0957417420310435
 Scalable fast encrypted internet traffic service classification based on [29] Z. Song et al., “I 2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent neural
 multiple protocol data unit length sequence with composite deep learning,” network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
 Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 289–302, 2021. Secure Comput., early access, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[10] H. Wu, L. Wang, G. Cheng, and X. Hu, “Mobile application encryption [30] Y. Chen, T. Zang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, L. Ouyang, and P. Yang, “Incremental
 traffic classification based on TLS flow sequence network,” in Proc. IEEE learning for mobile encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
 Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops, 2021, pp. 1–6. Conf. Commun., 2021, pp. 1–6.
[11] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Wei, Z. Xu, N. Fu, and Y. Zhou, “Higher layers, [31] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A.
 better results: Application layer feature engineering in encrypted traffic Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and
 classification,” in Wireless Algorithms, Systems, and Applications. Cham, improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 548–556. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021.
[12] R. Dubin, A. Dvir, O. Pele, and O. Hadar, “I know what you saw [32] Y. Li, Y. Lu, and S. Li, “Ezac: Encrypted zero-day applications classifilast minute—encrypted HTTP adaptive video streaming title classifica- cation using CNN and k-means,” in Proc. IEEE 24th Int. Conf. Comput.
 tion,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 3039–3049, Supported Cooperative Work Des., 2021, pp. 378–383.
 Dec. 2017. [33] J. Zhang, J. Zhou, and N. Zhou, “Network traffic classification method
[13] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Xu, K. Xu, Y. Shan, and J. Zhang, “A3C system: based on subspace triple attention mechanism,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Inf.
 One-stop automated encrypted traffic labeled sample collection, construc- Sci. Parallel Distrib. Syst., 2022, pp. 312–316.
 tion and correlation in multi-systems,” Appl. Sci., vol. 12, no. 22, 2022. [34] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
 [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/12/22/11731 “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in multimodal multi-
[14] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, task traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag.,
 “Characterization of encrypted and vpn traffic using time-related,” in Proc. vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023.
 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414. [35] G. Bovenzi, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “A
[15] W. Wang, M. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zeng, and Z. Yang, “End-to-end en- Big Data-enabled hierarchical framework for traffic classification,” IEEE
 crypted traffic classification with one-dimensional convolution neural Trans. Netw. Sci. Eng., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 2608–2619, 4th Quarter 2020.
 networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Secur. Informat., 2017, [36] J. Lu, A. Liu, F. Dong, F. Gu, J. Gama, and G. Zhang, “Learning under
 pp. 43–48. concept drift: A review,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 31, no. 12,
[16] F. Al-Obaidy, S. Momtahen, M. Hossain, and F. Mohammadi, “Encrypted pp. 2346–2363, Dec. 2019.
 traffic classification based ml for identifying different social media appli- [37] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone
 cations,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Elect. Comput. Eng., 2019, pp. 1–5. app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
[17] H. Yao, C. Liu, P. Zhang, S. Wu, C. Jiang, and S. Yu, “Identifica- Forensics Secur., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
 tion of encrypted traffic through attention mechanism based long short [38] M. Korczyński and A. Duda, “Markov chain fingerprinting to clasterm memory,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 241–252, sify encrypted traffic,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun., 2014,
 Feb. 2012. pp. 781–789.
[18] M. Song, J. Ran, and S. Li, “Encrypted traffic classification based on text [39] M. Shen, M. Wei, L. Zhu, and M. Wang, “Classification of encrypted
 convolution neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. traffic with second-order markov chains and application attribute bi-
 Netw. Technol., 2019, pp. 432–436. grams,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1830–1843,
[19] S. Cui, B. Jiang, Z. Cai, Z. Lu, S. Liu, and J. Liu, “A session-packets- Aug. 2017.
 based encrypted traffic classification using capsule neural networks,” in [40] C. Liu, Z. Cao, Z. Li, and G. Xiong, “LaFFT: Length-aware FFT based
 Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput. Commun.; IEEE fingerprinting for encrypted network traffic classification,” in Proc. 2018
 17th Int. Conf. Smart City; IEEE 5th Int. Conf. Data Sci. Syst., 2019, IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2018, pp. 1–6.
 pp. 429–436. [41] C. Liu, Z. Cao, G. Xiong, G. Gou, S.-M. Yiu, and L. He, “MaMPF:
[20] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, D. Niu, X. Qiu, Y. Zhao, and Y. Zhou, “WFF-EGNN: Encrypted traffic classification based on multi-attribute markov probability
 Encrypted traffic classification based on weaved flow fragment via ensem- fingerprints,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM 26th Int. Symp. Qual. Service, 2018,
 ble graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw., pp. 1–10.
 vol. 1, pp. 389–411, 2023. [42] C. Dong, C. Zhang, Z. Lu, B. Liu, and B. Jiang, “Cetanalytics: Comprehen-
[21] Y. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Zhang, X. Ma, and F. Huang, “STNN: A novel sive effective traffic information analytics for encrypted traffic classifica-
 TLS/SSL encrypted traffic classification system based on stereo transform tion,” Comput. Netw., vol. 176, 2020, Art. no. 107258. [Online]. Available:
 neural network,” in Proc. IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst., 2019, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1389128619309466
 pp. 907–910. [43] X. Yun, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhao, and Z. Zhao, “Encrypted TLS traffic
[22] Y. Zeng, Z. Qi, W. Chen, and Y. Huang, “Test: An end-to-end network classification on cloud platforms,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 31, no. 1,
 traffic classification system with spatio-temporal features extraction,” in pp. 164–177, 2023.
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Cloud, 2019, pp. 131–136. [44] G. Aceto, G. Bovenzi, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
[23] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé, “Know “Characterization and prediction of mobile-app traffic using markov modyour Big Data trade-offs when classifying encrypted mobile traffic eling,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 907–925,
 with deep learning,” in Proc. Netw. Traffic Meas. Anal. Conf., 2019, Mar. 2021.
 pp. 121–128. [45] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, B. Jiang, S. Tang, S. Guo, and Y. Zhou, “Length
[24] W. Maonan, Z. Kangfeng, X. Ning, Y. Yanqing, and W. Xiujuan, “Centime: matters: Fast internet encrypted traffic service classification based on
 A direct comprehensive traffic features extraction for encrypted traffic multi-PDU lengths,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Mobility Sens. Netw., 2020,
 classification,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Syst., 2021, pp. 531–538.
 pp. 490–498. [46] W. Chen, F. Lyu, F. Wu, P. Yang, G. Xue, and M. Li, “Sequential message
[25] X. Hu, C. Gu, F. Wei, and C.-H. Chen, “CLD-Net: A network characterization for early classification of encrypted internet traffic,” IEEE
 combining CNN and LSTM for internet encrypted traffic classifica- Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3746–3760, Apr. 2021.
 tion,” Sec. Commun. Netw., vol. 2021, Jan. 2021, Art. no. 9835476, [47] X. Wang, S. Chen, and J. Su, “App-net: A hybrid neural network for
 doi: 10.1155/2021/5518460. encrypted mobile traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
[26] B. Lu, N. Luktarhan, C. Ding, and W. Zhang, “ICLSTM: Encrypted Commun. Workshops, 2020, pp. 424–429.
 traffic service identification based on inception-LStM neural network,” [48] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decentralized
 Symmetry, vol. 13, no. 6, 2021, Art. no. 1080. [Online]. Available: https: application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using graph neural
 //www.mdpi.com/2073-8994/13/6/1080 networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
[27] G. Xie, Q. Li, and Y. Jiang, “Self-attentive deep learning method for online [49] Z. Chen, G. Cheng, Z. Wei, D. Niu, and N. Fu, “Classify traffic
 traffic classification and its interpretability,” Comput. Netw., vol. 196, rather than flow: Versatile multi-flow encrypted traffic classification with
 2021, Art. no. 108267. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect. flow clustering,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 2,
 com/science/article/pii/S1389128621002930 pp. 1446–1466, Apr. 2024.
CHEN et al.: ULTIMATE ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC FEATURE ENGINEERING: HTTPS ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1307

[50] Y. Cao, Y. Feng, H. Wang, X. Xie, and S. K. Zhou, “Learning to sketch: Yuyu Zhao (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 A neural approach to item frequency estimation in streaming data,” in software engineering from the Nanjing University
 IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 7136–7153, of Science and Technology in 2016, and the MS
 Nov. 2024. and PhD degrees in cyber security from Southeast
[51] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. University, Nanjing, China, in 2019 and 2023, respec-
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., tively. He is a currently a lecturer with the School of
 2017, pp. 6000–6010. Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast Univer-
[52] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification sity. His research interests include in-band telemetry,
 with mini-flowpic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. blockchain, and network processors.
 Conf., Nice, France, 2022, pp. 647–654, doi: 10.1145/3517745.3561436.

 Zihan Chen (Member, IEEE) received the BS degree
 in software engineering from Central South University in 2017, and the PhD degree in cyber security
 from Southeast University in 2023. He is currently
 working as a postdoc with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering at Southeast University. His Yuyang Zhou (Member, IEEE) received the BS demajor research interests include cyber security, en- gree in electronic information engineering from the
 crypted traffic classification, encrypted traffic feature Nanjing University of Science and Technology in
 engineering, and deep learning. He is a Member of 2016 and the PhD degree in cyberspace security from
 CCF and works as a reviewer for multiple Journals Southeast University in 2021. He is currently worksuch as IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure ing as a postdoc with the School of Cyber Science
Computing, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, ESWA and the duty editor of the and Engineering, Southeast University. His major re-
Journal of Cyberspace. search interests include moving target defense, DDoS
 mitigation, security modeling, intrusion detection,
 and Android malware detection. He has published in
 some of the topmost journals and conferences like
 Guang Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the BS de- IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, IEEE Transactions
 gree in traffic engineering from Southeast University on Industrial Informatics, and ACM Computing Classification System, and is
 in 1994, the MS degree in computer application from involved as reviewer and in technical program committees of several journals
 the Hefei University of Technology in 2000, and the and conferences in the field.
 PhD degree in computer network from Southeast University in 2003. He is a full professor with the School
 of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China. He has authored or coauthored
 seven monographs and more than 100 technical papers, including top journals and top conferences. His
 research interests include network security, network
measurement, and traffic behavior analysis. He is a senior member of CCF. Shanqing Jiang (Member, IEEE) received the BS
 degree in Internet of Things engineering from North
 China Electric Power University in 2017 and the PhD
 Dandan Niu (Student Member, IEEE) received the
 degree in cyber security from Southeast University in
 BS degree in Internet of Things from Jiangnan Uni-
 2023. He is currently a research associate with Purple
 versity in 2021. She is currently working toward the Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing, China. His research
 MS degree in cyberspace security with the School
 interests include SDN, future network architecture,
 of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast Uniand network resilience.
 versity. Her major research interests include cyber
 security, encrypted traffic analysis.