This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

 Uncertainty-Aware Multimodal Anomaly Detection
 for Microservice Systems with Active Learning
 Hui Dou, Shenglai Guo, Lele Zou, Yiwen Zhang*, Pengfei Chen, and Zibin Zheng, Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Accurate and robust anomaly detection is critical for a pivotal role in ensuring system reliability and security.
microservice system reliability. Recent multimodal approaches Specifically, logs record detailed information during service
have improved detection comprehensiveness by integrating met- operation, including requests, errors, exceptions, and other
rics, logs, and traces. However, they often overlook intra-modal
uncertainty from noise, ambiguity, or missing data, and inter- events. Metrics, on the other hand, provide a quantitative
modal uncertainty arising from varying predictive capabilities representation of the system’s performance and health status,
across modalities. Additionally, extensive labeling of multimodal with common examples including response time, error rate,
data remains costly. To address these limitations, we propose and CPU utilization. Trace data captures the complete path of
MUAD, an uncertainty-aware multimodal anomaly detection a request as it usually flows through multiple microservices.
framework with active learning. MUAD employs a Graph-based
Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) to model intra-modal uncertainty By utilizing trace IDs and span IDs, it reveals invocation
through probabilistic representations, and a Confidence-aware relationships and provides a global view of service inter-
Fusion Mechanism (CFM) to dynamically weight modalities actions, aiding in the analysis of service dependencies and
based on their prediction confidence. Furthermore, an active performance bottlenecks. Over these years, many studies have
learning paradigm iteratively refines the model using high- successfully utilized unimodal data (i.e., solely metrics [2],
confidence pseudo-labels and informative samples, maintaining
performance under label-deficient conditions. Experiments on [3], logs [4], [5] or traces [6], [7]) to achieve automated
three benchmark datasets demonstrate MUAD achieves 98.10% anomaly detection, demonstrating certain effectiveness in speaverage F1-score, outperforming state-of-the-art methods by up cific detection tasks. However, due to the limited information
to 7.87%. Results also confirm its robustness under low-quality provided by each individual modality, unimodal approaches
data and limited labels. exhibit significant limitations in identifying particular types of
 Index Terms—Microservice systems, anomaly detection, multi- anomalies [8], [9], [10]. For example, log data may sometimes
modal data, active learning. reflect minor errors that have little impact on the overall
 system performance, which can easily trigger false alarms
 I. I NTRODUCTION and lead to false positives. Figure 1 provides an illustrative
 example of how different modal data may manifest under
In recent years, microservices architecture has gained
 various anomaly scenarios in microservice systems. Certain
widespread adoption in modern application development. By
 business-level anomalies, such as database query exceptions
decomposing tightly coupled applications into independently
 or code defects, often do not cause significant fluctuations in
deployable services, this approach enhances both flexibility
 metrics data, yet they are more readily identifiable through
and scalability. However, as system scale and complexity
 logs and trace data. In contrast, network congestion anomalies
increase, the risk of anomalies escalates correspondingly.
 are typically evident in both metrics and trace data. Therefore,
Anomalies originating in a single service may propagate
 analytical methods that comprehensively leverage multimodal
through the call chain and adversely affect the performance
 data can compensate for the shortcomings of single data
of dependent services, thereby degrading the user experience
 sources, thereby ensuring the comprehensiveness of anomaly
and potentially leading to economic losses [1]. Consequently,
 detection.
timely detection and remediation of performance anomalies is
 Given the limitations of unimodal anomaly detection apessential for maintaining system reliability and availability.
 proaches, several studies have proposed multimodal anomaly
 The observability data collected by operators in microser- detection methods in recent years [11], [8], [12], [13]. Alvice systems, encompassing metrics, logs, and traces, plays though these approaches obtained prospective performance,
 Hui Dou, Shenglai Guo, Lele Zou and Yiwen Zhang are with the School they still suffer from the following challenges:
of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China. (1) Intra-modal uncertainty: Multimodal data originates
E-mail: {douhui, zhangyiwen}@ahu.edu.cn, from heterogeneous sources and is prone to data uncertainty
{e24201079, e22301352}@stu.ahu.edu.cn
 due to modality noise, absence, and intrinsic ambiguity.
 Pengfei Chen is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering, These uncertainties directly compromise data quality, thereby
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. diminishing the model’s ability to comprehend multimodal
E-mail: chenpf7@mail.sysu.edu.cn
 content effectively. Existing approaches [11] [8] typically
 Zibin Zheng is with the School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen employ deterministic point embeddings to learn modality-
University, Zhuhai, China. specific representations. However, such methods rely heavily
E-mail: zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
 on clean or high-quality data. When processing low-quality
 Yiwen Zhang is the corresponding author. data, uncertain sample embeddings may cause the model to

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2

 detected unusual pa�erns no detected unusual pa�erns
 bilistic Encoder (GPE) module to extract robust feature representations from complex multimodal content. For the second
 challenge, CFM enables the model to dynamically focus on
 the most discriminative modalities. For the third challenge, we
 System Fault Type incorporate an active learning framework for iterative model
 Metric Log Trace
 training that maintains high detection performance even under
 Resource Underprovisioning limited labeling resources.
 We conducted extensive experiments on two widely adopted
 benchmark microservice platforms (TrainTicket [16] and So-
 Database Query Failure
 cialNetwork [15] ) and one public dataset (SN from Eadro
 [11]). The experimental results demonstrate that our approach
 Network Conges�on
 achieves an average F1-score of 98.10%, surpassing previous
 state-of-the-art unimodal and multimodal methods by up to
Fig. 1: Abnormal patterns in multimodal data for different
 7.87%. These results also highlight the high robustness and
system failures. This figure illustrates how different fault
 resilience of MUAD, as it maintains excellent detection pertypes manifest across metrics, logs, and traces. For instance,
 formance even under conditions of low-quality modal data and
resource underprovisioning manifests primarily in metrics,
 limited labeled samples.
while database query failures are evident in logs and traces.
 In summary, our work makes the following contributions:
 • We propose MUAD, a novel multimodal anomaly detecinaccurately capture critical information, consequently limiting
both performance and robustness. tion framework for microservice systems that leverages
 metrics, logs, and traces. By jointly modeling intra-modal
 (2) inter-modal uncertainty: Although each modal data
 and inter-modal uncertainties, MUAD significantly imdeserves to be paid enough attention in order to detect various
 proves the accuracy and robustness of anomaly detection.
anomalous patterns in practical scenarios, the confidence level
 • MUAD employs a graph-based probabilistic encoder
of each modality is not static across different samples, which
 to robustly learn information representations for each
are termed as “inter-modal uncertainty” in our paper. Existing
 modality, and dynamically integrates these modalities
multimodal anomaly detection [11], [14], [15] methods inthrough a confidence-aware fusion mechanism, achieving
herently assume that all modalities contribute positively to the
 efficient multimodal data integration.
detection process. However, when confronted with inter-modal
 • We innovatively integrate active learning into the multiconflicts, these approaches prevents the dynamic assessment of
 modal anomaly detection setting, which enables MUAD
which modality can most accurately reflect the system state,
 to maintain strong detection performance even under
thereby lacking the ability to dynamically assess and adjust
 label-deficient conditions. This is particularly important
the confidence levels of each modality.
 for multimodal anomaly detection, as the complexity of
 (3) Paucity of training data: Fully labeled high-quality multimodal data typically incurs high annotation costs.
samples can significantly enhance the detection performance • We conduct extensive experiments on three benchmark
of models but require extensive manual annotation, which is datasets, where MUAD achieves state-of-the-art perforboth time-consuming and costly. Particularly in the context mance. The source codes and datasets utilized in MUAD
of multimodal data, the complexity and workload increase is open-sourced as a GitHub project [17].
significantly due to the need to integrate information from
 The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
heterogeneous sources and make comprehensive judgments
 introduces the key motivations. Section III describes the detail
about the system state. Consequently, a key challenge in
 design and implementation of MUAD. After that, Section IV
multimodal anomaly detection lies in balancing the trade-off
 describes the experimental setups and presents the experimenbetween annotation cost and detection performance, so as to
 tal results and analysis. Section V introduces the related work.
maintain effectiveness under under label-deficient conditions.
 Finally, Section VI concludes this paper.
 In this work, we propose MUAD, an uncertainty-aware
multimodal anomaly detection framework enhanced with active learning. It consists of four stages: (1)Unimodal Feature II. M OTIVATION
Encoding, where each modality is encoded into deterministic Motivation #1: It is necessary to model intra-modal
point-wise features; (2)Uncertainty Modeling, which derives data uncertainty to enhance the robustness of multimodal
robust modality-specific representations by sampling stochas- anomaly detection. In real-world scenarios, the collected data
tic latent vectors; (3)Dynamic Modality Fusion, where a is subject to various uncertainties arising from environmental
Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM) adaptively as- disturbances, limitations in the performance of monitoring
signs weights to each modality based on confidence estimates components, and human errors. As shown in Figure 2, intraand fuses them into a global representation; (4)Active Train- modal data uncertainty primarily includes modality noise,
ing, which iteratively updates the model using high-confidence absence, and intrinsic ambiguity. Specifically, since normal
pseudo-labeled data and highly informative manually labeled and anomalous logs may share the same log events, this eventsamples until the query budget is exhausted. Specifically, to level ambiguity makes it difficult for existing log event-based
address the first challenge, we design a Graph-based Proba- feature extraction methods to effectively distinguish between

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

 Log Uncertainty Metric Uncertainty
 ...LoggingReporter : Span reported:a56b4…- POST

 ...LoggingReporter : Span reported:4e26a…- error
 ...LoggingReporter : Span reported: <*> - <*>

 Trace Uncertainty

Fig. 2: Examples of low-quality multimodal data in microservices. Log Uncertainty (Left Top): the consistent log templates
used for extracting both normal and abnormal events result Fig. 3: Based on the experimental results of MUAD on
in ambiguity at the event level. Metric Uncertainty (Right): Dataset B, we can find that the confidence scores of different
unusual fluctuations in CPU and network metrics occur during modalities vary dynamically across samples. Data from lownormal system operation, introducing noise that may not confidence modalities may constrain optimal fusion strategies,
indicate actual anomalies. Trace Uncertainty (Left Bottom): thereby adversely affecting system state inference.
missing latency data in call chains compromises the integrity
and completeness of trace information. strate high confidence scores in detecting CPU overload conditions, indicating their effectiveness in inferring system status.
normal and anomalous patterns, thereby increasing the risk However, they become unreliable when diagnosing database
of false positives and false negatives. Moreover, we observed query anomalies, where traces obtain the highest confidence
that the presence of noisy metric data further confounds the score. If proper weight allocation is not implemented during
identification of genuine anomalies, as transient fluctuations multimodal fusion, these metrics may dominate the overall
induced by factors such as resource contention do not nec- detection decision, posing a risk to detection robustness. In
essarily indicate system anomalies and should not trigger such cases, greater emphasis should be placed on modalities
alerts. Additionally, real-world microservice systems often with higher prediction confidence to ensure the reliability of
face issues with missing multimodal data, which not only un- anomaly detection results. Notably, logs consistently exhibit
dermines the overall integrity of the data but also significantly low confidence scores, primarily because log-based anomaly
impacts the quality of feature representation. In particular, the detection methods often fail to meet the precision requirements
absence of call chain data adversely affects the learning of of practical applications [8], [14]. These critical observations
modal graph features that rely on call chain generation. These motivate our introduction of a dynamic fusion mechanism
findings suggest that intra-modal data uncertainty diminishes into the multimodal anomaly detection framework, enabling
the model’s ability to comprehend multimodal content, thereby automatic identification of the most trustworthy information
necessitating a robust feature extraction method to effectively sources and consequently enhancing overall detection accumodel such uncertainty. racy.
 Motivation #2: It is necessary to deal with intermodal uncertainty to ensure the reliability of multimodal III. A PPROACH
anomaly detection. Due to the various anomalous patterns,
the confidence level of each modality in anomaly detection A. Design Overview
is inherently non-stationary across different samples. To val- Figure 4 presents an overview of the MUAD framework, a
idate this conclusion, we utilize the trained MUAD model to multimodal anomaly detector integrated with an active learnpredict the True Classification Probability (TCP) values for ing strategy. The framework operates in an iterative training
each modality across two different fault sample sets and two paradigm, wherein human annotators label the most informadifferent normal sample sets from Dataset B. Specifically, TCP tive samples and high-confidence predictions are automatically
is derived from the softmax output of the modality-specific assigned pseudo-labels to expand the annotated dataset. Due
classifier, representing how confidently each modality predicts to the innovative introduction of confidence prediction into
the correct system state. Higher TCP values (closer to 1.0) the active learning process, MUAD can significantly reduce
indicate more reliable modality predictions (Detailed formu- the effort of manually labeling data. Within a given query
lation can be found in Section III-D). Besides, Dataset B was budget, the model aims to maximize detection performance.
collected locally from the open-source microservice systems During each iteration, MUAD adopts the approach illustrated
SocialNetwork [15] and detailed can be found in Section IV-A. in Figure 5 to jointly model both intra-modal and inter-modal
We focused on two fault types: CPU exhaustion and Database uncertainties, thereby ensuring the detector’s performance and
query failure, as well as another two separate sample sets robustness. Specifically, modality-specific encoders are first
from the normal data. These experimental setups enable us applied to process inputs from different data sources. To
to evaluate the confidence levels of different modalities under capture intra-modal uncertainty, a Graph-based Probabilistic
various conditions. As shown in Figure 3, the metrics demon- Encoder (GPE) is employed to represent input features as

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

 Online Detection
 service and construct the corresponding time series data.
 Data
 MUAD Anomaly Detection
 Similarly, a GRU is employed to generate the trace feature
 Preprocessing t
 Trace representation, denoted by ft ∈ RD .
 Active Training Update
 C. Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder
 Metric

 Label
 Existing multimodal representation methods encode each
 High-confidence
 samples modality as a deterministic point in the embedding space,
 Log Unlabeled pool
 High-information
 Engineer Labeled pool thereby overlooking the uncertainty inherent in the data.
 samples
 To address this limitation, we model the input features of
Fig. 4: The overview framework of MUAD. The framework each modality as Gaussian distributions and reconstruct their
operates in an iterative training paradigm with active learning. embedding representations through distribution sampling. No-
In each iteration, multimodal data (metrics, logs, traces) are tably, given the characteristics of anomaly propagation among
processed by MUAD for anomaly detection. The labeled pool microservices, we focus on capturing graph-level features
is updated through two mechanisms: high-confidence sam- for each modality to sense the topological structure over a
ples are automatically pseudo-labeled, while high-informative broader neighborhood, rather than reconstructing independent
samples are manually annotated by engineers. This process embeddings for each service. Specifically, we employ a Graph
continues until the query budget is exhausted. Attention Network (GAT) to learn the salient information of
 each modality within the graph structure and utilize a pooling
Gaussian distributions. Subsequently, a Confidence-aware Fulayer to obtain the graph-level features, i.e., {gm , gl , gt }. Howsion Mechanism (CFM) is designed to adaptively assign fusion
 ever, these features remain deterministic and fail to capture
weights to each modality. The final fused representation is then
 the uncertainty present in multimodal data. Our GPE module
forwarded to the anomaly detector for prediction.
 further models the input features of each modality as Gaussian
 distributions, which can be formally expressed as:
B. Unimodal Feature Representation
 µv , σv2 = M LP (gv ) , v ∈ {m, l, t} (2)
 In microservice systems, different observable data typically
 p(zv |x) = N µv , σv2
 
exist in heterogeneous forms, including logs, metrics, and (3)
traces. To capture modality-specific representations, we de- where the mean vector(µ) represents the feature representasign individual unimodal feature extractors tailored to each tion identified by each modality, and the variance vector(σ)
modality. indicates the range of the modality’s distribution over each
 Metric Feature Representation: The metrics collected dimension—the larger the variance, the higher the uncertainty
from each microservice are presented as a multivariate time of the observed content. Now, instead of a deterministic
series, reflecting the performance status of the corresponding point embedding, we can sample a random embedding zv
service. To efficiently capture the key dynamic information, from p(zv |x). However, since the sampling operation is nonwe employ a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) to model the differentiable, we employ the reparameterization trick to allow
intramodality dynamics in the time series, using its final gradient descent to back-propagate normally during parameter
hidden state to represent the entire sequence: optimization. Specifically, for each modality, we first sample
 t
 fm = GRU ( M1k , M2k , ..., MTk ), fm ∈ RD
 
 (1) random noise ξ from a standard normal distribution and then
  k generate zv as an equivalent sampled representation:
 k k
where M1 , M2 , ..., MT denote the multivariate time series
composed of k metrics over an observation window of size T . zv = µv + ξσv2 , ϵ ∼ N (0, I) (4)
fm represents the metric feature, and Dt denotes the output Although GPE is capable of estimating the mean and
dimension of the feature extractor. variance for each modality, if the variance becomes too
 Log Feature Representation: Following the log parsing ap- small during training, the modality feature representations can
proach described in previous work, we first use Drain, a widely degenerate into deterministic embeddings. To counteract this
adopted log parsing tool in AIOps research community, to effect, we introduce a KL divergence regularization term to
convert unstructured log messages into structured log events. constrain each modality’s distribution to approach the standard
Subsequently, we model the occurrence of these log events normal distribution, N (0, I). Specifically, the optimization is
using the Hawkes process [18], as it has demonstrated both formulated as follows:
effectiveness and efficiency in prior evaluations of log event 1X
 KL N (µv , σ 2v ) || N (0, I)
 
 Lkl =
representation learning [11]. To ensure that the resulting log 3 v
features are compatible with subsequent processing stages, we (5)
 1X1 2
project them into a unified D-dimensional space using a fully = (µv + σ 2v − log σ 2v − 1)
 3 v 2
connected layer with a ReLU activation function. Finally, we
 t
extract deterministic log embeddings, denoted by fl ∈ RD . where KL(·) denotes the divergence between two probability
 Trace Feature Representation: We follow up-to-date pre- distributions. Under the guidance of this loss function, the
vious works [11], [19] and capture delay times to represent model is discouraged from adopting excessively low variances,
traces. Specifically, we process all traces within each sliding thus preserving the uncertainty in the multimodal features and
window to extract the average delay associated with each preventing their collapse into deterministic representations.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5

 True Classification Probabilities
 Modality-Specific Classifier
 Log FC SoftMax
 Encoder
 Confidence Learning
 Log
 FC Sigmoid

 Trace (2) Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (3) Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism
 Encoder MLP Adaptive Weights
 Trace

 L T M
 GAT
 Metric
 Encoder (4) Anomaly Detection
 Metric MLP Anomaly
 Detector
 (1) Unimodal Feature Representation

Fig. 5: Major stages in MUAD for anomaly detection by modeling both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties. The pipeline
consists of four stages: (1) Unimodal Feature Representation extracts modality-specific features using dedicated encoders;
(2) Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) models intra-modal uncertainty by mapping features to Gaussian distributions
N (µ, σ 2 ) through GAT and MLP layers; (3) Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism (CFM) dynamically assigns fusion weights
based on confidence scores,thereby modeling inter-modal uncertainty; (4) Anomaly Detector produces the final prediction.

D. Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism to a scalar, followed by a Sigmoid activation to ensure
 As the varying importance of different modalities in predict- ωv ∈ (0, 1). This simple design prevents overfitting while
ing the final system state, a dynamic mechanism is required enabling efficient confidence estimation during both training
to weigh their contributions during the fusion process. Here and inference.
we adopt a confidence-aware fusion mechanism (CFM) that To achieve the above objective, we employ the following
adaptively estimates modality-specific weights. As shown in loss function: n
 X
Figure 5, CFM applies a modality-specific classifier to each Lvp = − log(giv (Ii∗ )) (8)
modality after obtaining its uncertainty representation. This i=1
classifier generates a softmax output, and the module selects n
 X
the true classification probability (TCP) [20], [21] from the Lvq = MSE (TCPvi , ωiv ) (9)
softmax outputs as the confidence score. Unlike using the max- i=1
imum softmax probability, which may lead to overconfidence X
when a modality makes an incorrect prediction, TCP uses the Lcon = (Lvp + Lvq ) (10)
 v∈{m,l,t}
softmax probability corresponding to the actual label, thereby
mitigating such overconfidence. Formally, for each modality, In practice, Lvp and Lvq are jointly optimized through endthe confidence score can be expressed as: to-end training. During each forward pass, the classifier g v
 K generates softmax outputs, from which TCPv is computed
 X
 TCPv = y · p (y | zv ) = yk pvk (6) and used as the supervision signal for training the confidence
 k=1 network. Both the classifier and confidence network are updated simultaneously via backpropagation through Eq.(10),
where (·) denotes the inner product operation, and yk repwhere the two loss components play complementary roles: Lvp
resents the k element of the label. It can be observed that
 (Eq. 8) ensures accurate classification through cross-entropy
TCPv ∈ (0, 1) reflects the correctness of a modality’s inloss on the ground-truth label Ii∗ , while Lvq (Eq. 9) trains the
formation in representing the system state. A higher value of
 confidence predictor ω v to estimate the classifier’s reliability
TCPv indicates that the modality’s features accurately capture
 via mean squared error with TCPv . This joint optimization
the system state, whereas a lower value suggests incorrect preenables each modality to develop reliable self-assessment
dictions. However, ground-truth labels are unavailable during
 capabilities for optimal multi-modal fusion.
the testing phase, making it infeasible to use TCPv directly as
 Finally, we aggregate the representations from all modalities
a weight. To ensure consistency between training and testing, a
 into a unified system state representation by performing a
confidence network is constructed to predict confidence scores P
 confidence-weighted fusion: h = ωv zv .
that will serve as the modality fusion weights:
 ωv = Sigmoid (MLP (zv )) (7) E. Anomaly Detection
 The confidence network is implemented as a lightweight Finally, the anomaly detector uses the fused representation
architecture: a single fully-connected layer that maps zv ∈ RD as input to to classify the current system state as either

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

 Algorithm 1: Active training procedure of MUAD The active training procedure of MUAD is described in
 Input: Unlabeled pool NU ; Labeled pool NL ; Algorithm 1. To fully leverage the above advantages, we
 High-confidence sample set; NC Query budget design a novel active learning query strategy hybridly utilizing
 b; Query batch size k; Confidence threshold θ. the MIS and HCS. Specifically, high-informative samples are
 Output: Anomaly detection model MUAD and identified by calculating the prediction entropy:
 Labeled dataset NL . X
 H(xi ) = − p(c | xi ) log p(c | xi ) (12)
1 NC = ∅; c
2 while |NU | < b do where higher entropy indicates greater model uncertainty.
3 ▷Stage 1: Training the MUAD Model These samples, termed as most informative samples (MIS) in
4 begin our framework, are selected for expert annotation. For high-
5 NL ←NL ∪ NC ; confidence samples (HCS), the predicted confidence score
6 Train the anomaly detection model ▷Eq. (13); TCP
 [ i (defined in Eq. (6)) serves as the confidence indicator,
7 end and samples with TCP [ i > θ are automatically assigned
 8 pseudo-labels via arg max p(y|xi ). These two mechanisms
 ▷Stage 2: Labeling High-Informative Samples work complementarily to balance annotation cost and de-
 9 begin tection performance controlled by the confidence threshold
10 Calculate the entropy values in NU ; θ. Based on the above query strategy, the active training
11 Select the Top-k samples for annotation; process proceeds as follows. We begin by randomly labeling
12 Update NL ; 10% of the data to initialize the MUAD model. During each
13 end subsequent iteration, we select MIS by computing the entropy
14 of the model’s predictions. High entropy typically indicates
 ▷Stage 3: Selecting High-Confidence Samples that the model is uncertain about the sample’s classification,
15 for xi ∈ NU do highlighting areas where the current model struggles and
16 CP i > θ then
 if T[ where expert labeling is most valuable. Next, we perform
17 Assign pseudo-labels; confidence prediction and label inference on the remaining un-
18 Update NC ← xi ; labeled data, and incorporate samples with confidence scores
19 end exceeding a predefined threshold θ (i.e., HCS) into the training
20 end set for the next iteration. Since the model is essentially a
21 NL ← NL ∪ S, NC ← NC ∪ H, NU ← NU \ S; classifier, we adopt the T[ CP value as an indicator of the
22 end model’s confidence in its predictions. In each learning phase,
23 return NL the model’s training loss consists of the following components:
 LMU AD = Lano + λ1 Lkl + λ2 Lconf + Lmse (13)

normal or anomalous. We formulate this explicitly as a binary where Lano denotes the binary cross-entropy loss on labeled
classification task. Formally, this can be expressed as: data, and Lmse represents the loss for label confidence estimation. λ1 and λ2 are the weighting coefficients for the
 ŷ = argmax[Sof tmax (W h + b)] (11) corresponding loss components. We repeat the above iterative
 process until the query budget b is exhausted.
 In the equation above, W and b respectively denote the
trainable parameters, and ŷ ∈ {0, 1} represents the predicted
discrete label, where 0 denotes a normal state and 1 denotes an IV. E XPERIMENT
anomaly. If an anomaly is detected, MUAD triggers an alert In this section, we evaluate MUAD by answering the following
and provides the modality confidence scores to the operator, research questions (RQs) through empirical studies:
facilitating the assessment of the alert’s reliability. • RQ1: How effective is MUAD in anomaly detection
 tasks?
 • RQ2: How does each component contribute to MUAD’s
F. Active Training
 overall performance?
 To balance labeling cost and model performance, we apply • RQ3: Does MUAD exhibit high robustness?
active learning to train our model. As a label-efficient learning • RQ4: Is it necessary to consider high confidence samples
paradigm, active learning selects the most informative samples in MUAD’s active learning strategy?
(MIS) for annotation under a given query budget, aiming to • RQ5: How do MUAD’s hyperparameters affect its permaximize model performance at minimal labeling cost. Most formance?
existing studies on active anomaly detection focus on selecting
samples for expert annotation, while overlooking the value of
high-confidence samples (HCS) in accelerating model training. A. Experimental Setup
However, if the model exhibits sufficient confidence in its 1) Datasets: To evaluate the performance of MUAD, we
predictions, pseudo-labels can be automatically assigned and conduct extensive experiments on three datasets (A, B and C),
incorporated into the training process. as summarized in Table I. We randomly selected 60% of the

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

 TABLE I: Dataset composition.

 Dataset Metric Length Log Messages Trace Quantity model dependency-aware system states in microservices.
 • DeAnomaly [25] is a two-phase unsupervised anomaly
 Dataset A 473575 386707 11132 detection framework that decomposes multivariate time
 Dataset B 290184 216249 33545 series to remove normal patterns and uses diffusion
 Dataset C 16944 15365 11345 models on residuals for robust and accurate anomaly
 detection.
 • HG-PAD [26] is an unsupervised framework that moddata from each of the three datasets for training and used the els microservice dependencies via heterogeneous graphs,
remaining 40% for testing, ensuring that the ratio of normal employing GNN, CVAE, and GAT for anomaly detection
to abnormal samples remains consistent between the training using metrics and traces. We implement this method foland testing sets. lowing the original paper as no official code is available.
 Dataset A and Dataset B were collected locally from • Medicine [10] is a multimodal failure diagnosis approach
the open-source microservice systems TrainTicket [16] and that mitigates modality dominance through independent
SocialNetwork [15], respectively. TrainTicket is a platform encoding and adaptive optimization, achieving robust
that provides railway ticketing services, while SocialNetwork performance under missing or low-quality modality data.
simulates a microservice-based social networking application. 3) Performance Metrics: Since anomaly detection is essen-
Both have been widely studied in prior research on microser- tially a binary classification task, we adopt Precision, Recall,
vice anomaly detection. Following previous studies [11], [22], and F1-score to evaluate the performance of MUAD and other
we adopt chaos engineering techniques to inject seven types of baseline models. These metrics are defined as follows:
anomalies: CPU/memory/disk stress, service failure, database
 TP
query exceptions, packet loss, and packet loss/delay. During Precision = (14)
our data collection phase, each anomaly lasts for two minutes. TP + FP
In total, we perform 133 and 84 injection operations on Dataset TP
A and Dataset B, respectively. Metrics, logs, and trace data Recall = (15)
 TP + FN
are collected through three separate collectors.
 Dataset C is the SN dataset from Eadro [11], which pro- Precision × Recall
vides a multimodal dataset suitable for microservice anomaly F1-score = 2 × (16)
 Precision + Recall
detection. It contains various faults, such as CPU overload,
 where TP (True Positives) denotes the number of correctly
network packet loss, and network latency. The dataset includes
 identified anomalous samples, FP (False Positives) refers to the
7 metrics sampled every 1 second, 126,384 traces, and 15 log
 number of normal samples incorrectly identified as anomalous,
templates.
 and FN (False Negatives) represents the number of anomalous
 2) Baselines: We compare MUAD against representative
 samples that were not detected.
state-of-the-art methods in microservice anomaly detection,
 4) Implementation and Settings: We implement the protoincluding both unimodal and multimodal approaches. These
 type of our method using Python 3.8. All experiments are conbaselines were selected based on their technical diversity,
 ducted on a Linux server equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce
recency, and reproducibility, ensuring comprehensive evalu-
 GTX 3060 GPU. The experimental hyperparameters include
ation across different modality combinations and detection
 the sliding window length, stride, confidence threshold θ, and
paradigms. The selected baselines are as follows:
 manually tuned loss weights. Specifically, we set the sliding
 • MTAD-GAT [23] is a multivariate time series anomaly
 window length to 10 and the stride to 1. It is worth noting that
 detection method that leverages graph attention networks microservice modalities are sometimes asynchronous in practo capture temporal and inter-variable dependencies of tice. While data alignment is necessary for multimodal fusion,
 metrics. the small stride allows MUAD to capture transient anomalies
 • HADES [8] is a semi-supervised multimodal anomaly
 that might otherwise be smoothed out, and the Hawkes process
 detection model that takes logs and metrics as inputs implicitly preserves the asynchronous arrival dynamics of logs
 and fuses modality features via a cross-modal attention within each window. The threshold θ to 0.9. MUAD is trained
 mechanism. using the Adam optimizer [27] with an initial learning rate
 • MRCA [19] performs automated fault localization using
 of 0.001, a batch size of 50, and 120 epochs per training
 multimodal data, mainly logs and traces, and detects stage. We continue the iterative process of sample selection
 anomalous services based on reconstruction probabilities. and training until the model performance reaches the level of
 • UAC-AD [24] is an unsupervised adversarial contrastive
 using the fully labeled dataset. For the baseline methods, we
 learning-based method that enhances anomaly detection adopt the parameters provided in the corresponding papers and
 by distinguishing hard and abnormal samples. official open-source implementations.
 • MSTGAD [12] proposes a multimodal anomaly detection framework that integrates metrics, logs, and traces
 through attentive multi-modal learning. B. RQ1: Overall Performance of MUAD
 • Eadro [11] is a supervised multimodal anomaly detec- To evaluate the effectiveness of MUAD in anomaly detion approach that nonlinearly fuses features from three tection tasks, we compare its overall performance and permodalities and employs a graph attention network to formance under varying labeled data quantities with several

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

 TABLE II: Performance comparison for anomaly detection.

 Modality Dataset A Dataset B Dataset C
 Approach
 Metric Log Trace F1-score Recall Precision F1-score Recall Precision F1-score Recall Precision

 MTAD-GAT ✓ 0.7520 0.8267 0.6897 0.6706 0.6455 0.6978 0.8561 0.9999 0.7484
 HADES ✓ ✓ 0.4275 0.3305 0.6053 0.5631 0.6060 0.5259 0.9084 1.0000 0.8321
 UAC-AD ✓ ✓ 0.4589 0.3606 0.6309 0.5070 0.4236 0.6314 0.4761 0.3255 0.8861
 MRCA ✓ ✓ 0.2090 0.1346 0.4592 0.4355 0.3013 0.7857 0.9412 0.8889 0.9412
 MSTGAD ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.7438 0.6994 0.7943 0.8251 0.8261 0.8240 0.9802 0.9920 0.9686
 DeAnomaly ✓ 0.5259 0.4607 0.6124 0.6788 0.5316 0.9387 0.9753 0.9701 0.9806
 HG-PAD ✓ ✓ 0.4742 0.3477 0.7455 0.5121 0.4004 0.7102 0.8167 0.7154 0.9514
 Medicine ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.3663 0.3905 0.4476 0.4143 0.4048 0.4881 0.8056 0.8334 0.8667
 Eadro ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.9022 0.8484 0.9632 0.9234 0.8936 0.9551 0.9831 0.9839 0.9823
 MUAD ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.9809 0.9789 0.9829 0.9692 0.9593 0.9657 0.9928 0.9941 0.9914

 MUAD-10% ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.8447 0.8452 0.8443 0.8729 0.8514 0.8956 0.9314 0.9849 0.8833
 MUAD-30% ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.9208 0.9271 0.9145 0.9289 0.9231 0.9348 0.9759 0.9822 0.9697
 MUAD-40% ✓ ✓ ✓ 0.9584 0.9625 0.9543 0.9358 0.9421 0.9295 0.9825 0.9844 0.9807

representative anomaly detection models, as shown in Table not only for detection but also for identifying the source of
II. Notably, to mitigate potential dataset size bias, we selected anomalies, paving the way for future end-to-end troubleshootthe closest matching percentage of labeled samples for fair ing frameworks. In a preliminary experiment on Dataset C, we
comparison. Based on these results, we make the following extended MUAD with a simple classification head for serviceobservations: level localization. The extended model achieved a HitRate@1
 Overall, MUAD outperforms other state-of-the-art anomaly of 99.24%, outperforming the baseline Eadro (97.59%). Fidetection methods in terms of F1-score, recall, and precision. nally, despite the architectural complexity, MUAD remains
Our approach achieves the highest average F1-scores of 0.9809 computationally efficient. For example, it requires only 3.35s
on Dataset A, 0.9692 on Dataset B, and 0.9928 on Dataset C, for inference on Dataset C with a consumer-grade NVIDIA
surpassing the best-performing baselines by 7.87%, 4.58%, RTX 3060 GPU, which is well within the acceptable range
and 0.97%, respectively. Notably, on Dataset C, although for practical anomaly detection tasks.
MUAD exhibits a slightly lower recall than Hades, it achieves Due to the active learning strategy specially designed for
a 24.3% improvement in precision. This suggests that Hades multimodal anomaly detection model training, MUAD further
incurs a higher false positive rate, which in turn compromises demonstrates superior performance under label scarcity. As
the overall reliability of the system. These results further con- shown in Table II, across all three datasets, our approach
firm MUAD’s ability to detect anomalies with minimal false is able to achieve an average F1-score of 94.18% using
alarms or missed detections, underscoring the effectiveness of only 30% of labeled data, marginally outperforming the fully
the proposed method. supervised Eadro method, which attains 93.62%. Moreover,
 To further understand MUAD’s advantages, we analyze model performance progressively improves with additional
the performance of the baseline methods. Single-modality labeled data, confirming MUAD’s capability to effectively
methods like DeAnomaly show strong performance on specific balance annotation costs and detection performance.
datasets (e.g., F1=0.9753 on Dataset C) but suffer degradation
on others (F1=0.5259 and 0.6788 on Datasets A and B), C. RQ2: The Ablation Study of the Proposed Method
indicating sensitivity to dataset characteristics and limited
generalization. Multimodal methods, while leveraging richer To further validate the effectiveness of MUAD, we perinformation, do not automatically guarantee superiority. HG- formed ablation experiments on Datasets A, B, and C. We
PAD achieves F1-scores ranging from 0.4742 to 0.8167, and designed six sets of ablation experiments to evaluate the
Medicine yields 0.3663 to 0.8056 across the three datasets. individual modules of MUAD as follows:
This suggests that the key challenge lies not in the num- • Only Metric: Uses only metric data to evaluate its stanber of modalities, but in effective fusion under uncertainty. dalone contribution.
Among all baselines, Eadro achieves the strongest perfor- • Only Trace: Employs only trace data to assess its impact.
mance (F1=0.9022–0.9831) yet remains constrained by limited • Only Log: Relies solely on log data to measure its
uncertainty modeling. In contrast, MUAD explicitly models effectiveness.
both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties through GPE • w/o GPE: This variant removes the Graph-based Probaand CFM, enabling consistently superior performance across bilistic Encoder, instead using deterministic point features
all datasets. In addition, MUAD’s representations are robust extracted from each modality.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

 TABLE III: Experimental results of the ablation study.
 Dataset Approach F1-score Recall Precision strategy, exhibits varying degrees of performance degradation
 across different evaluation metrics. This further highlights the
 Only Metric 0.9459 0.9306 0.9619
 superiority of our fusion approach. We attribute this to the
 Only Log 0.6805 0.5916 0.8008 fact that different modalities contribute unequally, and the use
 Only Trace 0.8837 0.8252 0.9511 of a confidence-aware approach enables adaptive learning of
 Dataset A w/o GPE 0.9467 0.9367 0.9568 weights for each modality, allowing the model to focus more
 w/o G 0.9650 0.9607 0.9694 on the most informative modalities for anomaly detection.
 w/o CFM 0.9651 0.9666 0.9635 Finally, it is worth noting that the ablation results on
 MUAD 0.9809 0.9789 0.9829
 Dataset C seems less pronounced, which is mainly due to the
 dataset’s specific characteristics. In detail, the Only Metric
 Only Metric 0.9452 0.9511 0.9394 variant achieves an F1-score of 0.9903, which is close to
 Only Log 0.7350 0.5810 0.7070 MUAD’s 0.9928. This is mainly because the smaller size
 Only Trace 0.8735 0.8455 0.9035 of Dataset C limits the ability of complex models to fully
 Dataset B w/o GPE 0.9484 0.9432 0.9536
 exploit their structural advantages. Moreover, the fault types
 in Dataset C are relatively homogeneous, with resource- and
 w/o G 0.9524 0.9477 0.9571
 performance-related anomalies (e.g., CPU overload, network
 w/o CFM 0.9350 0.9143 0.9086
 latency) accounting for a significant proportion. These anoma-
 MUAD 0.9692 0.9593 0.9657 lies are directly and prominently reflected in performance
 Only Metric 0.9903 0.9925 0.9882 metrics, enabling the Only Metric variant to achieve strong
 Only Log 0.9064 1.000 0.8289
 discriminative capability on its own. As a result, incorporating
 additional modalities and considering intra-modal and inter-
 Only Trace 0.9470 0.9758 0.9199
 modal uncertainty yields only limited incremental gains for
 Dataset C w/o GPE 0.9922 0.9919 0.9925
 Dataset C.
 w/o G 0.9925 0.9962 0.9888 In summary, the ablation results demonstrate that MUAD’s
 w/o CFM 0.9909 0.9919 0.9898 components contribute synergistically to its performance gains.
 MUAD 0.9928 0.9941 0.9914 The multimodal integration provides comprehensive observability, while GPE and CFM ensure robust uncertainty modeling and reliable fusion, collectively enabling MUAD to achieve
 state-of-the-art anomaly detection across diverse scenarios.
 • w/o G: A simplified variant where the graph component
 is removed from GPE, retaining only the probabilistic
 encoding for each modality. D. RQ3: Robustness Evaluation
 • w/o CFM: This variant excludes the Confidence-aware To comprehensively evaluate the robustness of MUAD
 Fusion Module, performing anomaly detection by directly under realistic data quality degradation, we select Dataset A,
 concatenating features from all modalities. which has the largest data volume among our benchmarks, for
 As presented in Table III, the superior performance of experimentation. We examine two data imperfection scenarios
MUAD can be primarily attributed to the complementary in- prevalent in production microservice systems: Inter-modal
tegration of multiple modalities. Relying on a single modality Information Inconsistency and Random Modality Missing.
leads to varying degrees of performance degradation across We quantify robustness using relative performance degradadatasets. For Dataset A and B, MUAD respectively achieves tion, which normalizes the impact of perturbations against each
an average F1-score improvement of 14.42% and 11.80%, model’s clean baseline:
demonstrating its excellent capability in handling multimodal F 1baseline − F 1perturbed
 Degradation(%) = × 100 (17)
data. These results further underscore the importance of in- F 1baseline
tegrating diverse data modalities to enhance the accuracy of Lower degradation indicates stronger robustness. We compare
anomaly detection. MUAD against Eadro, the best-performing multimodal base-
 Modeling intra-modal uncertainty is crucial for robustly line from Section IV-B, using this metric alongside absolute
capturing modality-specific features. When the GPE module F1-scores.
is removed, the model struggles to extract meaningful infor- 1) Inter-modal Information Inconsistency: In practical
mation from low-quality multimodal data, leading to degraded microservice systems, multimodal observations may become
overall performance. Moreover, in the experimental results on inconsistent due to heterogeneous noise, asynchronous data
Datasets A and B, we observe that w/o G performs worse than collection, or partial modality corruption. To simulate such
w/o GPE, highlighting the benefits of modeling uncertainty realistic conditions, we construct an inter-modal information
in graph-based modality features. Notably, prior studies [28], inconsistency setting, where the reliability of different modali-
[29] have also widely adopted graph-based representations for ties is unevenly and asynchronously degraded across samples.
modality features, further validating the effectiveness of our Specifically, we consider two perturbation scenarios with infeature extraction approach. creasing severity. Perturbations are generated by adding noise
 It is evident that w/o CFM, which relies on simple con- factor τ sampled from a standard normal distribution N (0, I),
catenation rather than the proposed confidence-aware fusion and scaled according to empirical data statistics, ensuring

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10

TABLE IV: Robustness to Inter-modal Information Inconsistency.
 20%, 40%, and 60%. The missing pattern is fully randomized
 Perturbation Setting across samples, without assuming which modality is absent or
 how many modalities are simultaneously unavailable, reflect-
 Method Metric Clean Single-Modal Multi-Modal
 ing the inherent unpredictability of real-world data collection
 Eadro F1 0.9022 0.8455 0.7823 failures.
 Deg (%) 0.00 6.28 13.29 As shown in Table V, MUAD demonstrates strong robustness across all missing rates. At a 60% overall missing
 MUAD F1 0.9809 0.9584 0.9399 rate, MUAD maintains an F1-score of 0.8401 with 14.35%
 Deg (%) 0.00 2.29 4.18 performance degradation, substantially outperforming Eadro
 (F1: 0.7183, 20.38% degradation), corresponding to a 6.03
 TABLE V: Robustness to Random Modality Missing. percentage point advantage in relative robustness. Moreover,
 MUAD exhibits graceful degradation with near-linear per-
 Overall Missing Rate formance decay as missing rates increase, whereas Eadro
 Method Metric Clean 20% 40% 60% shows a steeper decline, particularly beyond 40% missing.
 This robustness can be attributed to the Confidence-aware Fu-
 Eadro F1 0.9022 0.8362 0.7800 0.7183 sion Mechanism (CFM), which dynamically reallocates fusion
 Deg (%) 0.00 7.32 13.54 20.38 weights when modalities are unavailable, allowing MUAD to
 MUAD F1 0.9809 0.9338 0.8888 0.8401 emphasize remaining reliable modalities. In contrast, Eadro’s
 Deg (%) 0.00 4.80 9.39 14.35
 fixed fusion strategy cannot adapt to modality absence, resulting in pronounced performance degradation.
 In summary, these robustness experiments show that MUAD
 maintains stable anomaly detection performance under both
realistic distortion levels without assuming identical noise inter-modal information inconsistency and random modality
patterns across modalities. In the Single-Modality Perturbation missing. This demonstrates MUAD’s robustness to degraded
setting, we randomly select 30% of the test samples. For each and incomplete multimodal observations and highlights the
selected sample, we apply the noise injection to a single, importance of uncertainty modeling and dynamic modality
randomly chosen modality while keeping others clean. In the fusion for reliable anomaly detection in practical microservice
Multi-Modality Perturbation setting, we randomly select 40% environments.
of the test samples and apply simultaneous noise injection to
multiple modalities for each selected sample. By perturbing E. RQ4:Necessity of Considering High-Confidence Samples in
several modalities at the same time, this setting induces more Active Learning
severe inter-modal inconsistency. In this section, we construct a variant of MUAD without the
 As shown in Table IV, MUAD demonstrates strong robust- High Confidence Samples (w/o HCS) to evaluate the necessity
ness under both perturbation scenarios. For example, under the of taking HCS into consideration in the active learning pro-
Multi-Modality Perturbation setting, MUAD achieves an F1- cess. The experiment was conducted on Dataset A which is
score of 0.9399 with only 4.18% performance degradation, considered representative as it features a balanced distribution
significantly outperforming Eadro, whose F1-score drops to of anomalies and a sufficient amount of high-quality data for
0.7823 with 13.29% degradation—corresponding to a 9.11 reliable evaluation. As shown in the comparative results in
percentage point reduction in relative performance loss. This Figure 6, MUAD consistently outperforms the variant without
robustness advantage stems from MUAD’s joint modeling HCS across all query iterations. On Dataset A, as the number
of intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties. Specifically, the of query iterations increases, the F1-score of MUAD with HCS
Graph-based Probabilistic Encoder (GPE) captures modality- steadily improves from approximately 0.85 to 0.96, whereas
specific uncertainty by representing features as probabilistic the variant without HCS exhibits lower performance with
distributions, while the Confidence-aware Fusion Mechanism limited improvement. Selecting samples with high TCP d values
(CFM) dynamically adjusts fusion weights by down-weighting proves effective in identifying high-confidence instances and
unreliable modalities and emphasizing more trustworthy ones assigning reliable pseudo-labels, thereby significantly boosting
at the sample level. In contrast, Eadro adopts a fixed fusion detection performance. Furthermore, the continual inclusion
strategy that cannot adapt to modality-level reliability varia- of high-entropy samples into the training set facilitates the
tions, resulting in pronounced performance degradation under discovery of more accurate high-confidence samples over
inter-modal inconsistency. time. Since these high-entropy samples typically correspond
 2) Random Modality Missing: In real-world microservice to instances where the model is uncertain, their annotation
systems, observability data is often incomplete due to collector gradually enhances the model’s decision confidence and rofailures, network partitions, or transient system issues. To eval- bustness.
uate MUAD’s resilience under such conditions, we construct a In summary, the experimental results confirm that incorporandom modality missing setting, where observability data is rating high-confidence samples is essential for MUAD’s active
partially unavailable at the sample level. Specifically, for each learning strategy, as it effectively reduces annotation costs
test sample, one or more modalities are randomly masked to while maintaining strong detection performance under label
simulate unpredictable data loss, with overall missing rates of scarcity.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11

 0.98
 w/o HCS
 0.96 MUAD
 0.94
 0.92
 0.90
F1-Score

 0.88
 0.86 Fig. 7: Sensitivity analysis of loss weights λ1 and λ2 on
 0.84 Datasets A and B. The colorbars indicate F1-score performance. Results demonstrate that MUAD maintains consis-
 0.82 tently high performance across a wide range of hyperparameter
 0.80 values, indicating strong robustness and low sensitivity to
 5 15 10 20 25 30 parameter selection in practical deployment.
 Query Iteration
Fig. 6: Impact of high-confidence samples (HCS) selection
on active learning performance. The x-axis denotes active practical deployment, as it reduces the need for extensive
learning query iterations, where each iteration corresponds hyperparameter tuning across different microservice environto one querying round followed by model retraining. The ments.
orange bars represent MUAD with HCS, while the blue bars
show the variant without HCS. Incorporating high-confidence
 V. R ELATED W ORK
pseudo-labeled samples consistently improves F1-score across
query iterations, demonstrating the effectiveness of leveraging A. Unimodal Anomaly Detection
reliable predictions to reduce manual annotation costs while Over the years, numerous anomaly detection methods have
maintaining performance. been proposed to ensure the reliability of large-scale systems. Existing unimodal anomaly detection approaches can
 be categorized into three types according to the dependent
F. RQ5:Parameter Sensitivity modality: metric-based, log-based, and trace-based methods.
 In order to balance the ability to model intra- and inter- Metric-based approaches can be further classified into three
modal uncertainties, MUAD comprises multiple loss compo- categories. Reconstruction-based methods [30], [31], [32] typnents. We conducted further experiments to analyze the impact ically reconstruct multivariate time series and detect anomalies
of two key loss weights, λ1 and λ2 . based on reconstruction error or reconstruction probability.
 Impact of loss weight λ1 on intra-modal uncertainty Prediction-based methods [23], [33], [34] forecast future metmodeling: λ1 controls the weight of the KL divergence term in rics and trigger anomaly alarms when the actual values deviate
intra-modal uncertainty modeling. This hyperparameter serves from the predicted ones beyond a predefined threshold. Cluster
as a regularization factor that balances the trade-off between analysis-based approaches [35], [36], [37] embed time series
the compactness and richness of modality-specific information segments into a vector space and apply clustering or distanceretained in the learned subspace. As shown in Figure 7, the based techniques to identify segments that deviate significantly
optimal values of λ1 for the two datasets are 1.0 and 0.1, from the majority, thereby flagging them as anomalies.
respectively. Under these optimal settings, the model tends to Logs record critical events during system operation and
predict higher variance for noisy samples and lower variance serve as an important and valuable resource for online anomaly
for high-quality samples. detection. Various log-based anomaly detection techniques
 Impact of loss weight λ2 on inter-modal uncertainty [38], [39], [5], [40] have been proposed. For instance, Neumodeling: λ2 primarily influences the performance of con- ralLog [40] extracts the semantic information of raw log
fidence prediction for each modality. As illustrated in Figure messages using the BERT model and employs a Transformer-
7, the optimal value for both datasets is 0.6. By optimizing based classification model to detect anomalies. In addition,
λ2 , the model can adjust its final decision strategy according since traces capture the interaction details among microserto the dynamically learned weights of each modality. vices, they play an indispensable role in reconstructing the
 In summary, MUAD demonstrates stable performance propagation paths of anomalies. Several studies [41], [42], [6]
across a wide range of loss weight configurations, indicat- have focused on anomaly detection in trace data. TraceCRL
ing low sensitivity to precise hyperparameter selection. This [6] integrates graph structural information and differentiates
robustness can be attributed to the complementary nature of between normal and abnormal behavior representations in call
MUAD’s loss components: the primary anomaly detection chains through a contrastive learning framework. However,
objective (Lano ) dominates the optimization process, while the as these methods rely solely on a single modality, they are
auxiliary uncertainty modeling terms (Lkl and Lconf ) provide prone to overlooking certain types of anomalies, which limits
effective regularization as long as their weights fall within their ability to ensure the overall security and reliability of the
reasonable ranges. Such stability is particularly valuable for system.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12

B. Multimodal Anomaly Detection and accurate multimodal anomaly detection.

 To overcome the limitations of unimodal anomaly detection, C. Uncertainty Learning
researchers have developed anomaly detection methods based Uncertainty is primarily categorized into data uncertainty,
on multimodal data [43], [9], [24], [12], [44], [45], [1], [46], which is caused by noise within the training data and cannot be
[47], [48]. Specifically, DeepTraLog [43] uses a unified graph mitigated by increasing the amount of data; and model uncerto represent the complex structure of traces and the log events tainty, which is mainly due to incomplete training or data and
embedded within them, and then builds a deep SVDD model is related to model parameters. Recently, some studies [49],
based on this to detect anomalies in microservice systems. [50], [51], [52] have focused on uncertainty research in deep
Anofusion [9] employs GTN to learn the correlations between learning to achieve more robust performance. DUA-Nets [51]
heterogeneous multimodal data and uses GAT to capture dynamically assigns weights to different views of each sample
key features, ultimately predicting data patterns for anomaly by estimating data uncertainty, thereby effectively integrating
detection through GRU. AMulSys [44] employs a hierarchical multi-view information and mitigating noise effects. DMUE
architecture to model traces, metrics, and logs, utilizes graph [52] effectively addresses the issue of label ambiguity in facial
attention network for trace-metric representation extraction, expression recognition by introducing a multi-branch learning
applies heterogeneous graph Transformer for log representa- framework to discover the latent distribution within the label
tion learning, and introduces category prior guided multimodal space, and leveraging pairwise relationships between instances
data augmentation with multifaceted contrastive learning to to estimate uncertainty. Our research focuses primarily on
address class imbalance in anomaly detection. MicroDig [45] leveraging data uncertainty to improve the performance and
employs a heterogeneous propagation graph to model causal robustness of microservice anomaly detection. At the same
relationships between microservices, combines heterogeneity- time, we utilize model uncertainty in active learning to select
oriented random walk algorithm to analyze anomaly propaga- high-information samples.
tion patterns, and effectively addresses the root cause localization accuracy issues caused by inconsistency between causality VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
and calling relationships. MULAN [1] proposes a unified In this paper, we proposed MUAD, an uncertainty-aware
framework for multi-modal causal structure learning aimed at multimodal anomaly detection framework for microservice
root cause localization. It leverages a log-tailored language systems that explicitly models both intra-modal and intermodel for log representation learning, employs contrastive modal uncertainties. MUAD integrates a graph-based probalearning within a shared latent space to extract both modality- bilistic encoder to robustly learn modality-specific representainvariant and modality-specific features, and incorporates a tions under noisy and incomplete observations, a confidence-
KPI-aware attention mechanism to evaluate the reliability aware fusion mechanism to dynamically adjust modality conof each modality and jointly learn the final causal graph. tributions, and an active learning strategy to reduce label-
In comparison with these methods, our approach explicitly ing cost. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets
accounts for both intra-modal and inter-modal uncertainties, demonstrate that MUAD achieves an average F1-score of
demonstrating superior effectiveness and robustness. 98.10%, outperforming state-of-the-art multimodal methods
 Recently, a few works have leverage the advantages of by up to 7.87%, while consistently exhibiting significantly
large language models (LLMs) to improve the performance of lower performance degradation under challenging conditions
AIOPS tasks in microservice systems. For instance, Flow-of- such as inter-modal information inconsistency and random
Action [46] proposes an SOP-enhanced multi-agent framework modality missing.
that constrains LLM reasoning through SOP flow mechanisms. Despite these promising results, we summarize the limita-
By incorporating multiple auxiliary agents, it effectively mit- tions of our current work and outline corresponding directions
igates the hallucination problems of the ReAct framework in for future research: (1) Log Semantics: While current log
root cause analysis (RCA), thereby significantly improving embeddings capture basic patterns, they may miss deep semandiagnostic accuracy. LasRCA [47], designed for one-shot sce- tic nuances in complex log messages. We plan to incorporate
narios with extremely scarce fault labels, introduces a collab- Large Language Models (LLMs) to enhance log semantics and
orative framework that integrates LLMs with small classifiers. generalization capabilities. (2) Task Scope: The current frame-
Through iterative sample selection and LLM-driven feedback work of MUAD is primarily optimized for anomaly detection.
annotation, it achieves efficient RCA while balancing accuracy We intend to extend the uncertainty-aware representations to
and computational cost. Furthermore, TAMO [48] presents a support a unified framework that simultaneously performs
tool-assisted LLM agent framework that unifies temporally anomaly detection and fine-grained root cause localization for
aligned multimodal data representations with domain-specific microservice systems.
tools. This design addresses challenges such as restricted
context windows, modal input constraints, and dynamic de- ACKNOWLEDGMENT
pendency hallucinations, and demonstrates superior diagnostic This work was supported by the National Natural Science
performance across heterogeneous datasets and common fault Foundation of China under Grant 61902440 and 62272001.
types. Given the growing research interest in combining mul- This work was also supported by the Key Project of Nature
timodal data with LLMs for AIOPS in microservices, we plan Science Research for Universities of Anhui Province of China
to incorporate LLMs in future work to achieve more efficient under Grant 2022AH040019 and 2022AH05008637.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13

 R EFERENCES [19] Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, Q. Fu, Y. Ma, and P. He, “Mrca: Metric-level root
 cause analysis for microservices via multi-modal data,” in Proceedings
 [1] L. Zheng, Z. Chen, J. He, and H. Chen, “Mulan: multi-modal causal of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
 structure learning and root cause analysis for microservice systems,” in Engineering, 2024, pp. 1057–1068.
 Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, 2024, pp. 4107–4116. [20] C. Corbière, N. Thome, A. Bar-Hen, M. Cord, and P. Pérez, “Addressing
 [2] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly failure prediction by learning model confidence,” Advances in neural
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural information processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
 network,” in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international [21] Z. Han, F. Yang, J. Huang, C. Zhang, and J. Yao, “Multimodal
 conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2019, pp. 2828– dynamics: Dynamical fusion for trustworthy multimodal classification,”
 2837. in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
 [3] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using tem- pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 20 707–20 717.
 poral hierarchical one-class network,” Advances in neural information [22] G. Yu, P. Chen, Y. Li, H. Chen, X. Li, and Z. Zheng, “Nezha:
 processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 13 016–13 026, 2020. Interpretable fine-grained root causes analysis for microservices on
 [4] L. Yang, J. Chen, Z. Wang, W. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Dong, and W. Zhang, multi-modal observability data,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint
 “Semi-supervised log-based anomaly detection via probabilistic label European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the
 estimation,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Foundations of Software Engineering, 2023, pp. 553–565.
 Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1448–1460. [23] H. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, C. Huang, D. Cao, Y. Tong, B. Xu, J. Bai,
 [5] X. Zhang, Y. Xu, Q. Lin, B. Qiao, H. Zhang, Y. Dang, C. Xie, J. Tong, and Q. Zhang, “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via
 X. Yang, Q. Cheng, Z. Li et al., “Robust log-based anomaly detection on graph attention network,” in 2020 IEEE international conference on data
 unstable log data,” in Proceedings of the 2019 27th ACM joint meeting mining (ICDM). IEEE, 2020, pp. 841–850.
 on European software engineering conference and symposium on the [24] H. Liu, X. Huang, M. Jia, T. Jia, J. Han, Y. Li, and Z. Wu, “Uacfoundations of software engineering, 2019, pp. 807–817. ad: Unsupervised adversarial contrastive learning for anomaly detection
 [6] C. Zhang, X. Peng, T. Zhou, C. Sha, Z. Yan, Y. Chen, and H. Yang, on multi-modal data in microservice systems,” IEEE Transactions on
 “Tracecrl: contrastive representation learning for microservice trace Services Computing, 2024.
 analysis,” in Proceedings of the 30th ACM joint European software
 [25] H. Dou, P. Shi, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Deanomaly: Anomaly
 engineering conference and symposium on the foundations of software
 detection for multivariate time series using robust decomposition and
 engineering, 2022, pp. 1221–1232.
 memory-augmented diffusion models,” IEEE Transactions on Instru-
 [7] S. Zhang, Z. Pan, H. Liu, P. Jin, Y. Sun, Q. Ouyang, J. Wang, X. Jia,
 mentation and Measurement, 2025.
 Y. Zhang, H. Yang et al., “Efficient and robust trace anomaly detection
 [26] J. Yang, Z. Wang, S. Chen, H. He, Y. Hou, and X. Jiang, “Hg-pad:
 for large-scale microservice systems,” in 2023 IEEE 34th International
 Heterogeneous graph structure learning aided performance anomaly
 Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). IEEE, 2023,
 diagnosis in microservice systems,” IEEE Transactions on Services
 pp. 69–79.
 Computing, 2025.
 [8] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Yang, and M. R. Lyu, “Heteroge-
 [27] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
 neous anomaly detection for software systems via semi-supervised crossin 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
 modal attention,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on
 2015, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
 Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1724–1736.
 [9] C. Zhao, M. Ma, Z. Zhong, S. Zhang, Z. Tan, X. Xiong, L. Yu, [28] Z. Xie, H. Xu, W. Chen, W. Li, H. Jiang, L. Su, H. Wang, and D. Pei,
 J. Feng, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang et al., “Robust multimodal failure detection “Unsupervised anomaly detection on microservice traces through graph
 for microservice systems,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD vae,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, 2023, pp. 2874–
 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2023, pp. 5639– 2884.
 5649. [29] S. Xie, J. Wang, H. He, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, N. Zhang, and
[10] L. Tao, S. Zhang, Z. Jia, J. Sun, M. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Sun, C. Yang, B. Li, “Tvdiag: A task-oriented and view-invariant failure diagnosis
 Y. Zhang, and D. Pei, “Giving every modality a voice in microservice framework for microservice-based systems with multimodal data,”
 failure diagnosis via multimodal adaptive optimization,” in Proceedings ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology, 2025,
 of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software just Accepted. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3734868
 Engineering, 2024, pp. 1107–1119. [30] S. Liu, B. Zhou, Q. Ding, B. Hooi, Z. Zhang, H. Shen, and X. Cheng,
[11] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y. Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end- “Time series anomaly detection with adversarial reconstruction netto-end troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source works,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
 data,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4293–4306, 2022.
 Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1750–1762. [31] Z. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Han, Y. Su, R. Jiao, X. Wen, and D. Pei, “Multivariate
[12] J. Huang, Y. Yang, H. Yu, J. Li, and X. Zheng, “Twin graph-based time series anomaly detection and interpretation using hierarchical interanomaly detection via attentive multi-modal learning for microservice metric and temporal embedding,” in Proceedings of the 27th ACM
 system,” in 2023 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Auto- SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2021, pp.
 mated Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 66–78. 3220–3230.
[13] Z. Zhao, T. Zhang, Z. Shen, H. Dong, X. Ma, X. Liu, and Y. Yang, [32] J. Wang, S. Shao, Y. Bai, J. Deng, and Y. Lin, “Multiscale wavelet
 “Chase: A causal heterogeneous graph based framework for root cause graph autoencoder for multivariate time-series anomaly detection,” IEEE
 analysis in multimodal microservice systems,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv– Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 72, pp. 1–11,
 2406, 2024. 2022.
[14] N. Zhao, J. Chen, Z. Yu, H. Wang, J. Li, B. Qiu, H. Xu, W. Zhang, [33] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 K. Sui, and D. Pei, “Identifying bad software changes via multimodal in multivariate time series,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
 anomaly detection for online service systems,” in Proceedings of the artificial intelligence, vol. 35, no. 5, 2021, pp. 4027–4035.
 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference [34] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderand Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering, 2021, pp. strom, “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using lstms and nonparametric
 527–539. dynamic thresholding,” in Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
[15] Y. Gan, Y. Zhang, D. Cheng, A. Shetty, P. Rathi, N. Katarki, A. Bruno, international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, 2018,
 J. Hu, B. Ritchken, B. Jackson et al., “An open-source benchmark suite pp. 387–395.
 for microservices and their hardware-software implications for cloud [35] A. Zimek, E. Schubert, and H.-P. Kriegel, “A survey on unsupervised
 & edge systems,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International outlier detection in high-dimensional numerical data,” Statistical Analy-
 Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and sis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal, vol. 5, no. 5, pp.
 Operating Systems, 2019, pp. 3–18. 363–387, 2012.
[16] X. Zhou, X. Peng, T. Xie, J. Sun, C. Xu, C. Ji, and W. Zhao, “Bench- [36] J. Kim and C. D. Scott, “Robust kernel density estimation,” The Journal
 marking microservice systems for software engineering research,” in of Machine Learning Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 2529–2565, 2012.
 Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Software Engi- [37] L. Xiong, B. Póczos, and J. Schneider, “Group anomaly detection
 neering: Companion Proceeedings, 2018, pp. 323–324. using flexible genre models,” Advances in neural information processing
[17] MUAD, https://github.com/slg-frank/muad.git. systems, vol. 24, 2011.
[18] A. G. Hawkes, “Markov processes in apl,” ACM SIGAPL APL Quote [38] M. Du, F. Li, G. Zheng, and V. Srikumar, “Deeplog: Anomaly detection
 Quad, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 173–185, 1990. and diagnosis from system logs through deep learning,” in Proceedings

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
 This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Services Computing. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
 content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TSC.2026.3672587

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14

 of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC conference on computer and communications Shenglai Guo received his BE degree in Software
 security, 2017, pp. 1285–1298. Engineering from Wuhan Polytechnic University in
[39] W. Meng, Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Zhang, D. Pei, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, 2022, and now is a master student in the School of
 S. Tao, P. Sun et al., “Loganomaly: Unsupervised detection of sequential Computer Science and Technology at Anhui Uniand quantitative anomalies in unstructured logs.” in IJCAI, vol. 19, no. 7, versity. His current research topics mainly focus on
 2019, pp. 4739–4745. anomaly detection in microservices.
[40] V.-H. Le and H. Zhang, “Log-based anomaly detection without log parsing,” in 2021 36th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated
 Software Engineering (ASE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 492–504.
[41] P. Liu, H. Xu, Q. Ouyang, R. Jiao, Z. Chen, S. Zhang, J. Yang,
 L. Mo, J. Zeng, W. Xue et al., “Unsupervised detection of microservice
 trace anomalies through service-level deep bayesian networks,” in 2020
 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
 (ISSRE). IEEE, 2020, pp. 48–58.
[42] Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, B. Qiao, H. Che, P. Zhao, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Dang, and Lele Zou received his BE degree in Data Science
 Q. Lin, “Tracelingo: Trace representation and learning for performance and Big Data Technology from Anhui Polytechnic
 issue diagnosis in cloud services,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM International University in 2022. He received the MS degree
 Workshop on Cloud Intelligence (CloudIntelligence). IEEE, 2021, pp. in Artificial Intelligence from Anhui University in
 37–40. 2025. His current research topics mainly focus on
[43] C. Zhang, X. Peng, C. Sha, K. Zhang, Z. Fu, X. Wu, Q. Lin, and intelligent operations and maintenance for microser-
 D. Zhang, “Deeptralog: Trace-log combined microservice anomaly de- vices.
 tection through graph-based deep learning,” in Proceedings of the 44th
 International Conference on Software Engineering, 2022, pp. 623–634.
[44] P. Wang, X. Zhang, and Z. Cao, “Anomaly detection for microservice
 system via augmented multimodal data and hybrid graph representations,” Information Fusion, vol. 118, p. 103017, 2025.
[45] L. Tao, X. Lu, S. Zhang, J. Luan, Y. Li, M. Li, Z. Li, Q. Yu,
 H. Xie, R. Xu et al., “Diagnosing performance issues for large-scale
 microservice systems with heterogeneous graph,” IEEE Transactions on
 Services Computing, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 2223–2235, 2024.
[46] C. Pei, Z. Wang, F. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Liu, X. He, R. Kang, T. Zhang,
 J. Chen, J. Li et al., “Flow-of-action: Sop enhanced llm-based multi- Yiwen Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in managent system for root cause analysis,” in Companion Proceedings of the agement science and engineering from the Hefei
 ACM on Web Conference 2025, 2025, pp. 422–431. University of Technology, in 2013. He is currently a
[47] Y. Han, Q. Du, Y. Huang, J. Wu, F. Tian, and C. He, “The potential of Professor with the School of Computer Science and
 one-shot failure root cause analysis: Collaboration of the large language Technology, Anhui University. Meanwhile, he is a
 model and small classifier,” in Proceedings of the 39th IEEE/ACM Ph.D. advisor. His research interests include service
 International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, 2024, pp. computing, cloud computing, and big data analytics.
 931–943. Until now, Dr. Zhang has published more than 70
[48] Q. Wang, X. Zhang, M. Li, Y. Yuan, M. Xiao, F. Zhuang, and D. Yu, papers in some international conferences including
 “Tamo: Fine-grained root cause analysis via tool-assisted llm agent with AAAI, ICSOC, ICWS and journals including IEEE
 multi-modality observation data in cloud-native systems,” arXiv preprint IEEE TSC, TKDE, ACM TOIS, TKDD.
 arXiv:2504.20462, 2025.
[49] P.-Y. Huang, W.-T. Hsu, C.-Y. Chiu, T.-F. Wu, and M. Sun, “Efficient
 uncertainty estimation for semantic segmentation in videos,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018, pp.
 520–535. Pengfei Chen is currently a professor in School
[50] F. Kraus and K. Dietmayer, “Uncertainty estimation in one-stage object of Computer Science and Engineering at Sun Yatdetection,” in 2019 ieee intelligent transportation systems conference sen University. He graduated from the department
 (itsc). IEEE, 2019, pp. 53–60. of computer science of Xi’an Jiaotong University
[51] Y. Geng, Z. Han, C. Zhang, and Q. Hu, “Uncertainty-aware multi-view with a Ph.D. degree in 2016. Now, he is interested
 representation learning,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on in distributed systems, AIOps, cloud computing,
 Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 7545–7553. Microservice. Until now, Dr. Chen has published
[52] J. She, Y. Hu, H. Shi, J. Wang, Q. Shen, and T. Mei, “Dive into more than 50 papers in some international conferambiguity: Latent distribution mining and pairwise uncertainty estima- ences including ICSE, FSE, ASE, ICSOC, ICWS
 tion for facial expression recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF and journals including IEEE TDSC, TSC, TCC.
 conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 6248–
 6257.

 Zibin Zheng (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor
 and the Dean of the School of Software Engineering,
 Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China. He authored
 or coauthored more than 200 international journal
 and conference papers, including 1 ESI hot paper
 Hui Dou is currently an associated professor in and 10 ESI highly cited papers. His research inter-
 School of Computer Science and Technology at ests include blockchain, software engineering, and
 Anhui University. He graduated from the department services computing. Prof. Zheng was a recipient of
 of computer science of Xi’an Jiaotong University several awards, including the Top 50 Influential Pawith a Ph.D. degree in 2017. Dr. Dou is now pers in Blockchain of 2018 and the ACM SIGSOFT
 interested in AI-driven performance diagnosis and Distinguished Paper Award at ICSE 2010.
 optimization for distributed systems. Until now, Dr.
 Dou has published more than 20 papers in some
 international conferences and journals such as ASE,
 ICDCS, ICPP and IEEE TSC, TPDS, TIM.

 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted,
 but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.