2802 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 Unified Anomaly Detection via Multi-Scale
 Contrasted Memory
 Loı̈c Jézéquel , Jean Beaudet, Aymeric Histace , and Ngoc-Son Vu

 Abstract—Deep anomaly detection aims to provide robust and
efficient classifiers for zero-shot (unsupervised, UNS) and fewshot (imbalanced supervised, IMS) settings. However, current
models still struggle on edge-case normal samples and are often
unable to keep high performance over different scales of anomalies. Additionally, there is a lack of a unified framework that
efficiently addresses both UNS and IMS settings. To address these
limitations, we present a novel two-stage method which leverages
multi-scale normal prototypes during training to compute an
anomaly deviation score. First, we employ a novel memoryaugmented contrastive learning to jointly learn representations
and memory modules across multiple scales. This allows us to Fig. 1. Comparison of AnoMem with SoTA methods on CIFAR-100 with
effectively capture subtle features of normal data while adapting different anomaly ratio γ. AnoMem is the first unified model to perform well
to varying levels of anomaly complexity. Then, we train an in both UNS and IMS settings. The so-called unified method here exhibits
efficient anomaly distance-based detector that computes spatial rather random performance for the UNS setting.
deviation maps between the learned prototypes and incoming
observations. Our model outperforms the SoTA on a wide range
of anomalies, including object, style, and local anomalies, as well To date, no efficient unified AD framework has been able
as industrial inspection and face anti-spoofing, while being on to seamlessly address both UNS and IMS detection. Existing
par with SoTa out-of-distribution detectors. Notably, it stands as methods typically perform only within their original design
the first model capable of maintaining exceptional performance
across both settings. settings, as can be seen in Fig. 1. Indeed, these methods
 employ different specialized approaches with distinct sets of
 Index Terms—Anomaly detection, industrial inspection, face hyperparameters. The addition of anomalies into the training
anti-spoofing, out-of-distribution, unified model, contrastive
learning, differentiable memory, Hopfield network, unsupervised, leads to a substantial overhaul of the AD algorithms. This
imbalanced supervised settings. impracticality becomes apparent in real-world applications,
 especially when only normal samples are initially available
 I. I NTRODUCTION (UNS), and the acquisition of anomaly samples occurs at a
 later stage (IMS).
D ETECTING deviations from a normal baseline is a pivotal challenge in machine learning and computer vision.
However, collecting and annotating anomalous data can be
 Apart from the lack of a unified method, existing AD models
 suffer from additional limitations. First, there exists a hard
prohibitively expensive. Thus, unsupervised anomaly detection trade-off between remembering edge-case normal samples and
(UNS-AD) has gained significant attention [1], [2], [3], [4]. maintaining generalizability toward anomalies, leading to a
UNS-AD methods train models exclusively with anomaly-free lack of normal sample memorization and high false reject
images to detect unseen anomalies, also termed one-class or rates on harder samples. Second, these models often focus
zero-shot AD. Yet, in many real-world scenarios, a small set of on either local low-scale anomalies or global object-oriented
anomaly samples may become available over time, prompting anomalies but fail to combine both (see Table I). Furthermore,
the need for their inclusion to improve AD performance. Con- current models tend to be highly dataset-dependent and do not
sequently, we transition from UNS to imbalanced supervised explicitly utilize multi-scaling.
(IMS) or few-shot settings. In this context, available anomaly To overcome these limitations, we present a novel two-stage
samples are often intricate, incomplete, and ill-defined, leading AD model, dubbed AnoMem. Our approach improves the AD
to a significant departure of AD from conventional binary landscape by incorporating multi-scale normal class prototypes
classification. within its training phase to compute anomaly deviation scores
 across various scales. Unlike previous memory bank equipped
 Received 8 October 2024; revised 18 July 2025; accepted 26 January 2026.
Date of publication 24 February 2026; date of current version 18 March 2026. methods [5], [6], AnoMem leverages normal memory layers
The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it spanning multiple scales, thereby augmenting both anomaly
for publication was Dr. Weiying Xie. (Corresponding author: Ngoc-Son Vu.) detection efficacy and the quality of learned representations.
 Loı̈c Jézéquel and Jean Beaudet are with Idemia Identity and Security
France, 95520 Osny, France. Moreover, by employing modern and backpropagable Hop-
 Aymeric Histace is with ETIS Laboratory - ENSEA, CYU, CNRS, 95000 field layers for memorization, our method surpasses the
Cergy, France. efficiency of nearest neighbor anomaly detectors [7], [8].
 Ngoc-Son Vu is with LIST3N, Université de Technologie de Troyes (UTT),
10300 Troyes, France (e-mail: son.vu@utt.fr). While the mentioned detectors require retaining the entire
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIP.2026.3663923 normal set, our model adeptly learns the most representative
 1941-0042 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2803

 TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF A NO M EM ’ S P ERFORMANCE . A NO M EM D EMONSTRATES E XCEPTIONAL C APABILITIES FOR I MAGE -L EVEL AD W ITH D IFFERENT T YPES
 OF A NOMALY. C ATEGORIZATION I S A PPROXIMATE : “ CLASSIC ” AD ARE O BJECT-A NOMALY D ETECTORS B ETWEEN 2019 AND 2021 (E XCEPT
 MSC [9] IN 2023), “IAD” D ENOTES M ORE R ECENT M ETHODS O RIENTED T OWARDS I NDUSTRIAL I NSPECTION . P ERFORMANCE L EVELS
 ARE Q UANTIZED AND D ENOTED AS F OLLOWS : ? ? ?: E XCELLENT (S OTA), ??: G OOD (C OMPARABLE TO S OTA), ?: P OOR TO
 AVERAGE , G RAYED -O UT: C ANNOT B E A PPLIED , -: R ESULTS N OT AVAILABLE OR C ANNOT B E A PPLIED . R ESULTS IN B LUE
 W ERE R E -E VALUATED . “EK” I NDICATES M ETHODS W HICH G ET H ELP F ROM E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE , S UCH AS
 P RE -T RAINED M ODELS OR E XTRA DATASETS . E CENT VLM-BASED AD M ETHODS ARE M ULTIMODAL AND
 EK-D EPENDENT, T YPICALLY E VALUATED ON I NDUSTRIAL B ENCHMARKS . A LTHOUGH L ABELED AS Z ERO -
 S HOT, T HESE M ETHODS M AY I MPLICITLY E NCODE A NOMALY K NOWLEDGE T HROUGH T HEIR
 P RETRAINED M ODALITIES (S EE S ECTION II-B)

samples within a fixed size. Through extensive experiments, minimal error when presented with a partial or corrupted input.
we demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms all Memory modules will vary based on their capacity to memprevious memory-equipped anomaly detectors. orize data given a model size and the average reconstruction
 Our main contributions are the following: error.
 • We propose to integrate backpropagable memory modules A simple memory module is the nearest neighbor queue
 into contrastive learning (CL) to learn normal class pro- (non-differentiable memory). Given a maximum size M, it
 totypes during training. In the first stage, we jointly learn stores the last M samples representations in the queue. To
 representations and memory modules using CL, allowing remember an incomplete input x, it retrieves the nearest
 for effective memorization of normal prototypes.1 In the neighbor from the queue.
 second stage, we learn to detect anomalies using the A more powerful and expressive form of memory, known
 learned prototypes. When anomalies are available, we as the modern differentiable Hopfield layer [17], significantly
 train a detector on the spatial deviation maps between extends classical Hopfield networks. It represents memory as
 learned prototypes and observations. AnoMem is the first a learnable weight matrix X ∈ Rd×NMem , where each column ξi
 working well in both UNS and IMS settings with a few denotes a prototype pattern in a d-dimensional space. Retrieval
 anomalies (unified method). is performed via the iterative update:
 • AnoMem is further improved by using multi-scale normal ξ(t+1) = softmax β ξ(t) X X> ,
 
 (1)
 prototypes for representation learning and AD. We introduce a novel way to efficiently memorize 2D features where ξ(0) is the input query vector input, and β is the inverse
 maps spatially. This enables our model to accurately temperature that controls the sharpness of the attention. Iteradetect low-scale, texture-oriented anomalies and higher- tion continues until convergence, i.e., |ξ(t+1) − ξ(t) | < , where
 scale, object-oriented anomalies (generic detector). the variable t denotes the iteration step. This update is formally
 • The efficiency of AnoMem, was validated through exten- equivalent to the self-attention mechanism in Transformers, but
 sive experiments with no external knowledge, including is reapplied recursively, enabling convergence to fixed-point
 different types of anomalies (object, subtle style, local, attractors. This allows the Hopfield layer to function as both
 fine-grained), two real-world applications (industrial an associative memory and an attention mechanism.
 inspection and face anti-spoofing), and OOD detection. Key advantages of the Hopfield layer include its exponen-
 We improve detection with up to 50% error relative tially large memory capacity, efficient convergence in a few
 improvement on object anomalies and 14% on face steps, and low redundancy in learned patterns due to softmaxanti-spoofing. based retrieval. It supports diverse attractors (e.g., global, local,
 or specific patterns) and integrates seamlessly into modern
 II. R ELATED W ORK deep architectures. Henceforth, we refer to this module as
 a Hopfield layer of size NMem , referring to the number of
A. Memory Modules memory vectors it contains.
 A memory module should achieve two main operations:
¬ writing inside a memory from a given set of samples, and B. Anomaly Detection
­ retrieving the most similar sample from its memory with
 1) Overview of AD: Due to its importance, AD has received
 1 Unlike coreset algorithm, which stores samples directly, we leverage the significant attention, leading to a wide variety of proposed
modern Hopfield network to learn and represent prototypes of normal samples. methods. For comprehensive surveys of deep AD techniques,
2804 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

we refer readers to [18], [19], while this section focuses on methods [7], [8] use a nearest neighbor queue for anomaly
approaches most relevant to our work. scoring. Density estimation methods estimates the normal dis-
 Recent advances have increasingly explored the use of tribution using deep density estimators like normalizing-flows
vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [20]) for zero-shot AD. [32], variational models [33] or diffusion models [34], [35].
These models inherently rely on EK, such as pre-trained Reconstruction methods measure the reconstruction error of
multimodal embeddings, and will be discussed in more detail a bottleneck encoder-decoder, trained with denoising autoenlater. Such developments complement the three major families coders [36], [37] or two-way GANs [38], [39], [40]. Some
of AD techniques—pre-trained feature adaptation, discrimi- incorporate memory in the latent space of an auto-encoder [5],
native, and generative methods—as categorized in [18]. In [6] during training for optimal reconstruction. More recently,
addition to methodological categories, AD approaches can be knowledge distillation methods have been adapted to AD
further classified by their supervision levels, depending on the by using the representation discrepancy of anomalies in the
availability and granularity of anomaly annotations. Common teacher-student model [41], [42].
settings include unsupervised (UNS), imbalanced supervised IMS-AD mainly revolves around two-stage methods and
(IMS), semi-supervised, and open-set detection. For example, anomaly distance methods. Some recent work has tried to
semi-supervised AD leverages partially labeled data, while generalize pretext task to UNS-AD [23]. In the IMS-AD twoopen-set supervised AD [21] targets previously unseen anoma- stage methods, a supervised classifier with the anomalous
lies despite limited anomaly types being available during samples is trained in the second stage instead of the aforetraining. Recently, the UniAD setting [22] was introduced, mentioned one-class estimator [43]. Distance methods directly
enabling a single model to handle multi-class normal samples, use a distance to a centroid as the anomaly score and learn
avoiding the need to train separate models per object category. the model to maximize the anomaly distance on anomalous
While these multi-class UNS-AD methods aim for category samples and minimize it on normal samples [44], [45]. To
generalization, our approach performs robustly in both UNS our best knowledge, no IMS-AD methods in the literature
and IMS settings with few anomaly samples, and effectively use any kind of memory mechanism for the anomaly score
detects both texture- and object-level anomalies across differ- computation. For instance, MemSeg [46] and PatchCore [2]
ent scales. use frozen pretrained encoder and memory is not learned.
 Concerning its applications and evaluation protocols, AD Moreover, there is no anomaly distance learning.
can also be categorized differently, as depicted in Table I. Our method performs exceptionally well in both unsu-
Early AD methods were evaluated on object-anomaly datasets pervised (one-class) and imbalanced supervised settings,
such as CIFAR10/100, which we refer to as classic AD. establishing it as a unified approach.
The introduction of the MVTec-AD dataset has catalyzed 3) Vision-Language Models (VLM) Based AD: Recent
the development of methods for industrial inspection, and years have seen significant advances in vision-language modrecent AD methods are evaluated on industrial datasets rather els (VLMs). CLIP [20] pioneered large-scale image-text
than CIFAR10/100. Very closely related to AD is out-of- pretraining, enabling strong generalization across a wide range
distribution (OOD) detection (we will briefly discuss the of tasks. Models like LLaVA and GPT-4V further unify vision
difference later). For the OOD detection task, many methods and language modalities to achieve human-level understandhave been recently proposed, but most of them cannot be ing. These VLMs have also been applied to AD.
applied to object-anomaly or industrial inspection. This paper WinCLIP [47] introduces a window-based CLIP approach
aims to develop a generic AD, and we evaluate AnoMem on with a compositional ensemble of state words and prompt
these evaluation protocols. Moreover, we also include very templates, aiming to efficiently extract and aggregate multichallenging AD benchmarks such as AD on the fine-grained level features. KAnoCLIP [48] and AA-CLIP [49] leverage
CUB200 dataset, as well as the second industrial application prompt learning and lightweight adapters to adapt CLIP for
of face anti-spoofing. industrial AD without requiring anomaly samples (i.e., in
 2) AD Methods: AD involves classifying data into two UNS-AD settings). AdaptCLIP [50] further enhances robustcategories: normal and anomalous. While the normal class ness by learning domain-specific prompts and fine-tuning on a
is well-defined, the anomaly class encompasses all other small set of normal samples. AnomalyGPT [51] explores the
variations, making it broader and more complex. This leads to use of large-scale VLMs to tackle structural anomaly detection
a natural data imbalance. In this paper, we categorize existing in industrial environments.
methods based on the availability of anomalous samples, While effective, these methods are multimodal and rely on
leading to two distinct variations: UNS-AD and IMS-AD. EK via large-scale pretrained encoders. Moreover, they have
 There exist different UNS-AD approaches. Pretext task been primarily evaluated on industrial AD benchmarks, which
methods learn to solve a different auxiliary task on normal may limit their generalizability to more diverse anomaly types.
data [10], [11], [23], [24], and the anomaly score reflects Although often categorized as UNS or zero-shot AD, from
performance on this auxiliary task. Two-stage methods consist a strict perspective, VLM-based methods are not truly zeroof representation learning and anomaly score estimation. After shot, as information about anomalies may already be implicitly
training an encoder on normal data using self-supervised encoded in the pretrained visual or language modalities.
learning [15], [25], [26], [27] or an encoder pre-trained on 4) Other AD Tasks: Anomaly localization (AL) is a closely
additional datasets [9], [28], [29], a classifier computes the related task whose goal is to produce an anomaly heatmap.
anomaly score in the latent space [1], [30], [31]. Some AL datasets range from defect localization [52] to surveillance
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2805

Fig. 2. Overview of AnoMem’s training. (a) In the first step, representation and normal prototypes are learned simultaneously across multiple scales using
Hopfield layers and contrastive learning (Sec. III-A); (b) In the second stage, multi-scale anomaly detection models are trained using memory deviation maps,
a process applied only in the IMS-AD setting (Sec. III-B). Learnable components are highlighted in dark gray.

video abnormal event detection [53]. Specialized methods tar- Algorithm 1 AnoMem First Learning Stage
geting localization [1], [54] have been introduced to efficiently
solve this task.
 Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection aims to detect whether
or not an observation has been sampled from the same
distribution as the training set [55], [56], [57]. Compared
to AD, normal data of OOD is highly multi-modal since it
cover multiple semantic classes. Moreover, OOD will put more
weight than in AD on the acquisition process of data (e.g.,
capture sensor, lighting, background). Therefore, it is generally
preferred for OOD detectors not to generalize too much on
normal data, while it is the opposite in AD.

C. Contrastive Learning
 Contrastive learning (CL) is a self-supervised representation
learning method. It operates on the basis of two principles:
(1) two different images should yield dissimilar representa- where z, z0 are the last features of the two augmented batches
tions, and (2) two different views of the same image should and `NTX is the normalized temperature-scaled cross entropy
yield similar representations. The views of an image are loss (NTX). In practice, minimizing will yield representations
characterized by a set of transformations T . These trans- with the most angular spread variance, while retaining angular
formations can range from geometric transformations such invariance in regard to T . Memory mechanisms can also be
as crops and rotations, to colorimetric transformations with used into CL as in [64] and [65]. During training, the positive
color jitter. There have been many methods enforcing these and negative pairs are augmented with the samples nearest
two principles: SimCLR [58], Barlow-Twins [27] and VICReg neighbors from a memory queue. This allows the model to
[59] with a Siamese network, MoCo [60] with a negative reach better performance for smaller batch sizes.
sample bank, BYOL [61] and SimSiam [62] with a teacherstudent network or SwAV [63] with contrastive clusters. While III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD
some contrastive methods such as SimCLR and MoCo require
 Sec. III-A first details a novel training procedure to simulnegatives samples, other such as BYOL, SimSiam and SwAV
 taneously learn an encoder’s representations and a set of
do not.
 multi-scale normal class prototypes (the pseudocode can be
 In the simplest formulation, the pairs of representations
 found in Alogithm 1). Sec. III-B then presents how to use
to contrast are only considered from two views of a batch
 the encoder and the normal prototypes to train a one-class or
augmented by transformations (t, t0 ). SimCLR minimized the
 imbalanced supervised anomaly detector in a unified frameloss:
 B
 work. Our model is summarized in Fig. 2.
 LCO =
 1 X
 `NTX (zk , z0 k ) + `NTX (z0 k , zk ) (2) Notation: Let X = {(xk , yk )}k be a training dataset with nor-
 2B
 k=1
 mal samples (yk = 1) for UNS-AD, and potentially anomalies
2806 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

(yk = 0) for IMS-AD. f : RH×W×C → RD is a backbone where
made of several stages f (1) , · · · , f (S ) where the dimensions exp(sim(z, z0 )/τ)
of the sth scale feature map are H (s) × W (s) × C (s) . We note `NTX (z, z0 ) = − log P (5)
 ~p 1[~p,z] exp(sim(z, ~
 p)/τ)
z(s) = f (s) ◦ · · · ◦ f (1) (x).
 and ~p covers any representation inside the multi-view batch,
 τ is a temperature hyperparameter and sim(·, ·) is the cosine
A. Learning Representations and Memorizing Normal Class similarity.
Prototypes Remarks: Unlike existing two-stage AD methods [1], [9],
 We first present how memory modules can be used in CL [15], [25], [26], [28], [29], [30], [31] which separate represento provide robust and representative normal class prototypes, tation learning from anomaly score estimation, our approach
and then generalize the idea to several scales throughout the explicitly incorporates anomalous and normal labels from the
encoder (shown in Fig. 2a). We choose to apply a CL type very beginning of the representation learning phase. Impormethod rather than other unsupervised learning schemes, as tantly, the labels yk are utilized solely to filter out anomalies
it produces better representations with very few labeled data from memory learning, ensuring that the representation learn-
[66]. We also favor self-supervised learning only on the normal ing is effective in both UNS and IMS settings. Additionally,
data rather than using a pre-trained encoder on generic datasets the encoder and normal prototypes are learned simultane-
[28] which often performs poorly on data with a significant ously from the very beginning of the representation learning
distribution shift. process.
 1) Baseline: To learn unsupervised representations and 3) Variance Loss as Regularization: Our procedure can
identify a set of normal prototypes, one approach is to be prone to representation collapse during the first epochs.
sequentially apply CL followed by k-means clustering and use Indeed, we observed that the dynamic between CL and the
the cluster centroids as the normal prototypes. However, this randomly initialized memory layer can occasionally lead to
method has two significant limitations: a collapse of all prototypes to a single point during the first
 1) The steps of representation learning and prototype con- epochs. To prevent this, we introduce a regularization loss to
 struction are entirely decoupled. Research has shown ensure the variance of the retrieved memory samples does not
 that incorporating a few representative samples in the reach zero:
 negative examples significantly enhances representation 1 X
 B q
 LV (z, y) = − P yk Var Mem(zk , yk )
  
 quality and reduces the reliance on large batch sizes (6)
 [63], [64]. k yk k=1
 2) The k-means prototypes often fail to capture atypi- 4) Multi-Scale Contrasted Memory: To gather information
 cal samples effectively. Consequently, harder normal from several scales, we apply our contrasted memory loss not
 samples may not be adequately represented by these only to the flattened 1D output z of our encoder but also to S
 prototypes, leading to a higher false rejection rate during intermediate layer 3D feature maps z(1) , · · · , z(S ) .
 anomaly detection (AD). We perform ablation studies We add after each scale representation z(s) a memory layer
 to compare AnoMem with this baseline using k-means HF(s) to effectively capture multi-scale normal prototypes.
 centroids in Sec. IV-G. However, memorizing the full 3D map as a single flattened
 2) Integrated Method: Jointly Learning Memory and vector would not be ideal. Indeed, at lower scales we are
Encoder: To address above-mentioned flaws, we introduce a interested in memorizing local patterns regardless of their
novel approach based on memory modules to jointly learn position. Moreover, the memory would span across a space
an encoder and normal prototypes. Let zk and z0 k respectively of very high dimensions. Therefore, 3D intermediate maps
be the encoder features for the contrastive upper and lower are viewed as a collection of H (s) W (s) 1D feature vectors z(s) i, j
branch. Instead of contrasting zk and z0 k , we apply beforehand rather than a single flattened 1D vector. This is equivalent
a Hopfield memory layer HF(·) to the upper branch in the case to remembering the image as patches. Since earlier features
of normal samples. The memory layer is only applied when map will have a high resolution, the computational cost and
the sample is normal, since we assumed that anomalous data is memory usage of such approach can quickly explode. Thus,
significantly more variable and less defined than normal data. we only apply our contrasted memory loss on a random sample
As such, we note with ratio r(s) of the available vectors on the sth scale.
 Our multi-scale contrasted memory loss:
 Mem(z, y) = y · HF(z) + (1 − y) · z (3)
 S 
 1 X X  
Thus, Mem(z, 1) = HF(z) for normal samples and Mem(z, 0) = LCOM-MS = P (s) λ(s) LCOM z(s) 0 (s)
 i, j , z i, j , y
z for anomalies. We introduce now the following contrasted s |Ω | s=1 (i, j)∈Ω(s)

memory loss for representation learning:
 
 (s)
 + λV (zi, j , y) (7)
 B 
 1 X
 LCOM (z, z , y) =
 0
 `NTX Mem(zk , yk ), z0 k
 
 2B where λV controls the impact of the variance loss, λ(s) controls
 k=1
  the importance of the sth scale, and Ω(s) is a random sample
 + `NTX z0 k , Mem(zk , yk ) without replacement of bH (s) W (s) r(s) c points from 1, H (s) ×
 
 (4)
 1, W (s) . We choose to put more confidence on the latest stages
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2807

which are more semantically meaningful than earlier scales, correctly separated without encouraging anomalous features to
meaning that λ(1) < · · · < λ(S ) . be pushed toward infinity. Our second stage loss is:
 We simultaneously minimize this loss on all the encoder B S
stages and the S memory layers’ weights. An overview of this 1 XX
 LSUP = `dist g(s) ◦ φ(∆(s) ), yk
 
 (11)
first stage is given in Fig. 2a, and its algorithm is presented in S ·B
 k=1 s=1
Alg. 1. Compared to previous memory bank equipped anomaly
and OOD detectors [5], [6], [7], [8], [67], our model is the first Finally, all scale anomaly scores are merged using a sum
to memorize the normal class at several scales, allowing it to weighted by the confidence parameters λ(s) :
be more robust to anomaly sizes. Moreover, the use of normal 1 X (s)
 sa (x) = P (s) λ · sa (s) (x) (12)
memory does not only improve AD but also the quality of the s λ s
learned representations, as will be discussed in Sec. IV-G.
 The anomaly score sa effectively combines the expertise of
 the scores from each scale, making it more robust to different
B. Inference: Multi-Scale Normal Prototype Deviation sizes of anomalies than other detectors. As mentioned in
 In this second step, our goal is to compute an anomaly score Sec. III-A, the λ(s) will put more weight to later scales, making
given the pre-trained encoder f and the multi-scale normal our detector more sensitive to broad object anomalies.
memory layers HF(1) , · · · , HF(S ) . For each scale s, we consider
the difference ∆(s) between the encoder feature map z(s) and IV. E XPERIMENTS
its recollection from the sth memory layer. The recollection
process consists in spatially applying the memory layer to each We evaluate the performance of AnoMem across a wide
C (s) depth 1D vector: range of benchmarks, demonstrating that it is the first unified
 approach capable of effectively addressing both UNS and IMS
 ∆(s) = z(s) − HF(s) z(s)
 
 (8) anomaly detection, as well as various types of anomalies,
 including object, local, fine-grained anomalies, and industrial
where (HF(z))i, j = HF(zi, j ).
 applications. In Secs. IV-A and IV-B, we provide a detailed
 Remark: It is worth noting that only this second stage has
 overview of the benchmarks and implementation details. Subto be swapped between UNS and IMS settings, resulting in a
 sequently, Secs. IV-C to IV-F compare our method with
unified easily-switchable framework for AD.
 the state-of-the-art (SoTA) under different scenarios. Finally,
a. Unsupervised AD. We use the L2 norm of the difference
 Secs. IV-G to IV-K present various ablation studies.
map as an anomaly score for each scale, and no further
 Remarks: Since not all existing methods were fully evaltraining is required:
 uated in all settings and for a fair comparison under the
 sa (s) (x) = k∆(s) k2 (9) same conditions, we either use existing implementations or
 re-implement and evaluate them ourselves for many of those
b. Imbalanced supervised AD. The second training stage methods. We denote those results in blue in the following
of IMS-AD is summarized in Fig. 2b. We use the additional tables. As posited in [4], it is unfair to directly compare
anomaly data to train S scale-specific classifiers on the differ- methods trained from scratch, including AnoMem, with those
ence map ∆(s) . Each classifier is first composed of an average utilizing external knowledge (EK), such as pre-trained models
pooling layer φ followed by a two-layer MLP g(s) with a single or additional datasets. Thus, we distinguish between non-EK
scalar output. φ reduces the spatial resolution of ∆(s) , to prevent and EK methods, exemplified in Tabs. II to IV.
using very large layers on earlier scales. The output of g(s)
directly corresponds to the sth scale anomaly distance:
 A. Evaluation Protocol and Benchmarks
 sa (s) (x) = g(s) ◦ φ(∆(s) ) (10) We evaluated AnoMem across a broad range of anomaly
Each scale-specific classifier is trained using the intermediate detection benchmarks, as outlined in Tab. I. This evaluafeatures of the same normal and anomalous samples used tion encompassed: (1) one-class novelty detection, adopting
during the first step along their labels. The training procedure the terminology from [41], with both object-level and fineis similar to other distance-based anomaly detectors [44], grained anomaly detection, (2) two real-world applications of
[45] where the objective is to obtain small distances for industrial inspection and face anti-spoofing (FAS), and (3) outnormal samples while keeping high distances on anomalies. of-distribution (OOD) detection. In total, we examined seven
We note that our model is the first to introduce memory distinct datasets.
prototypes learned during representation learning into the 1) One-class novelty detection: one class is designated as
anomaly distance learning. The distance constraint is enforced normal, while all other classes are treated as anomalous
via a double-hinge distance loss: or novel. The final result reported is the mean of all
   runs for each possible normal class. We varied the ratio
 1
 `dist (d, y) = y· max d− , 0 +(1−y)· max (M−d, 0) γ of anomaly data in the training set and averaged the
 M metrics over 10 random samples for each ratio. The
where d is the anomaly distance for a given sample and M UNS-AD setting, where γ = 0, is a special case of
controls the size of the margin around the unit ball frontier. the IMS-AD setting. This protocol presents a realistic
Using this loss, both normal samples and anomalies will be challenge and is commonly used in anomaly detection
2808 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 TABLE II
C OMPARISON W ITH S OTA FOR O NE -C LASS N OVELTY D ETECTION . T HE UNS-AD S ETTING , W HERE γ = 0, I S A S PECIAL C ASE OF THE IMS-AD
 S ETTING . ∗ I S F ROM [35]. N OTE T HAT, EK M ETHODS IN THE UNS S ETTING U SE V ERY L ARGE E XTERNAL DATASETS , S IGNIFICANTLY M ORE
 T HAN O UR IMS S ETTING W HERE W E ACHIEVED B ETTER R ESULTS (S EE T EXT )

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE ON I NDUSTRIAL D EFECT D ETECTION U SING THE MVT EC -AD DATASET

 TABLE IV CUB-200, with its 200 fine-grained bird classes (each
P ERFORMANCE ON FACE P RESENTATION ATTACK D ETECTION U SING THE with about 50 images), presents a particularly challeng-
 WMCA DATASET, C OLUMNS R EPRESENT U NSEEN ATTACKS ing scenario due to its subtle style and local anomalies.
 2) Real-world applications: we focus on two real-world
 applications of AD, i.e., industrial inspection detection
 (IDD) using the MVTec-AD dataset [52] and face antispoofing (FAS) using the WMCA dataset [70]. The
 MVTec dataset includes 5 texture classes and 10 object
 classes. The training set comprises 3,629 images free
 of anomalies, while the test set encompasses 1,725
 images, containing both anomalous and anomaly-free
 instances. Each class includes various defects to enable
 comprehensive testing. AL evaluation of this dataset is
 beyond the scope of this paper and will be addressed in
 future work. Shifting to the FAS evaluation protocol,
 which aims to differentiate real from fake faces, the
 training and test data come from the same dataset, but
 one attack type is left unseen during training. This
 setup allows us to evaluate the model’s generalization
 and robustness against new attack types. The WMCA
 literature to assess the model’s ability to generalize dataset, containing over 1900 RGB videos, includes varto various anomalies without relying on a significant ious attacks like paper print (PP), screen recording (SR),
 amount of training anomalies. Datasets included CIFAR- paper mask (PM), and flexible mask (FM), covering
 10, CIFAR-100 [68], and CUB-200 [69]. Notably, object, style, and local anomalies.
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2809

 3) Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection: we assessed how shift transformations (alongside standard augmentations like
 well the model can distinguish between in-distribution SimCLR and AnoMem) to generate its pseudo OOD negatives.
 (ID) and out-of-distribution (OOD) samples after train- AnoMem performs differently: it directly learns prototypes of
 ing on the ID dataset. For this evaluation, we included normal samples and does not rely on pseudo negatives or
 the commonly used SVHN [71] and LSUN [72] datasets. require shift augmentations.
 We report the area under the ROC curve (AUROC) averaged
over all normal classes. C. Results on Novelty Detection
 For non-EK methods, we consider various categories of
B. Implementation Details
 unsupervised (UNS) approaches: the reconstruction error gen-
 1) Optimization: Training is performed under SGD opti- erative model [38], the knowledge distillation method [41],
mizer with Nesterov momentum [73], using a batch size of methods based on pretext tasks [10], [11], and the two-stage
B = 1024 and a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler [74] method [15]. Additionally, we include the two-stage IMS-AD
for both of the stages. method in [43]. To further illustrate the limitations of classical
 2) Model Design: Regarding network architecture, a binary classification, we include a traditional deep classifier
Resnet-50 [75] (≈ 25M parameters) is used as the backbone f . trained with balanced batches of normal and anomalous sam-
We consider two different memory scales: one after the third ples. We also incorporate unified methods applicable in both
stage and another after the last stage. The associated memory unsupervised and supervised settings, such as a reconstruction
 (1) (2)
layers are respectively of size NMem = 512 and NMem = 256 error model [33], and direct anomaly distance models [44].
with an inverse temperature β = 2, along with a pattern Finally, we consider EK methods, including RD, SSD, CSI,
sampling ratio of r(1) = 0.3 and r(2) = 1. The choices of and MSC. The results are summarized in Table II, from which
memory size and sampling ratios are respectively discussed in we can draw several key observations:
Sec. IV-H and Sec. IV-I. The scale confidence factors are set
 1) Methods without EK:
to increase exponentially as λ(s) = 2 s−1 , and the variance loss
factor is fixed to λV = 0.05 after optimization on CIFAR-10. • Superiority of AnoMem: First, among the meth-
We use τ = 0.1 as suggested in [58]. For the anomaly distance ods without EK, the classical supervised approach
loss, we choose a margin size of M = 2. As for the inverse significantly underperforms compared to specialized
temperature β, we used the value recommended in [17] based anomaly detectors across all datasets. This underon the size of our Hopfield memory size. scores the necessity of using dedicated AD methods,
 We conducted a performance evaluation of AnoMem as classical models tend to overfit on anomalies.
using different backbone architectures, including EffNet-B0, Furthermore, AnoMem consistently outperforms all
ResNet18, and ResNet50. In the context of one-vs-all eval- other detectors considered in the study. While its
uation settings (UNS and IMS) on the CIFAR dataset, we performance improves with the availability of more
achieved consistently high performance. abnormal data, it remains highly competitive even
 Remarks: EffNet-B0 emerged as the top performer, demon- when trained with only normal samples.
strating superior results, followed closely by ResNet50 and • Efficient memory usage in AnoMem: the memory
then ResNet18. The performance gaps between these archi- usage in AnoMem is significantly more efficient
tectures were relatively small, with EffNet-B0 outperforming than that in MemAE or similar models [5],
ResNet50 by a margin of 0.2% to 0.3%, while ResNet50 [6], which rely on pixel-wise reconstruction loss
surpassed ResNet18 by a modest margin of 0.4% to 0.6%. In to learn memory. In contrast, AnoMem employs
the rest of the paper, we report the performance of AnoMem contrastive learning, allowing its learnable neural
using ResNet50, which was the median performer. It is worth network-based memory to develop more robust repnoting that the memory modules are scalable with the chosen resentations. Unlike other methods, such as coreset
backbone. technique, which are limited by static memory
 3) Input Preprocessing: For all datasets except CIFAR-10 mechanisms, AnoMem creates normal prototypes
and CIFAR-100, we resize the input images to 224 × 224. that are less constrained and more semantically rich
Prior works on the MVTec-AD often resized the images to and generalizable. This approach enables AnoMem
128 × 128 or 256 × 256, and [41] found that the resolution to achieve better performance and adaptability in
of 256 × 256 produced better results (up to 2 points). We AD tasks.
observed the same findings in our experiments; the resolution 2) Comparison with EK methods:
of 256 × 256 gives slightly better results than 224 × 224. • Remarks. Although EK methods such as CSI and
However, to demonstrate our method as a generic detector, MSC do not directly use anomalies, they leverage
we resize all the images to the same size of 224 × 224. As extensive additional datasets (like ImageNet1K or
for the contrastive invariance transformations, we use random 21K with up to 14 million images). The pre-trained
crop with rescale, horizontal symmetry, brightness jittering, models in these methods incorporate significant
contrast jittering, saturation jittering with Gaussian blur and information about “pseudo” anomalies (images from
noise as in SimCLR [58]. the additional dataset), while the “strict” UNS set-
 Remarks: It is worth noting that we do not need specific ting operates under the assumption of no prior
augmentations as in CSI [15]. Indeed, CSI requires additional knowledge.
2810 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 • Efficiency of AnoMem. Despite requiring less TABLE V
 training data, AnoMem demonstrates superior effi- P ERFORMANCE FOR OOD D ETECTION
 ciency. For instance, on CIFAR-10, MSC achieved
 94.8% AUC with the help of 1 million additional
 images, while IMS-AnoMem attained 97.1% AUC
 using only 5% of anomaly classes. This highlights
 AnoMem’s effectiveness and efficiency in AD even
 with minimal data.
 • Generalization capacity on challenging benchmark
 datasets. AnoMem significantly outperforms CSI on
 CUB-200 and MSC on FAS and industrial inspection tasks, achieving up to 10 percentage points
 higher AUC (details provided in the next section).
 This indicates that SoTA pre-trained methods like
 CSI and MSC may perform poorly in the presence NSA in [3], and SSMCTB (self-supervised masked
 of distribution shifts, whereas AnoMem consistently convolutional transformer block) in [13], but still
 performs excellently. Notably, as other detectors, perform worse than AnoMem, even in the UNS
 including the SoTA CSI, struggle with CUB-200, setting.
 this dataset represents a valuable benchmark for
 assessing AD performance. E. Results on Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS)
 3) Unified anomaly detector: AnoMem performs very
 Table IV compares our model’s performance on the FAS
 well in both UNS-AD and IMS-AD while other unified
 intra-dataset cross-type protocol2 with the methods discussed
 methods fail in UNS-AD. AnoMem is the first efficient
 in Sec. IV-C. Without any additional tuning specific to face
 unified anomaly detector. We also note that our change
 data, our method achieves high-quality results on the FAS
 from UNS-AD to IMS-AD was done with minimal
 task, surpassing existing anomaly detection models across all
 hyperparameter tuning. This is due to the first training
 unseen attack types. Notably, it reduces the performance gap
 step being shared between two settings.
 between coarse attacks (e.g., PM, FM) and more challenging
 fine-grained attacks (e.g., PP, SR), thanks to its multi-scale
D. Results on Industrial Defect Detection anomaly detection approach. AnoMem consistently outper-
 Similar to [4] and the previous section, Table III is divided forms both CSI and the pre-trained MSC model. Additionally,
into two distinct parts to address the discrepancy of non-EK the use of certain large-scale datasets, such as ImageNet-21K,
and EK methods. From this table, several key observations can may not be feasible in industrial settings due to restrictive
be made: licensing terms.
 1) Performance of UNS-AnoMem. Without any specific
 design for industrial inspection, UNS-AnoMem outper- F. Results on Out-of-Distribution (OOD) Detection
 forms all previous methods that do not use external As shown in Tab. V, AnoMem performs comparably to the
 knowledge (EK), including PatchCore [2], NSA [3], and SoTA baseline CSI [15]. However, CSI relies heavily on stor-
 SPR (score-based perturbation resilience) [4]. ing the entire training set features during inference, resulting
 2) IMS-AnoMem performance in comparison with methods in a substantial memory footprint with large training sets. In
 using EK. contrast, our model efficiently learns a fixed size memory.3
 • PatchCore [2] and RD [41] utilize pre-trained Additionally, CSI tends to perform poorly on datasets with a
 models, whereas DRAEM [12] generates synthetic limited number of training normal samples, as evidenced by
 anomalies from an additional dataset instead of the results on the one-vs-all CUB-200 (with 50 images per
 relying on pre-trained models. Analyzing the out- class).
 comes of PatchCore, which has two variations, It is important to note that the algorithms presented in [80]
 with and without EK, indicates that incorporating achieve higher performance on this task, but they rely on
 EK enhances performance. Trained from scratch models pre-trained on a large-scale dataset such as ImageNetwith a limited amount of anomalies, IMS-AnoMem 21K (14M images) [81]. Therefore, a direct comparison
 achieves SoTA performance. The three results between these methods and AnoMem, which is trained from
 shown correspond to different ratios of anomalous scratch on a smaller dataset (50K images from CIFAR),
 samples used (γ = 0.01, 0.05, 0.10).
 2 Only a few studies have explored applying generic anomaly detection to
 • Other detectors are more complex than ours. DeSTS
 this complex real-world problem involving local anomalies. Consequently, we
 [14] combines a pre-trained teacher network, a need to replicate all the results shown in Tab. IV.
 denoising student encoder-decoder, and a segmen- 3 In terms of memory usage, CSI and pre-trained models using KNN require

 tation network into a framework, while UniAD [22] storing the entire normal dataset, whereas AnoMem only needs a fixed size.
 For example, for OOD detection with CIFAR as the ID dataset, CSI must
 utilizes a pre-trained Transformer. “FastViT + [13]” retain 60000 samples. In contrast, AnoMem requires only 768 samples (256
 combines three methods, that are FastVit in [76], for one memory module and 512 for another).
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2811

 TABLE VI
 P ERFORMANCE OF A NO M EM FOR IMAGE C LASSIFICATION
 T HROUGH L INEAR E VALUATION

 TABLE VII
 P ERFORMANCE OF A NO M EM FOR UNS-AD W ITH
 M ULTI -S CALE M EMORY Fig. 3. Memory experiments on CIFAR10.

is not entirely fair. The pre-training samples used in [80]
overlap in nature with the anomalous samples that need to be
detected. Additionally, this protocol involves a normal class
composed of several subclasses, demonstrating the capability Fig. 4. Sampling ratio experiments.
of our memory modules to handle multi-modal normal cues
effectively.
 two-scale model. While we sacrifice some of the memory and
 training time for the additional scale, our AD performance is
G. Impact of the Multi-Scale Memory improved significantly.
 This section examines the impact of multi-scale memory
layers and highlights their benefits for our model’s perfor- H. Impact of Memory Size and Scale
mance. We will illustrate these advantages through two distinct The memory size must be carefully chosen at every scale
tasks: image multi-class image classification and anomaly to reach a good balance between the normal class prototype
detection. The baseline is the model using only the last feature coverage and the memory usage during training and inference.
map, with k-means centroids as its normal prototypes, as This section presents some rules of thumb regarding the sizing
detailed in Sec. III-A. of memory layers depending on the scale.
 1) Image Classification: We evaluate the impact of memory We start by plotting the relation between the last scale
on image classification using linear evaluation on standard memory size, the representation separability, and the final AD
CIFAR-10/100 benchmarks. This involves training an addi- performance in Fig. 3a. As one could expect, higher memory
tional linear classifier on frozen encoder representations to size produces better quality representations and more accurate
assess how memory influences the contrastive learning of anomaly detector. However, we can note that increasing the
these representations. Unlike AD, this experiment focuses memory size above 256 has significantly less impact on the
on multi-class image classification and aims to validate the anomaly detector performance. Therefore a good trade-off
effectiveness of the first step in our approach, as depicted in between memory usage and performance seems to be at 256
Fig. 2a. Tab. VI shows that incorporating memory layers in the on CIFAR-10.
first branch significantly enhances the quality of the encoder Further, we study the impact of feature map scale on the
representations. We hypothesize that, similar to the findings required memory size. In Fig. 3b we fix the last scale memory
in [64], adding prototypical samples in one branch enables size to 256 and look at the AD accuracy for various ratios
the model to contrast positive images against representative of memory size between each scale. As lower scales benefit
negatives. This approach reduces the need for large batch sizes more from a larger memory than higher scales, we hypothesize
and significantly lowers multi-scale CL memory usage. that the feature vectors of more local texture-oriented features
 2) Anomaly Detection: To support the importance of mem- are richer and more variable than global object-oriented ones.
ory for AD, we compare the anomaly detector with k-means Memory layers thus need to be of higher capacity to capture
centroids or with the normal prototypes learned during the the complexity.
first stage (Table VII). In the first case, we train the anomaly In Tab. VIII, we compare the memory usage of different
detectors with the same procedure but instead of fetching the memory module types across two datasets. Notably, pretrained
Hopfield layer output we use the closest k-means centroid. models using a nearest-neighbor (NN) queue require storing
Lastly, we measure the impact of multi-scale AD by comparing the entire normal set, while AnoMem maintains a fixed memthe single-scale model only using the last feature map, and our ory size.
2812 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 Fig. 5. t-SNE of learned prototypes, normal and anomalous samples on CIFAR10.

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF A DDITIONAL M EMORY U SAGE FOR
 S TORING N ORMAL P ROTOTYPES

Fig. 6. Visualization of rescaled normal prototype deviation maps at scale S 1
(7 × 7) and S 2 (14 × 14) across different spoof types in the WMCA dataset.

 We also compare the effect of the scale on the performance
of our model. As shown in Fig. 3b, the AD performance consistently improves with higher scales, even when the memory
size remains the same. The AUC can increase by up to 6 points
when the model is extended to scale S 2. We also note that,
even with a larger memory, performance at the lower scale S 1
plateaus significantly below that of S 2. This would support Fig. 7. Failure case visualizations across datasets. Parentheses indicate the
that higher scale features are necessary to better discriminate misclassified ground truth (“Norm” = normal misclassified as anomaly, and
 vice versa). Cases illustrate limitations such as background sensitivity, scale
normal samples from anomalies. variance, and subtle anomalies.
 Remarks: We believe that the optimal choice of S depends
on the type of anomaly being considered. If the focus is
solely on object-level anomalies, where the semantic class versus a real dog), a larger S is beneficial. In this case,
differs (e.g., a dog versus a cat), a smaller S is sufficient to combining high-level semantic features with low-level textural
capture the normal semantic patterns at higher feature levels. patterns becomes important, albeit at the cost of increased
However, if finer-grained style anomalies are also taken into computational complexity. This complementarity across scales
account, where the object belongs to the same semantic class is illustrated in Fig. 6, where each scale appears to specialize
but exhibits stylistic differences (e.g., a painting of a dog in detecting different spoof-related cues.
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2813

 TABLE IX K. Qualitative Effectiveness of Learned Prototype
 L INEAR E VALUATION ON THE CIFAR-10 I MAGE C LASSIFICATION We perform in Fig. 5 a t-SNE analysis on the last-scale pro-
 B ENCHMARK FOR D IFFERENT λV
 totypes, along with test samples from normal and anomalous
 classes of CIFAR-10 after the first learning stage of AnoMem.
 As we can see, the representations of normal and anomalous
 samples are well separated, confirming the effectiveness of our
 memory backed representation learning. Moreover, the learned
 TABLE X
 normal prototypes are well representative of the normal class,
 UNS-AD E VALUATION ON CIFAR-10 AND CIFAR-100 FOR
 D IFFERENT λ(s) F UNCTIONS
 as testified by the close overlap in representation space.

 L. Additional Visualizations
 In Fig. 6, we additionally show the normal prototype deviation maps at two scales, S 1 and S 2 , overlaid on various spoof
 images from WMCA. While the deviation maps are generally
 spatially aligned with the anomalous regions, the significant
I. Impact of Spatial Sampling Ratios differences in score ranges and focus across scales make it
 In the first step, sampling ratios r are introduced to reduce non-trivial to fuse them into a single, meaningful heatmap.
the number of patterns used in the contrastive loss, which • Partial spoof: undetected at the higher scale S 1 , but fine
in turn decreases the size of the similarity matrix. At lower textural inconsistencies are captured at S 2 .
scales, neighboring samples are sufficiently similar, making • Replay spoof: S 1 detects screen borders, while S 2 capit less detrimental to omit some patterns during training. tures unnatural skin saturation.
To determine the optimal sampling ratio, we evaluate the • Mask spoof: S 1 identifies strong reflections, whereas S 2
anomaly detection AUC across various sampling ratios and reveals subtle mask texture.
anomalous data ratios γ. Given that the feature maps at the The combination of both scales enhances the model’s verfinal scale are spatially small, we only adjust the sampling satility in detecting diverse spoofing artifacts.
ratio at the first scale r(1) while keeping r(2) = 1. The batch We further present several failure cases for each dataset in
size remains fixed throughout all experiments. The results, Fig. 7, highlighting a few notable limitations:
shown in Sec. IV-I, reveal that low sampling ratios (γ < 0.3) • Background sensitivity: The anomaly score can be
substantially degrade AD performance. However, increasing overly influenced by the background, as seen in CUB
the sampling ratio beyond a certain point offers diminishing bird images with unusual backgrounds (d, e) or WMCA
returns: doubling the number of sampled patterns yields only Live samples with atypical clothing (a).
a 2% improvement in relative AUC, which may not justify the • Lack of scale invariance: The model’s reliance on lowadded computational cost. scale features can hinder its ability to generalize across
 different subject-to-camera distances (e.g., close-up bird
 image in CUB (f)).
J. Selection and Tuning of Hyperparameters • Subtle anomalies: Detection can fail when the anoma-
 The variance loss weight λV was evaluated on the CIFAR10 lous region is too small relative to the minimum scale
image classification benchmark using a range of commonly considered (e.g., WMCA Paper with a thin border (c), or
used. As shown in Tab. IX, AnoMem exhibits minimal sen- minor defects in MVTec samples (g, h, i)).
sitivity to λV . Moreover, in our tests, it remains fixed for all
other datasets. V. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE D IRECTIONS
 For the confidence weights λ(s) , we compared two monoton- In this paper, we introduce a novel two-stage AD model,
ically increasing functions linear and exponential. As we can AnoMem, designed to seamlessly operate in both UNS and
see from the results on UNS-AD in Tab. X, the exponential IMS settings. Our approach involves the memorization of
weighting yields a better anomaly detection than the linear prototypes for normal class instances to compute an anomaly
weights. We believe that the linear relation does not sufficiently deviation score. By incorporating learnable memory layers
enhance object anomalies and imposes excessive constraints for normal instances within a CL framework, we jointly
during representation learning, particularly when contrasting enhance encoder representations and establish robust memvery low-scale patterns. orization of normal samples. Subsequently, these learned
 The margin M enforces a norm constraint on normal and normal prototypes are leveraged to train a straightforward
anomaly representations within a radius of less than 1/M detector within a unified framework that accommodates both
and more than M, respectively. A value of 1 pushes all UNS-AD and IMS-AD. Moreover, we extend these prototypes
representations indiscriminately onto the unit sphere, while to multiple scales, enhancing the model’s robustness against
a high value leads to an ill-posed distance loss. We chose various anomaly sizes. Finally, we evaluate the performance of
M = 2 as a compromise, allowing half of the unit sphere AnoMem on diverse datasets containing object, style, and local
to be allocated for normal samples. Indeed, we are currently anomalies to demonstrate its efficiency, even when trained
working on dynamically adjusting the value of M. from scratch under limited data regimes.
2814 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 35, 2026

 Additionally, we could explore using our model for anomaly [19] Y. Cao et al., “A survey on visual anomaly detection: Challenge,
localization. This includes investigating more efficient meth- approach, and prospect,” 2024, arXiv:2401.16402.
 [20] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
ods for integrating multiple scales and merging the resulting language supervision,” in Proc. ICML, 2021.
anomaly maps into a unified heatmap. We might also examine [21] C. Ding, G. Pang, and C. Shen, “Catching both gray and black swans:
the use of memory networks for non-contrastive learning Open-set supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 7378–7388.
approaches, such as substituting the `NTX loss with cross- [22] Z. You et al., “A unified model for multi-class anomaly detection,” in
correlation and considering techniques like Barlow-Twins as Proc. NeuRIPS, 2022.
an alternative to SimCLR. [23] L. Jezequel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Anomaly detection
 via learnable pretext task,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit.
 (ICPR), Aug. 2022, pp. 1178–1185.
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT [24] L. Jézéquel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Efficient anomaly
 detection using self-supervised multi-cue tasks,” IEEE Trans. Image
 This work was conducted while Loı̈c Jézéquel was affiliated Process., vol. 32, pp. 807–821, 2023.
with both Idemia and ETIS, and Ngoc-Son Vu was affiliated [25] H. Cho, J. Seol, and S.-G. Lee, “Masked contrastive learning for
 anomaly detection,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
with ETIS. 2021, pp. 1434–1441.
 [26] C. Chen et al., “Novelty detection via contrastive learning with negative
 R EFERENCES data augmentation,” in Proc. 30th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., Aug.
 2021, pp. 606–614.
[1] C.-L. Li, K. Sohn, J. Yoon, and T. Pfister, “CutPaste: Self- [27] J. Žbontar, J. Li, I. Misra, Y. LeCun, and S. Deny, “Barlow twins: Selfsupervised learning for anomaly detection and localization,” in Proc. supervised learning via redundancy reduction,” in Proc. ICML, 2021,
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 12310–12320.
 pp. 9659–9669. [28] Z. Xiao, Q. Yan, and Y. Amit, “Do we really need to learn
[2] K. Roth, L. Pemula, J. Zepeda, B. Schölkopf, T. Brox, and P. Gehler, representations from in-domain data for outlier detection?” 2021,
 “Towards total recall in industrial anomaly detection,” in Proc. arXiv:2105.09270.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, [29] T. Reiss, N. Cohen, L. Bergman, and Y. Hoshen, “PANDA: Adapting
 pp. 14298–14308. pretrained features for anomaly detection and segmentation,” in Proc.
[3] H. M. Schlüter, J. Tan, B. Hou, and B. Kainz, “Natural synthetic IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021,
 anomalies for self-supervised anomaly detection and localization,” in pp. 2806–2814.
 Proc. ECCV, 2021, pp. 474–489. [30] V. Sehwag, M. Chiang, and P. Mittal, “SSD: A unified framework for
[4] W. Shin, J. Lee, T. Lee, S. Lee, and J. P. Yun, “Anomaly detection self-supervised outlier detection,” in Proc. ICLR, 2021.
 using score-based perturbation resilience,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. [31] K. Sohn, C. Li, J. Yoon, M. Jin, and T. Pfister, “Learning and evaluating
 Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 23315–23325. representations for deep one-class classification,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020.
[5] D. Gong et al., “Memorizing normality to detect anomaly: Memory- [32] N. Kumar, P. Hanfeld, M. Hecht, M. Bussmann, S. Gumhold, and
 augmented deep autoencoder for unsupervised anomaly detection,” N. Hoffmann, “InFlow: Robust outlier detection utilizing normalizing
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2019, flows,” 2021, arXiv:2106.12894.
 pp. 1705–1714. [33] T. Daniel, T. Kurutach, and A. Tamar, “Deep variational semi-supervised
[6] H. Park, J. Noh, and B. Ham, “Learning memory-guided normality novelty detection,” 2019, arXiv:1911.04971.
 for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern [34] J. Wyatt, A. Leach, S. M. Schmon, and C. G. Willcocks, “AnoDDPM:
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 14360–14369. Anomaly detection with denoising diffusion probabilistic models using
[7] L. Bergman, N. Cohen, and Y. Hoshen, “Deep nearest neighbor anomaly simplex noise,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 detection,” 2020, arXiv:2002.10445. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 649–655.
[8] X. Gui, D. Wu, Y. Chang, and S. Fan, “Constrained adaptive [35] H. Mirzaei et al., “Fake it till you make it: Near-distribution novelty
 projection with pretrained features for anomaly detection,” 2021, detection by score-based generative models,” in Proc. ICLR, 2023.
 arXiv:2112.02597. [36] P. Perera, R. Nallapati, and B. Xiang, “OCGAN: One-class novelty
[9] T. Reiss and Y. Hoshen, “Mean-shifted contrastive loss for anomaly detection using GANs with constrained latent representations,” in Proc.
 detection,” in Proc. AAAI, vol. 37, 2023, pp. 2155–2162. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
[10] D. Hendrycks, M. Mazeika, S. Kadavath, and D. Song, “Using self- pp. 2893–2901.
 supervised learning can improve model robustness and uncertainty,” in [37] S. Schneider, D. Antensteiner, D. Soukup, and M. Scheutz,
 Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 15637–15648. “Autoencoders—A comparative analysis in the realm of anomaly
[11] L. Bergman and Y. Hoshen, “Classification-based anomaly detection for detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 general data,” in Proc. ICLR, 2020. Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 1985–1991.
[12] V. Zavrtanik, M. Kristan, and D. Skocaj, “DRAEM—A discrimina- [38] N. Tuluptceva, B. Bakker, I. Fedulova, and A. Konushin, “Perceptual
 tively trained reconstruction embedding for surface anomaly detection,” image anomaly detection,” in Proc. ACPR, 2020, pp. 164–178.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, [39] T. Schlegl, P. Seeböck, S. M. Waldstein, U. Schmidt-Erfurth, and
 pp. 8310–8319. G. Langs, “Unsupervised anomaly detection with generative adversarial
[13] N. Madan et al., “Self-supervised masked convolutional transformer networks to guide marker discovery,” in Proc. Inf. Process. Med. Imag.
 block for anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., (IPMI), 2017, pp. 146–157.
 vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 525–542, Jan. 2024. [40] G. Liu, S. Lan, T. Zhang, W. Huang, and W. Wang, “SAGAN: Skip-
[14] X. Zhang, S. Li, X. Li, P. Huang, J. Shan, and T. Chen, “DeSTSeg: attention GAN for anomaly detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Image
 Segmentation guided denoising student–teacher for anomaly detection,” Process. (ICIP), Sep. 2021, pp. 2468–2472.
 in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. [41] H. Deng and X. Li, “Anomaly detection via reverse distillation from
 2023, pp. 3914–3923. one-class embedding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
[15] J. Tack, S. Mo, J. Jeong, and J. Shin, “CSI: Novelty detection via con- Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022, pp. 9727–9736.
 trastive learning on distributionally shifted instances,” in Proc. NeurIPS, [42] M. J. Cohen and S. Avidan, “Transformaly–two (Feature spaces) are bet-
 2020. ter than one,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
[16] S. Noh, D. Jeong, and J.-H. Lee, “Simple and effective out-of- Workshops (CVPRW), Jun. 2022, pp. 4059–4068.
 distribution detection via cosine-based softmax loss,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF [43] S. Han, H. Song, S. E. Lee, S. Park, and M. Cha, “Elsa: Energy-based
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023, pp. 16514–16523. learning for semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Brit. Mach.
[17] H. Ramsauer et al., “Hopfield networks is all you need,” in Proc. ICLR, Vis. Conf., 2021, p. 361.
 2021. [44] L. Ruff et al., “Deep semi-supervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. ICLR,
[18] M. Salehi, H. Mirzaei, D. Hendrycks, Y. Li, M. H. Rohban, and 2020.
 M. Sabokrou, “A unified survey on anomaly, novelty, open-set, and out [45] L. Jezequel, N.-S. Vu, J. Beaudet, and A. Histace, “Semi-supervised
 of-distribution detection: Solutions and future challenges,” Trans. Mach. anomaly detection with contrastive regularization,” in Proc. 26th Int.
 Learn. Res., 2022. Conf. Pattern Recognit. (ICPR), Aug. 2022, pp. 2664–2671.
JÉZÉQUEL et al.: UNIFIED ANOMALY DETECTION VIA MULTI-SCALE CONTRASTED MEMORY 2815

[46] M. Yang, P. Wu, and H. Feng, “MemSeg: A semi-supervised method [64] D. Dwibedi, Y. Aytar, J. Tompson, P. Sermanet, and A. Zisserman, “With
 for image surface defect detection using differences and commonalities,” a little help from my friends: Nearest-neighbor contrastive learning
 Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., vol. 119, Mar. 2023, Art. no. 105835. of visual representations,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
[47] J. Jeong, Y. Zou, T. Kim, D. Zhang, A. Ravichandran, and O. Dabeer, (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 9568–9577.
 “WinCLIP: Zero-/few-shot anomaly classification and segmentation,” in [65] S. A. Koohpayegani, A. Tejankar, and H. Pirsiavash, “Mean shift for
 Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. self-supervised learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
 2023, pp. 19606–19616. (ICCV), Oct. 2021, pp. 10306–10315.
[48] C. Li, S. Zhou, J. Kong, L. Qi, and H. Xue, “KAnoCLIP: Zero- [66] E. Cole, X. Yang, K. Wilber, O. M. Aodha, and S. Belongie,
 shot anomaly detection through knowledge-driven prompt learning and “When does contrastive visual representation learning work?” in Proc.
 enhanced cross-modal integration,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2022,
 Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Apr. 2025, pp. 1–5. pp. 1–10.
[49] W. Ma et al., “AA-CLIP: Enhancing zero-shot anomaly detection via [67] J. Zhang et al., “Out-of-distribution detection based on in-distribution
 anomaly-aware CLIP,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern data patterns memorization with modern Hopfield energy,” in Proc.
 Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2025, pp. 4744–4754. ICLR, 2023.
[50] B.-B. Gao et al., “AdaptCLIP: Adapting CLIP for universal visual [68] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
 anomaly detection,” 2025, arXiv:2505.09926. Univ. Toronto, Tech. Rep., 2009.
[51] Z. Gu, B. Zhu, G. Zhu, Y. Chen, M. Tang, and J. Wang, “AnomalyGPT: [69] P. Welinder et al., “Caltech-UCSD birds 200,” California Institute
 Detecting industrial anomalies using large vision-language models,” in of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. CNS-TR-2010-001,
 Proc. AAAI, vol. 38, 2024, pp. 1932–1940. 2010.
[52] P. Bergmann, M. Fauser, D. Sattlegger, and C. Steger, “MVTec AD—A [70] A. George, Z. Mostaani, D. Geissenbuhler, O. Nikisins, A. Anjos, and
 comprehensive real-world dataset for unsupervised anomaly detection,” S. Marcel, “Biometric face presentation attack detection with multiin Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. channel convolutional neural network,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
 2019, pp. 9584–9592. Security, vol. 15, pp. 42–55, 2020.
[53] V. Mahadevan, W. Li, V. Bhalodia, and N. Vasconcelos, “Anomaly [71] Y. Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, and A. Ng, “Reading
 detection in crowded scenes,” in Proc. IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning,” in Proc.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2010, pp. 1975–1981. NIPS, 2011.
[54] J. Yi and S. Yoon, “Patch SVDD: Patch-level SVDD for anomaly [72] F. Yu, A. Seff, Y. Zhang, S. Song, T. Funkhouser, and J. Xiao, “LSUN:
 detection and segmentation,” in Proc. ACCV, H. Ishikawa, C. Liu, Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with
 T. Pajdla, and J. Shi, Eds., 2020. humans in the loop,” 2015, arXiv:1506.03365.
[55] Y. Yu, S. Shin, S. Lee, C. Jun, and K. Lee, “Block selection method [73] I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. E. Dahl, and G. E. Hinton, “On the
 for using feature norm in out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. importance of initialization and momentum in deep learning,” in Proc.
 IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2023, ICML, 2013, pp. 1139–1147.
 pp. 15701–15711. [74] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with
[56] M. Lafon, E. Ramzi, C. Rambour, and N. Thome, “Hybrid energy based warm restarts,” in Proc. ICLR, 2016.
 model in the feature space for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. Int. [75] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
 Conf. Mach. Learn., A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.
 S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, Eds., Jul. 2023, pp. 18250–18268. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.
[57] A. Djurisic, N. Bozanic, A. Ashok, and R. Liu, “Extremely simple [76] P. K. A. Vasu, J. Gabriel, J. Zhu, O. Tuzel, and A. Ranjan, “FastViT:
 activation shaping for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. ICLR, A fast hybrid vision transformer using structural reparameterization,”
 2022. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2023,
[58] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. E. Hinton, “A simple pp. 5762–5772.
 framework for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. [77] A. Zaeemzadeh, N. Bisagno, Z. Sambugaro, N. Conci, N. Rah-
 ICML, vol. 1, 2024, pp. 1597–1607. navard, and M. Shah, “Out-of-distribution detection using union of
[59] A. Bardes, J. Ponce, and Y. LeCun, “VICReg: Variance-invariance- 1-dimensional subspaces,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Patcovariance regularization for self-supervised learning,” in Proc. ICLR, tern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2021, pp. 9447–9456.
 2021. [78] W. Liu, X. Wang, J. D. Owens, and Y. Li, “Energy-based out-of-
[60] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for distribution detection,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020.
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. [79] H. Choi, H. Jeong, and J. Y. Choi, “Balanced energy regularization loss
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9726–9735. for out-of-distribution detection,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
[61] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent—A new approach to self- Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Jun. 2023,
 supervised learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020. pp. 15691–15700.
[62] X. Chen and K. He, “Exploring simple Siamese representation learning,” [80] J. Li, P. Chen, Z. He, S. Yu, S. Liu, and J. Jia, “Rethinking out-ofin Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. distribution (OOD) detection: Masked image modeling is all you need,”
 2021, pp. 15745–15753. in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun.
[63] M. Caron, I. Misra, J. Mairal, P. Goyal, P. Bojanowski, and A. Joulin, 2023, pp. 11578–11589.
 “Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster [81] O. Russakovsky et al., “ImageNet large scale visual recognition
 assignments,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2020. challenge,” in Proc. IJCV, vol. 115, 2015, pp. 211–252.