2424 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

UniNet: A Unified Multi-Granular Traffic Modeling
 Framework for Network Security
 Binghui Wu , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Dinil Mon Divakaran, Senior Member, IEEE,
 and Mohan Gurusamy , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—As modern networks grow increasingly complex— adoption of TLS [1]. Consequently, researchers have long
driven by diverse devices, encrypted protocols, and evolving been exploring models from the domain of statistics, data
threats—network traffic analysis has become critically important. mining, and machine learning (ML) to address the challenges
Existing machine learning models often rely only on a single
representation of packets or flows, limiting their ability to in network traffic analysis [2], [3], [4], [5]. The advancement
capture the contextual relationships essential for robust analysis. in deep learning (DL) plays a crucial role in network traffic
Furthermore, task-specific architectures for supervised, semi- analysis for security tasks. These models leverage the vast
supervised, and unsupervised learning lead to inefficiencies in and complex features of network traffic to identify anomalies
adapting to varying data formats and security tasks. and threats effectively. Additionally, with the advent of pro-
 To address these gaps, we propose UniNet, a unified framework
that introduces a novel multi-granular traffic representation (T- grammable switches [6], there is potential for ML or partial
Matrix) with rich contextual information, integrating session, ML logic to run directly on switches at terabits per second
flow, and packet-level features to provide comprehensive contex- (Tbps) line rates [7], [8], promising real-time security capatual information. Combined with T-Attent, a specially designed bilities. The deep learning models, from convolutional neural
lightweight attention-based model, UniNet efficiently learns latent networks (CNNs) to autoencoders and the latest transformer
embeddings for diverse security tasks. Extensive evaluations
across four key network security and privacy problems—anomaly models [9] are able to learn from large datasets consisting
detection, attack classification, IoT device identification, and of hundreds of features. This has led to the development
encrypted website fingerprinting—demonstrate UniNet’s signifi- of several deep learning models for network anomaly deteccant performance gain over state-of-the-art methods, achieving tion, botnet detection, attack classification, fingerprinting and
higher accuracy, lower false positive rates, and improved scal- counter-fingerprinting of IoT devices and websites, traffic
ability across various datasets. By addressing the limitations
of single-level models and unifying traffic analysis paradigms, generation, and so on [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15].
UniNet sets a new benchmark for modern network security. Despite these promising directions, a core challenge lies
 in data representation and formats. The common formats
 Index Terms—Network security, network traffic analysis,
anomaly detection, website fingerprinting, representation learn- for network data are: i) pcap that captures every packet
ing, machine learning, multi-granular modeling, unified model. on the wire and details from the headers ii) flows (e.g.,
 NetFlow, IPFIX [16]) that capture coarser information from
 an aggregation of packets. Packet captures provide rich details
 but require substantial resources to store and process; flow-
 I. I NTRODUCTION
 based representations are more lightweight but lose important
 VER the years, computer networks have evolved sig-
O nificantly due to the increase in network bandwidth,
sophisticated network nodes (such as programmable switches),
 per-packet granularity. As a result, ML models must adapt
 to different levels of detail and data availability. Traditional
 intrusion detection systems (IDS) often focus on flows only,
new device types (e.g., Internet of Things), changing network treating each flow as an isolated unit [17], [18]. However,
protocols (e.g., DNS-over-HTTPS), new applications (e.g., malicious behaviors rarely manifest in any single flow or
ChatGPT), etc. With this evolution also comes the challenge packet in isolation. A single flow generally lacks concluof securing the networks from various threats and attacks. sive evidence, and a lone packet offers minimal context
Traditional rule-based systems have limitations in catching unless considered within a broader temporal and relational
up with new and unknown threats; moreover, payloads are environment. Therefore, recent efforts are shifting toward
not available for deep packet inspection due to the increasing session-level representations, wherein flows sharing common
 Received 12 March 2025; revised 30 April 2025 and 18 June 2025; accepted attributes (e.g., source or destination IP addresses) within a
23 June 2025. Date of publication 2 July 2025; date of current version certain time window are grouped into sessions. Session-level
29 December 2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article
and approving it for publication was G. Han. (Corresponding author: Binghui
 analysis provides more context than flow-level or packet-level
Wu.) views alone. However, most research works focus exclusively
 Binghui Wu and Mohan Gurusamy are with the Department of Electrical on one granularity at a time, which can either overlook subtle
and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117576 (e-mail: binghuiwu@u.nus.edu; gmohan@nus.edu.sg).
 patterns critical for detecting sophisticated threats or demand
 Dinil Mon Divakaran is with the Institute for Infocomm Research, excessive computational resources, undermining scalability
A*STAR, Singapore 138632, and also with the School of Computing, and real-time applicability.
National University of Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: dinil_divakaran@i2r.astar.edu.sg). Recent research works have shown the ability to parse
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2025.3585170 packets at line-rates for security use cases, e.g., rule-based
 2332-7731 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2425

Fig. 1. Overview of UniNet framework.

 TABLE I TABLE II
 E XTENDED C OMPARISON W ITH R ECENT N ETWORK TASKS W E C ONSIDER FOR N ETWORK T RAFFIC A NALYSIS (S EE T HREAT
 T RAFFIC A NALYSIS M ODELS M ODEL D ESCRIPTION IN S ECTION V FOR F URTHER D ETAILS )

 and packet level information; ii) T-Attent, A unified, self-
DDoS detection and mitigation [8], [19]. Yet, representing all attention-based feature extraction model capable of capturing
packets (of a traffic session) in a model is challenging. Firstly, contextual patterns from diverse data inputs; and iii) heads
using full packet sequences as inputs to the model makes the tailored to different learning paradigms, including supervised,
model size too large to be trained efficiently. Additionally, semi-supervised, and unsupervised tasks. Unlike previous
longer input sequences increase the inference time and make approaches that either focus on flows or packets in isolation,
the system more vulnerable to certain attacks, e.g., DoS attacks UniNet leverages these granularities in a single architecture,
specifically targeting such models. ① Therefore, a key gap we ensuring both fine-grained context and scalability. At the same
identify in this domain is the lack of efficient and effective time, its flexible architecture supports a variety of security
representation that includes both packet-, flow- and session- and privacy tasks, from anomaly detection and attack classifilevel features. Without such a representation, models are not cation to device identification and website fingerprinting (see
easily adaptable for deployment across various networks that Table II).
may have different traffic-capturing techniques and constraints, The following summarizes our contributions:
resulting in different data formats. ② Furthermore, another 1) T-Matrix: We develop a multi-granular representation
critical gap is the uncertainty around the type of model for network traffic that is suitable for multiple data
best suited to handle these challenges. A general model that formats and their combinations (Section III). We carry
can function effectively across different conditions is impor- out comprehensive experiments to compare T-Matrix
tant, as it ensures consistent performance despite variability with single-level representations; the results show that
in available features. Such a model must be capable of T-Matrix captures more detailed traffic patterns, leading
integrating various learning paradigms, including supervised, to improved performance in various traffic analysis
semi-supervised, and unsupervised learning. ③ Beyond the tasks (Section V-D).
need for a general representation and a unified model, there 2) T-Attent for Latent Embedding Learning: We develop a
is also a challenge of dealing with limited data. In scenar- unified attention-based architecture for network traffic
ios where data is scarce, the ability to extract meaningful analysis that captures contextual information and siminformation and maintain robust performance becomes impor- plifies model selection (Section IV). T-Attent effectively
tant. Table I presents a comparison with recent traffic analysis handles supervised, semi-supervised, and unsupervised
models. learning by employing different “heads” (Section IV-B).
 To address these limitations, we introduce UniNet, a This design greatly reduces the overhead of using sepunified framework designed to integrate multi-granular rep- arate models for each task, making UniNet a powerful
resentations and support a broad range of network traffic choice for diverse traffic analysis scenarios (Section V.
analysis tasks. Figure 1 provides an overview of UniNet, Additionally, we adopt a lightweight variant of the
highlighting its three main components: i) T-Matrix, A multi- transformer encoder and a new segmentation stratgranular traffic representation that can integrate session, flow, egy (Section IV-A), with reduced attention heads and
2426 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

 embedding dimensions, which ensures computational engineering. Traffic analysis systems typically operate by
 efficiency without compromising performance. tapping traffic so that false positives (FPs), however low
 3) Enhanced efficiency and performance: We evalu- their number, do not interrupt normal connections. A stream
 ate UniNet on four common network security and of packets should be analyzed before decision-making. To
 privacy tasks spanning three ML categories (unsu- support efficient analysis under this constraint, UniNet adopts
 pervised anomaly detection, supervised classification a sliding window strategy. Rather than waiting for a full
 of attacks and devices, and semi-supervised web- traffic to complete, the system buffers packets within a fixedsite fingerprinting), using multiple real-world datasets size time window and extracts features from it. We define
 (Section V). UniNet consistently outperforms existing session as a finite aggregation of flows that are temporally
 baselines in terms of detection rates and related metrics. correlated and are contextualized by src/dst IP address. For
 Furthermore, we highlight ability of UniNet to discover example, a 15-minute traffic to and from one IP address
 intrinsic patterns from limited data (Section V-C). The forms a session. The separation of different sessions can be
 self-attention mechanism in T-Attent shows significant based on time (static) or based on inactivity (dynamic, e.g., ‘a
 advantages in extracting information from informative silence of 1-min breaks a session into two’). Each flow in a
 sequences compared to baselines. We publish our code session is a set of packets identified by the common 5-tuple of
 base for supporting future research and reproducibility.1 src/dst IP address, src/dst ports, and protocol. Thus, a session
 represents the behavior of, say, a user’s browsing activity
 II. U NI N ET F RAMEWORK over a short period of time; the flows in the session describe
 the various connections, such as DNS query/response, HTTP
 We present an overview of our proposal, UniNet. As
 request/response to different servers for various resources to
depicted in Fig. 1, UniNet operates in four key steps. i) The
 load a website, and so on. Fig. 2 illustrates the semantic multifirst step involves extracting semantic features at multiple
 granular traffic representation of T-Matrix.
levels, such as packet, flow, and session, to retain rich
 Per-packet features are obtained from fields in the packet
contextual information and meaningful fields; subsequently
 header. The raw packet features useful for traffic analysis
we define a multi-granular cohesive traffic representation Tinclude packet size, time since the last packet, packet direc-
Matrix (Section III). ii) In the second step, the unified T-Matrix
 tion, packet direction (incoming/outgoing), transport protocol
representation is encoded into tokens for training the model. In
 (TCP/UDP), application protocol (HTTP, DNS, NTP, etc.),
Section III-A, we define the vocabulary of tokens correspond-
 TLS presence and version, the categories of source/destination
ing to important traffic features and describe the tokenization
 IP addresses (internal/external) and ports (service port, in
process. iii) After encoding the T-Matrix representation of
 particular). The port number helps to determine the type of
traffic into tokens, they are provided as input into the selfapplication traffic, specifically differentiating between service
attention model, T-Attent, for representation learning. We
 (well-known) ports and ephemeral (random) ports. However,
propose a relative segmentation embedding in Section IV,
 a single packet alone might not provide sufficient information
which allows the model to identify and aggregate features
 for traffic analysis. Packet-level features are meaningful when
at different levels, enhancing its ability to learn meaningful
 a sequence of packets is considered. For example, a TCP SYN
representations from the data. The output of T-Attent is a
 packet is present in both benign and malicious flow; as it
latent embedding that represents the understanding of the
 does not independently help in determining whether the packet
traffic. iv) This latent embedding is general enough to be
 (and the corresponding flow) is malicious. However, when we
used for various tasks, which is achieved by feeding it into
 analyze a sequence of packets, we may observe a rare pattern
different task-specific heads, as explained in Section IV-B.
 that indicates an anomaly; e.g., repetitive sequences with
These heads provide a flexible framework for multiple network
 identical packet sizes, which are characteristic of applicationtraffic analysis tasks.
 layer DDoS attacks. Therefore, we extract these features
 from sequences of packets, encoding them (Section III-A)
 III. T-M ATRIX D ESIGN to subsequently use the encoded features for training and
 T-Matrix is a multi-granular traffic representation that inference. As payloads are (mostly) encrypted, we do not
encompasses information at three different levels of traffic process payloads for feature extraction.
information: session, flow, and packet. This is different from Flow-level features are aggregated from the headers of
existing works that capture either flow-level or packet-level packets in a flow. This aggregation reduces the amount of
information but not both, thereby limiting the modeling capa- data, but it is still useful when there are missing packetbility. Incorporating lightweight domain knowledge is often level features due to resource limitations or when users tunnel
necessary to extract meaningful patterns from raw network through encrypted channels such as ToR and VPN. The
traffic. T-Matrix adopts basic yet generalizable features, such identifier of a flow is the 5-tuple: src and dst IP addresses and
as port categories and TCP flag encodings, that are protocol- port numbers, and transport protocol. Since data can flow in
agnostic and widely validated in prior work [14], [22], [24], both directions, the forward and reverse flow identifiers are
[26]. These features enable UniNet to generalize across diverse matched to learn the relationship. A silence period is used
tasks and protocols, without heavy reliance on manual feature to determine the expiry of a 5-tuple flow within a session.
 There are tens of flow-level features that can be extracted
 1 Code is available at: https://github.com/Binghui99/UniNet. from network traffic, and UniNet is designed to represent a
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2427

Fig. 2. T-Matrix multi-granular traffic representation and defaulted session, flow, and packet level semantic features.

variable number of features. Some of the common flow-level to represent features, and designing the final format for
features are flow size (in bytes and packets), flow duration, representing input.
a combination of TCP flags, as well as statistical measures 1) Tokenization: Tokenization breaks down textual
(mean, min, max, standard deviation, etc.) of sizes of all information into manageable units (tokens) that DL models
packets in the flow and inter-arrival times of packets, port can process and analyze [30]. All traffic features corresponding
numbers, and transport layer protocols [27], [28], [29]. For to a single data point (e.g., packet sequence) should be
clarity and systematic analysis, flag (e.g., ACK, SYN, FIN, represented as a single token. In this way, the model provides
PSH, URG, RST, ECE, CWR, and NS) combinations are insights into which specific features contributed to the
numerically coded, which is illustrated as following: detection of an anomaly, which not only enhances the ability
 • 1-9: Individual flags (e.g., ACK, SYN, FIN, PSH, URG, to detect complex attack patterns but also improves the
 RST, ECE, CWR, NS). explainability of the results (briefly discussed in Section VI).
 • 10-14: Common combinations ( SYN + ACK = 10, PSH Unlike natural languages that share common characters and
 + ACK = 11, URG + ACK = 12, FIN + ACK = 13, tokens, network traffic features are heterogeneous and the
 RST + ACK = 14). patterns are protocol-based [31]. As shown in Figure 2,
 • 15: Reserved for any uncommon or previously unseen features such as direction, port number, protocol, and TCP
 combinations. flags are categorical, while packet length and inter-arrival
These features offer a balance between capturing essential time (IAT) are continuous. To unify this diverse data into
characteristics and maintaining computational efficiency. Users a consistent format for model training, below we employ a
have the flexibility to add or remove features as needed for tokenization method and define a vocabulary. Tokenization
their specific use cases. techniques [32], [33] split data into tokens. We handle
 At the session level, features provide information about categorical features by assigning each category a unique
the flows within. Consider a session aggregated using src IP token, thereby converting data into a numerical format for
address (although it applies to other aggregations as well). processing. However, directly using continuous values can
This includes the total number o flows and dst IP addresses, lead to poor model performance due to issues like overfitting
the unique number of dst IP addresses, and the total number and sensitivity to outliers [34], [35], [36]. Therefore, we use
of service ports (e.g., 10 HTTP connections, 5 DNS resolu- binning to improve model convergence during training.
tions). Such a representation allows us to detect some of the There are three commonly used binning methods [37], [38]:
application-level anomalies, e.g., if there are 100s of outgoing equal-width, equal-frequency, and clustering. Equal-width bin-
DNS requests and no user application (such as browsing) in ning creates intervals of equal size, suitable for uniformly
a short window, it might indicate an infected host. Given the distributed data but it is less effective with outliers; in
above definition, T-Matrix represents a session as a single network traffic, attacks can be outliers. Equal-frequency bindata point. Since a session may consist of multiple flows, and ning distributes data points evenly across bins, managing
each flow can contain multiple packets, flows and packets are skewed distributions well. Clustering, using algorithms like
represented as matrices. A session encapsulates aggregated k-means, groups data by similarity, revealing inherent strucinformation from its flows and is therefore represented as a tures but requires more processing time [39]. We choose
single vector at the beginning of a data point. equal-frequency binning in T-Matrix, for its efficiency and
 ability to minimize the impact of outliers.
 2) Vocabulary: Vocabulary is the set of unique tokens a
A. T-Matrix Encoding tokenization system utilizes during training. The design of the
 Next, we present the process of encoding the multi- vocabulary must balance compression (using fewer tokens to
granular semantic features extracted from traffic data into a represent more information) with model performance. While
standardized format suitable for T-Attent, the second impor- higher compression can speed up processing and extend
tant component of UniNet. The encoding process involves context length, it may sacrifice the ability of models to
the following steps: tokenization, defining the vocabulary capture fine-grained details [30]. A very small vocabulary
2428 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

 TABLE III TABLE IV
 T OKEN ID S , VALUES , AND D ESCRIPTIONS T HE I LLUSTRATION OF F INAL I NPUT F ORMAT. T HE H IGHLIGHT PARTS
 R EPRESENT THE M ASKED T OKENS

size risks oversimplifying diverse data, leading to information
loss and potential overfitting [40], [41]. On the other hand, a
vocabulary that is too large can be computationally expensive
and impractical given resource constraints [42], [43].
 For categorical features, we need to decide the range of values. Port numbers are numerical identifiers used to distinguish
different applications or services on a network, ranging from 0
to 65,535. However, using all 65,535 values is impractical, as it
would require an immense amount of computational resources
and result in large model sizes. Instead, we focus on commonly
used ports that have significant meaning in traffic analysis.
This includes the well-known ports from 1-1024, in addition
to any custom application ports such as 8080 (HTTP) and
 Fig. 3. The architecture of T-Attent.
3306 (MySQL). Thus, we use 1024 as a base, adding specific
tokens for special ports, future protocols, and other purposes.
The final settings are given in Table III; the vocabulary size
 detect transitions between different flows by observing
is 1042. This results in a total of 1042 tokens, including
 changes from 0 → 1 or 1 → 0 in the segment label
2 special tokens, [MASK] and [PAD], for masked token
 sequences.
prediction (explained later in Section IV-B1) and padding data
 5) sequence label is used for handling supervised
with insufficient lengths. We bin continuous features into 1042
 learning problems, providing labels for sequences to
bins, which also function as normalization. As extreme values
 support classification and other tasks.
can impact this method, we carry out data cleaning to remove
 An example is shown in Table IV.
such values.
 IV. T-ATTENT A RCHITECTURE
B. T-Matrix Format
 T-Attent is designed to handle the heterogeneous and diverse
 Considering the need to perform various network traffic
 network traffic data by generating corresponding latent embedanalysis tasks, the input format must be sufficiently general to
 dings. The architecture of T-Attent is shown in Figure 3. It
handle different scenarios. Thus, the input dataset will be in
 consists of several layers that work together to process and
the format of a dictionary containing five keys:
 analyze the data effectively: embedding techniques, multiple
 1) input represents the sequence generated in
 encoder layers, and a masked prediction head for latent
 Section III-A1, containing information about the
 representation learning.
 [MASK] token. The masking ratio η indicates the
 proportion of features in the tokenization that are
 masked. For example, when using the model for A. Embedding and Encoding Layers
 unsupervised learning tasks, such as anomaly detection, To effectively represent network traffic data within our
 we set 0 < η ≤ 1. For supervised classification tasks, attention-based model, T-Attent employs several embedding
 we set η = 0. techniques. To enable the attention mechanism to effectively
 2) true value represents the ground truth of the masked distinguish and integrate information across multiple granulartokens. The values are all 0 except for the masked parts. ities, we incorporate a hierarchical segmentation embedding.
 To refine the loss function, we use the negative log loss Each input token is tagged with a segment label that idenfunction for model training. tifies its level of granularity—specifically, packet-, flow-, or
 3) mask index indicates the indices of [MASK] tokens, session-level. These labels are embedded alongside positional
 facilitating the calculation of the loss function by iden- encodings and token embeddings, allowing the model to learn
 tifying which parts of the input sequence are masked. cross-level dependencies in a fully data-driven manner without
 4) segment label separates session-level, flow-level, imposing rigid attention constraints or handcrafted guidance.
 and packet-level features, indicating which features are For example, segment labels are assigned as follows: all
 at the flow level and which are at the packet level. We packet-level tokens are labeled as [0], flow-level tokens as
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2429

[1], and session-level tokens as [2]. A combined multi- The encoder maps the latent embedding to a compressed
granular input sequence may thus be represented by segment bottleneck representation, followed by symmetric decoder
labels such as [2, 1, 0, 0, . . ., 1, 0, 0, ...]. layers to reconstruct the input. Formally, let z denote the latent
Each segment label is embedded into a learnable vector of vector output from T-Attent. The encoder compresses z as
the same dimension as the token and positional embeddings. follows:
If the embedding dimension is denoted as d, a segment label
 h = ReLU(W1 z + b1 ), z̃ = ReLU(W2 h + b2 )
sequence of shape 1 × N is mapped to a segment embedding
matrix Semb ∈ RN ×d . Likewise, positional embeddings are where W1 , W2 ∈ Rd×d , and d is the hidden size. The decoder
represented as Pemb ∈ RN ×d . The final input to the encoder mirrors this structure to produce the reconstruction ẑ . We
is computed as the element-wise sum of the token embeddings compute the mean squared error (MSE) between z and ẑ as
Temb , segment embeddings, and positional encodings: the reconstruction loss. Samples with losses exceeding the
 δ-percentile threshold (e.g., 95th percentile of benign samples)
 Input = Temb + Semb + Pemb .
 are flagged as anomalous.
 This design enables the model to distinguish and attend across 3) Classification Head: The classification head is a multidifferent granularities in a unified manner, while preserving layer perceptron (MLP) composed of two fully connected
architectural simplicity and maintaining generalizability across layers with ReLU activation, followed by a softmax output
tasks. Additionally, the T-Attent also leverages a lightweight layer. Specifically, the MLP maps the latent embedding z to a
ViT encoder layer [44] to process inputs from T-Matrix. This probability distribution over classes:
encoder comprises a small number of attention heads and h = ReLU(W1 z + b1 ), y = Softmax(W2 h + b2 )
feed-forward layers. Unlike traditional transformers, T-Attent
uses a relative segmentation embedding mechanism to split where W1 ∈ Rd×d , W2 ∈ Rd×C , and C is the number of
inputs into multi-granular segments, enabling it to capture output classes. Cross-entropy loss is used for optimization in
local structural patterns alongside high-level dependencies. supervised tasks such as attack type identification or device
The self-attention mechanism dynamically computes weights classification.
of different parts of the input sequence, allowing the model to
capture interactions between packets and flows (e.g., linking a V. P ERFORMANCE E VALUATIONS
DNS lookup to a subsequent HTTP connection). Moreover, we A. Experiments Settings
utilize learnable positional embeddings [45], [46] to encode
the sequential order of packets within a flow, enabling the We acknowledge the challenge posed by the limited
self-attention to capture essential temporal dependencies. availability of high-quality, open-source datasets [48]. To
 address this limitation, we intentionally selected three diverse
 datasets—CIC-IDS-2018 [49], UNSW-2018 [50], and DoQ-
B. UniNet Training With Different Heads 2024 [51]—collected by different institutions across various
 We now present the learning phase of our framework, time periods (2018 to 2024), covering a wide range of
where UniNet is trained to generate encoded embeddings of protocols, attack types, and use cases. While CIC-IDS-2018
network traffic data. These encoded embeddings can then be and UNSW-2018 were collected in controlled environments,
used as input for various ML heads or further processed the DoQ-2024 dataset includes real-world encrypted traffic
for specific analysis tasks (as illustrated in Figure 1). We captured during visits to live websites, based on modern Web
consider three heads for different purposes: unsupervised protocols such as HTTP/3 and DNS-over-QUIC, providing
representation learning, anomaly detection, and classification. realistic noise and variability.
This framework allows UniNet to be applied in different We evaluate our approach across four tasks. For anomaly
scenarios, enhancing its practical utility. detection and attack identification, benign traffic serves as
 1) MFP Head for Unsupervised Learning: For unsu- background traffic, and the goal is to detect malicious flows
pervised traffic representation learning (Section V-B), we hidden within normal activity. For IoT device classificaintroduce a new task called Masked Feature Prediction (MFP). tion, regular device communications represent typical network
This technique, inspired by the pretraining of LLMs [47], behavior, and the task is to correctly identify the device
involves intentionally masking certain tokens in the input data types. For website fingerprinting, particularly in the openduring training. The model is then trained to predict these world setting, traffic from many unmonitored websites serves
masked tokens based on the surrounding context. For this as background traffic, and the model must recognize specific
purpose, we randomly select a percentage, denoted as η (e.g., monitored websites amid this noise. All three datasets are
40%), of the features within a sequence to be masked. These extensive in both pcap and flow tabular formats, ensuring their
selected features are replaced with the [MASK] token. The suitability for our diverse tasks. Further details of each dataset
model is trained to predict the token IDs of these masked are provided in the subsequent sections.
features using the provided ground truth values, used for All the training and testing of our models and baselines are
unsupervised learning, as illustrated in Figure 3. conducted on an Nvidia RTX 4080 16GB GPU and an Intel
 2) Anomaly Detection Head: The anomaly detection head Core i9-13900KF processor. Due to hardware constraints, we
is implemented as a lightweight autoencoder consisting of limited the embedding size and encoder depth to lightweight
two fully connected layers in both the encoder and decoder. configurations, which also align with our goal of maintaining
2430 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

 TABLE V TABLE VII
 D EFAULT H YPERPARAMETERS DATA D ISTRIBUTION FOR A NOMALY D ETECTION (TASK 1)

 TABLE VI
 B INARY C ONFUSION M ATRIX .TP/FP: T RUE /FALSE P OSITIVE ; TN/FN:
 T RUE /FALSE N EGATIVE Dataset: We use the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset [49] for
 this task, and after processing the input into T-Matrix format,
 we use only the benign traffic to train T-Attent.2 The evaluation focuses on five types of network attacks: DDoS, DoS,
 BruteForce, Botnet, and Infiltration, which are categorized as
 malicious during the testing phase. The distribution of training
 and testing data is detailed in Table VII.
efficiency. We experiment with masking ratios ranging from Input representation: The input to UniNet is structured to
15% to 60%, finding optimal performance at 40%. The facilitate unsupervised learning, organized at a session level.
vocabulary size for tokens is set to 1042. The model utilizes Sessions are composed of flows grouped by the same source
10 heads, 10 embeddings, and 2 encoder layers. The learning or destination IP (Section III). Segment labels distinguish
rate follows a warm-up schedule, starting at 0.0001 and different levels of features and different flows within the
increasing to 0.001 over 10,000 steps. Specific settings for same session. The input sequence length is set to 2,000
different heads are discussed in the corresponding sections. tokens. We input all flows and their packets in the order of
The default values are given in Table V for all tasks. arrival until the sequence reaches 2,000 tokens. Any remaining
 The commonly used metrics for network security tasks tokens are padded with [PAD]. Each flow is represented
include Recall (True Positive Rate, TPR), Precision, False by 8 features, and each packet by 6 features (Section III).
Positive Rate (FPR), Accuracy, and Area Under the Curve Thus, representing a flow-packet segment requires a length
(AUC). AUC is a popular metric that counters the adverse of 68 features, making space for ≈ 30 flows within an
effects of class imbalance. According to Table VI, the metrics input sequence. Given the simpler and less informative nature
are calculated by equations: of packet features compared to natural language, a higher
 masking ratio is justified.
 TP TP
 Recall = , Precision = Baselines: The baselines we evaluate are:
 TP + FN TP + FP 1) Machine Learning baselines: We consider traditional
 FP TP + TN
 FPR = , Accuracy = ML algorithms such as Isolation Forest, One-Class
 FP + TN TP + TN + FP + FN SVM, Local Outlier Factor (LOF), and K-means cluster-
 For multi-class classification, we compute the macro values ing. These models rely on statistical and distance-based
of these metrics independently for each class and then average methods to identify anomalies. They are particularly
them across all classes. The threat model for each task is men- effective for scenarios with well-defined feature spaces,
tioned in the corresponding sections. We now evaluate UniNet offering faster training times and lower computational
and baselines for four different security tasks—Tasks 1-4 in requirements. They have been used commonly for
Table II—across the three categories of unsupervised anomaly network traffic analysis (e.g., see [52], [53], [54], [55]).
detection, supervised classification of attacks and devices, and 2) Deep learning baselines: We implement deep learning
semi-supervised website fingerprinting. models used in the past for network anomaly detection,
 including standard autoencoders (AE) [5], variational
 autoencoders (VAE) [56], and LSTM-based VAEs [57].
B. Task 1: Unsupervised Anomaly Detection
 These models are good at learning hierarchical and tem-
 Threat model: In anomaly detection (Task 1), the primary poral representations from raw network traffic data. AE
goal is to detect malicious network traffic that deviates reconstructs input data and detects anomalies based on
from a learned benign profile. We assume that the training reconstruction loss, while VAEs introduce a probabilistic
dataset, organized into session-level structures, is predomi- framework to model data distributions. LSTM-based
nantly benign but may contain a small fraction of undiscovered VAEs capture sequential dependencies in traffic patterns,
attacks; however, it is not extensively poisoned by adversaries. enhancing anomaly detection for time-series data.
Attackers can manipulate or inject flows, adjusting timing or
header fields (e.g., IP addresses, ports) to blend into normal 2 In practice, the benign class is created by removing suspicious flows using
patterns; however, they do not control the overall training rules; yet it is assumed that small part of this class contains some malicious
pipeline or the underlying network infrastructure. flows [5].
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2431

 TABLE VIII
 C OMPARISON OF BASELINE M ODELS AND U NI N ET FOR TASK 1

 The primary distinction between UniNet and the baseline traffic patterns while significantly reducing the false positive
approaches lies in the utilization of the MFP head for embed- rates. The enhanced performance of UniNet can be attributed
ding extraction and multi-granular representation. Specifically, to the effective representation learning capabilities of the
UniNet employs T-Matrix and embeddings generated by the MFP head when combined with T-Attent. The embedding
MFP head, which are subsequently processed through various generated by T-Attent encompasses both sequential and staanomaly detection models. In contrast, baseline approaches tistical features, leading to a more robust and comprehensive
use single-level information, such as a sequence of packets understanding.
or flows. They skip this step and apply anomaly detection
techniques directly to features without encoding by the MFP
head. C. Task 2: Supervised Attack Identification
 Orchestration of UniNet: To address these threats, we Threat model: As for attack identification (Task 2), we
employ UniNet in a two-phase, unsupervised fashion. Firstly, consider a realistic network environment where attackers
the MFP head (Section IV-B1) learns representative embed- launch a variety of threats, while attempting to evade detection
dings by randomly masking up to 40% of traffic features and by mimicking benign traffic patterns and manipulating both
predicting them, enabling the model to capture robust patterns flow- and session-level characteristics. An IDS aims first to
of benign behavior. Once T-Attent training is complete, the distinguish malicious from benign traffic (Task 2.1), using a
MFP head is removed, and the latent embeddings generated by coarse-grained yet efficient binary classifier to handle high
the final encoder layer is utilized in the next phase. Secondly, volumes of data. Flows flagged as malicious are then subjected
an autoencoder-based anomaly detection head refines these to a second, more detailed classification step (Task 2.2), which
embeddings, using reconstruction loss to identify deviations identifies the specific attack type (e.g., botnet, DDoS) using a
from the learned profile. multi-class head that requires deeper contextual analysis.
 Analysis: We present the performance of each model, A significant challenge inherent in this environment is
both for the baselines and for our enhanced implementation the scarcity of labeled instances for training. Attackers
using UniNet (i.e., UniNet + different heads) in Table VIII. often exploit this weakness, as obtaining large numbers of
For UniNet, we perform unsupervised representation learn- labeled samples for diverse or emerging attack types is
ing using the MFP head (Section IV-B1) with T-Attent. prohibitively costly and time-consuming in real-world set-
Subsequently, the initial traffic data is embedded into a tings. This lack of labeled data can hinder the IDS’s ability
transformed space to better capture underlying patterns and to generalize to new threats or achieve high classification
anomalies. The embeddings generated by T-Attent are then fed accuracy.
into different baseline models (anomaly detection heads). Dataset: We utilize the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset [49],
 As depicted in Table VIII, UniNet consistently outper- which is predominantly composed of benign samples, reflectforms the baseline across all key metrics — the accuracy ing real-world class imbalances and the limited availability of
improves by an average of 18.01%, F1-score by 18.49%, labeled data for certain attack types. We focus on four types
precision by 17.98%, recall by 17.64%, and AUC by 17.00%. of attacks: DoS, brute force, botnet, and infiltration. In Phase
The enhancements are even more pronounced with deep 1, all attacks are aggregated into a single malicious class.
learning models; in comparison to AE, UniNet registers a Phase 2 refines this classification by distinguishing among
maximum improvement of (approximately) 27% in accuracy, individual attack types. To address data imbalance, additional
28% in F1-score, and a reduction of about 44% in FPR. preprocessing steps are applied. The data distribution for
These results show that UniNet accurately detects anomalous Task 2 is presented in Table IX.
2432 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

 TABLE IX TABLE X
 I NTRUSION D ETECTION DATA D ISTRIBUTION (TASK 2) P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR ATTACK D ETECTION (TASK 2)

 Positive Rate) and the False Positive Rate (FPR) is cru-
 Input format: In this task, the classification is based on a cial. A low FPR is essential to minimize false alarms,
single flow. It focuses on classifying individual flows based which cost human hours for security analysis. However,
on flow-level statistics and short-term packet patterns, which this often comes at the expense of recall, due to missed
is more localized in nature. Therefore, an input is a single detection of anomalies. Figure 4a illustrates the performance
flow and set of packets within the flow, with a length of 2,000 of UniNet and baseline models across different FPR values.
tokens. This format begins with flow-level features, followed All models achieve high recall at high FPR levels, but
by packet-level features within the same flow. If the number the real test of efficacy lies in their performance at lower
of packets in a flow exceeds the maximum length of the input, FPR values. At an FPR of 10−2 , UniNet demonstrates an
it will be truncated. And if the number of packets is less than absolute increase of ∼ 14% for TPR compared to the bestthe fixed length, it will be padded with [PAD]. We use the performing baseline (LSTM-NoD). This advantage becomes
default flow and packet features described in Section III. The even more notable as the FPR is reduced to 10−3 ; the TPR
segment labels are used to separate per-packet and flow-level gap between UniNet and best performing baseline increases
features, indicating which level a particular feature belongs to. significantly to ∼ 68%. These results highlight the ability of
 Baselines: We compare UniNet with recent sequence UniNet to maintain high detection rates without sacrificing
models: LSTM-NoD [58] and GRU-tFP (Gated Recurrent the FPR.
Unit) [23]. The LSTM-NoD model utilizes two LSTM models, We test with different training instances per class to
one trained on normal-day (N) traffic and the other on attack- evaluate the information extraction capability of different
day (D) traffic, to estimate the likelihood of network requests models for Phase 2 (granular classification). When provided
being DDoS attacks [58]. The GRU-tFP model is introduced with same informative data, the model that extracts and
in [23] to address different tasks, including intrusion detection, utilizes information most effectively has a significant impact.
in a supervised way. GRU-tFP uses the GRU model to extract Figure 4b gives the overall accuracy across all attacks, where
traffic features hierarchically to capture both intra-flow and UniNet exhibits an average ∼ 14% accuracy improvement
inter-flow correlations. To analyze the impact of T-Matrix over the baselines. The model converges with 300 training
and T-Attent, LSTM-NoD and GRU-tFP are provided with instances per class, highlighting the effectiveness of T-Attent
single packet-level data sequences. In contrast, UniNet uses part in UniNet, which utilizes the self-attention mechanism to
the T-Matrix format with flow and packet level data. We extract intrinsic patterns.
also assess the ability of each model to extract meaningful Figure 4c-4d shows the F1-scores for each attack type.
traffic patterns with limited training instances per class. We Although DoS and Brute Force attacks are generally easier for
employ a lightweight hierarchical transformer architecture all models to detect due to their prominent and distinguishable
comprising two encoder layers with an embedding size of 10, characteristics, we still see an increasing gap between UniNet
resulting in a total of 15,000 parameters. This parameter count and baselines with increasing training instances. As for Bot
is significantly smaller compared to LLMs, which typically and Infiltration attacks, UniNet demonstrates a significant
contain billions of parameters. The compact design facilitates improvement over LSTM-NoD and GRU-tFP, particularly with
efficient execution and simplifies implementation, making it a low number of training instances (e.g., 100) per class.
suitable for deployment in resource-constrained environments. Notably, there is an absolute increase in F1-score by ∼ 25%
 Orchestration of UniNet: While adversaries may manip- for Infiltration and ∼ 43% for Botnet compared to the bestulate timing and header fields to blend in with legitimate performing baseline (GRU-tFP). This can be attributed to the
sessions, the IDS leverages session-level aggregation, flow- limitations of LSTM-NoD and GRU-tFP in capturing longbased features, and specialized embedding strategies to distance dependencies, especially when features are flattened,
highlight anomalies that cannot be entirely concealed. Under weakening the relationship between nearby tokens. In contrast,
conditions of label sparsity, we design experiments that UniNet performs well in understanding long sequences, which
explore the system’s robustness under varying levels of labeled is important for identifying both Bot and Infiltration. These
data availability, ranging from highly sparse (50 samples per attacks often exhibit subtle, long-range dependencies in their
class) to more representative distributions (500 samples per behavior patterns that simpler models struggle to capture.
class). Inference time: We evaluate the inference time for the
 Analysis: For the Phase 1 (broad detection), the results are different models. LSTM-NoD model exhibits the highest
presented in Table X. UniNet achieves the highest accuracy inference time of 4.0 µs, whereas UniNet processing sequences
of 99.41% over all baselines. In the context of intrusion in parallel, achieves the lowest inference time of 0.75 µs (see
detection, balancing the trade-off between recall/TPR (True Table X).
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2433

Fig. 4. F1-scores and performance metrics for various attack types and phases in Task 2.

D. Task 3: Multi-Class Device Classification Baselines: We compare UniNet with two recent
 Threat model: In IoT device classification (Task 3), the sequence models for IoT fingerprinting: SANE [14] and
goal of the system, in this case a network defense system, BiLSTM-iFP [24]. The SANE model employs a similar
is to identify the types of devices connected to the network architecture to UniNet, utilizing an attention-based structure
by continuously monitoring its traffic flows, such as those in but relying solely on per-packet features for IoT fingerprinting.
an enterprise environment. This helps the enterprise maintain Moreover, each packet is treated as a token in SANE; while in
awareness of all devices on its network and take action against UniNet, each feature is treated as a token. The BiLSTM-iFP
unauthorized or rogue devices. model extracts packet-level features and uses an enhanced
 Dataset: We utilize the UNSW 2018 dataset [50], which bidirectional LSTM to perform device classification.
encompasses a diverse array of device types (28 devices) Both baseline models were implemented using singleexhibiting heterogeneous traffic patterns. To mitigate skewed level representations. Additionally, to analyze the impact
data distributions, we train a multi-class classification head of T-Matrix, we conduct an ablation study comparing the
on a balanced subset of 15 selected device categories from performance of UniNet with and without T-Matrix (UniNetthe original 28, leveraging cross-entropy loss to enhance w/o-T-Matrix). Moreover, given the imbalanced in the dataset,
classification boundaries. Considering the dataset does not there is a risk that classes with fewer data points, i.e.,
have labels, we group the traffic by MAC address based on the minority classes, may be overlooked or underrepresented
device name list. Since the dataset is imbalanced, we remove in model training. To assess this, we specifically study
devices with very few data points and select 15 devices with the performance of four classes with the least number of
more than 10,000 data points. For devices with an excessive data points: i) Android Phone, ii) Light Bulbs LiFX Smart
number of data points, we randomly select 60,000 data points Bulb, iii) Smart Baby Monitor, and iv) Aura Smart Sleep
for each device type. Sensor. A good performance on these classes would indi-
 Input representation: In this session-level task, the data is cate that the model is not biased towards classes with
represented as sessions, where packets grouped by a src (dst) larger data representation, thereby ensuring a more robust
IP address within a static time-window form a session (refer system.
Section III). Each session may contain multiple flows; and Orchestration of UniNet: Our framework addresses the
a single flow may span multiple sessions, thereby becoming challenge of incomplete flows by aggregating traffic at the
incomplete in session(s) due to the time-window splits. The session level. This preserves essential contextual relationships,
data is then segmented them into sequences of 2,000 tokens enabling the detection of inconsistencies in traffic behavior
based on their arrival time. The segment labels for UniNet that may indicate adversarial manipulation.
are ‘0’s for incomplete flow-level features and ‘1’s for per- Analysis: We focus on the performance of different methods
packet features. As for UniNet w/o T-Matrix, the segment on minority classes, presented in Figure 5. UniNet achieves
labels are set to all ‘1’s. Positional information is based on the the best performance across all metrics, with an improvearrival time of each packet. We use only the six default packet ment of ∼7% in accuracy, ∼8% in F1-score, and ∼6% in
features mentioned in Section III: source/destination port precision compared with BiLSTM-iFP. We carry out further
representation, direction, packet size, transport layer protocol, analyses. i) To evaluate the advantages of the T-Matrix, we
and IAT. conduct an ablation study comparing UniNet with and without
2434 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

 TABLE XI
P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS C OMPARISON ACROSS OVERALL DATA AND M INORITY C LASSES . “U NI N ET W / O T-M ATRIX ” R EFERS TO U NI N ET W ITHOUT
 T-M ATRIX , U SING A S INGLE -L EVEL R EPRESENTATION AS BASELINES FOR TASK 4

the multi-level representation. The versions of UniNet-w/o-
T-Matrix are divided into three categories, each using only
one level of input: session-level, flow-level, or packet-level
features. To ensure a fair comparison, session-level and flowlevel features are positioned at the start of the input sequence
and padded to a fixed length, limiting the number of flows
that can be represented. As shown in Figure 5 and Table XI,
UniNet consistently outperforms all single-level input variants
by a substantial margin. Compared to the session-only model,
UniNet improves overall accuracy and minority-class accuracy
by ∼60%, and macro-F1 score by ∼90%. When compared
to the flow-only model, UniNet achieves a relative improve- Fig. 5. Performance comparison of minority classes for Task 4.
ment of ∼20% in overall accuracy, minority-class accuracy,
and macro-F1. Even against the strong packet-only baseline,
UniNet delivers additional gains—improving, minority-class
accuracy by 2.4%, and macro-F1 by 2.2%. These results sufficient knowledge to inspect flow and session-level charachighlight that while packet-level features are crucial, the multi- teristics, particularly in HTTP/3 (QUIC) and DNS-over-QUIC
granularity integration through T-Matrix leads to significantly (DoQ) traffic. In the closed-world setting, the user activities
more robust and generalizable performance, particularly for are restricted to a known, “monitored” set of websites, each
underrepresented classes. ii) As for the effectiveness of of which the attacker has previously profiled through multiple
T-Attent, we compare the performance between UniNet-w/o- training samples. Here, the adversary’s objective is to classify
T-Matrix (packet only) and SANE. Both models use advanced which monitored site the user is visiting. In the open-world
attention-based architectures and single-level representations. setting, the users also visit an extensive set of “unmonitored”
The key difference lies in their tokenization mechanisms: sites. The attacker thus seeks to determine whether a given
UniNet-w/o-T-Matrix takes a feature as a token, whereas visit is to one of the monitored sites, or to an unmonitored one,
SANE is based on per-packet tokens. We observe a modest despite incomplete knowledge of these unknown destinations.
improvement in accuracy. By analyzing interactions between Dataset: We use the recent DoQ-2024 [51], which captures
flows and packets within a session, and combining flow- network traffic from HTTP/3 and DoQ Web sessions across
level and packet-level features, UniNet generates robust device four vantage points. The dataset includes over 75,000 unique
identification. This makes it significantly harder for adversaries websites, with 500 monitored QUIC sites visited 1,280 times
to impersonate a targeted device class or maintain consistent each, and additional unmonitored sites visited 4 times each.
false signals across multiple flows. The overall performance Input representation: This session-based collection allows
of different methods of device classification is summarized in us to extract aggregated session-level features, including the
Table XI. total number of flows, average and standard deviation of flow
 Inference time: Table XI also provides the inference time sizes and durations, total inbound and outbound bytes, and the
for the different models. While BiLSTM-iFP takes 5.9 µs, inbound/outbound traffic ratio. These eight session-level fea-
UniNet, with an inference time of 0.85 µs, is significantly tures are concatenated with 1,992 packet-level features to form
faster, making it a better candidate for deployments. a 2,000-dimensional input vector. In our UniNet architecture,
 we incorporate a relative embedding to distinguish sessionlevel from packet-level segments, ensuring effective attention
 across both granularity.
E. Task 4: Encrypted Website Fingerprinting Baselines: We evaluate our method against several
 Threat model: In website fingerprinting (Task 4), an baselines, including models introduced in related works.
adversary aims to infer which website a user is visiting based Specifically, we compare our approach to an AutoWFP
on observed traffic patterns, even when packet payloads are model [20], the TMWF model [21], and TDoQ model [22].
encrypted. We assume the attacker has a vantage point to AutoWFP is based on LSTM. Although TMWF and TDoQ are
observe client communication (e.g., compromised router) and based on transformer, their architectures differ significantly.
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2435

 TABLE XII
 P ERFORMANCE OF C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING (300 C LASSES )

TMWF employs a traditional transformer by Vaswani et al. [9],
while TDoQ model utilizes a ViT-based patch embedding
design [44]. UniNet further distinguishes itself by incorporating a multi-granularity representation, T-Matrix, combining
session-level features with packet-level details, along with Fig. 6. Performance of open-world website fingerprinting.
an expanded and more sophisticated encoding strategy (refer
Section III-A).
 Orchestration of UniNet: QUIC/DoQ encryption conceals (49%), and AutoWFP (35%). High TPRs at low FPRs indicate
packet payloads, but does not entirely mask metadata such as that UniNet can accurately identify monitored websites while
flow sizes, inter-arrival times, and directionality, enabling the maintaining a low rate of misclassification for unmonitored
attacker to extract session-level aggregates (e.g., total flows) websites.
and packet-level features for fingerprinting. By constructing a Inference time: UniNet achieves the lowest average inferrobust signature from these features, the attacker attempts to ence time of 0.15 µs, close to that of TDoQ (0.16 µs) and
discriminate among thousands of potential websites in both approximately one-third of TMWF’s (0.45 µs), while being
closed-world and open-world environments. just ≈ 3% of AutoWFP (4.83 µs).
 Analysis: In our closed-world experiments involving
300 monitored websites, we evaluate four fingerprinting
methods using metrics such as accuracy, macro-precision, VI. D ISCUSSIONS AND F UTURE W ORKS
and F1 score. As shown in Table XII, UniNet achieves an We now discuss the practical considerations regarding the
accuracy of 98.9%, representing an absolute improvement implementation and deployment of UniNet.
of approximately 2% over the next best method, TDoQ Model complexity and running time: For most tasks (Task
(96.8%). Furthermore, UniNet enhances macro-precision and 2-4), we utilize a lightweight hierarchical transformer archi-
F1 score by approximately 3% each compared to TDoQ. These tecture, achieving a training time of approximately 30 seconds
substantial improvements demonstrate that the multi-granular per epoch with a batch size of 64 samples. This demonstrates
transformer architecture of UniNet significantly outperforms the efficiency of training. The inference time analysis shows
baseline methods, thereby establishing a new benchmark in that UniNet achieves shorter inference time compared to DL
closed-world website fingerprinting. baselines. For Task 1, which focuses on representation learning
 Open-world website fingerprinting: To evaluate UniNet‘s for traffic understanding, the model requires more data and
performance in a realistic open-world scenario, we consider time to train. However, this investment benefits deployment,
the top 100 QUIC-enabled domains, each generating 360 as the pre-trained representation accelerates convergence in
traces (36,000 traces in total) as “monitored”, and assigned downstream models, ensuring overall efficiency in practical
them to 100 distinct classes. An unmonitored class comprised applications.
45,000 other websites, each contributing four traces, result- False alarm rate: We emphasize the importance of coning in 180,000 traces. Importantly, no unmonitored website trolling false alarms, as real-world deployment necessitates
appears in both the training and test sets. As per [51], traces low false positive rates to reduce the operational burden on
were randomly collected from various locations to ensure network administrators. Through our evaluations of FPR vs.
diversity. We employ a 75:25 train–test split for the monitored TPR across multiple tasks, we demonstrate the effectiveness
classes and a balanced 1:1 split for the unmonitored class. This of UniNet in maintaining a low false positive rate, making it a
features a highly imbalanced testing ratio of approximately practical and reliable choice for network security applications.
1:10 between monitored and unmonitored traces. We assess Looking ahead, there are opportunities to enhance the
the TPR against the FPR in detecting monitored sites. As architecture and expand its capabilities.
is common in literature (e.g., [20], [21]), we adopt a binary Explainable AI (XAI) solutions: While UniNet excels in
setting by aggregating all monitored classes into a single extracting contextual relationships through its attention mechpositive category and all unmonitored classes into a single anisms, its reliance on these techniques poses interpretability
negative category. challenges. As a next step, we plan to incorporate XAI solu-
 As depicted in Figure 6, UniNet achieves a higher TPR at tions, such as attention visualization and feature attribution, to
low FPR levels compared to baseline methods, demonstrating enhance transparency and enable analysts to validate decisions.
superior discriminative capabilities between monitored and However, current XAI techniques for transformer-based modunmonitored traffic. Notably, UniNet attains a TPR of 81% els, such as gradient-based [60], attention-score-based [61],
at a low FPR of 10−3 , surpassing TDoQ (58%), TMWF or hybrid methods [62], are still in the early stages of
2436 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

development and yet to be adopted. This gap presents an network security tasks, such as anomaly/attack detection [26],
ongoing challenge that we are actively exploring. botnet detection [11], fingerprinting [21], etc. While semantic
 Robustness against generative evasion attacks: We will features can capture meaningful higher-level indicators (e.g.,
evaluate the robustness of our UniNet against adversarial port usage, flow durations), they rely heavily on domain
attacks. In particular, we assess its resilience to evasion expertise. This makes them less flexible in scenarios with
techniques—a critical issue in traffic analysis. Attackers may limited or evolving domain knowledge.
use methods such as traffic manipulation, adversarial perturbations, or obfuscation to circumvent machine learning-based B. Feature Encoding for ML Training
traffic analysis systems.
 Feature encoding transforms network traffic data into
 numeric representations suitable for ML models [11]. The pro-
 VII. R ELATED W ORKS cess begins with normalizing heterogeneous data into a unified
 Below, we discuss three critical stages in the ML-based traf- format, ensuring consistency and facilitating effective encodfic analysis pipeline: feature representation, feature encoding, ing. After normalization, data is tokenized into its minimum
and model development. By examining current approaches at units for fine-grained analysis. These tokens are then embedeach stage, we identify trade-offs that underscore the need for ded to extract relationships essential for understanding network
a unified, more adaptive framework. behaviors. However, existing encoding methods often fall short
 in practical network traffic analysis [66], [67]. For instance,
A. Feature Representation one-hot encoding, commonly used for categorical features
 like port numbers, creates high-dimensional sparse vectors,
 Existing feature representation techniques fall mainly into
 thereby increasing the computational complexity and the risk
two categories: bit-level and semantic representations. Bit-level
 of overfitting [11]. Embedding techniques like Word2Vec [68]
representation uses the raw binary bits from the packet header
 have been adopted in NLP, with newer contextual embedto represent each packet [63], [64], [65]. This method can
 ding methods proving more effective [69]. However, current
be enhanced to ensure field alignment between packets of
 approaches often use raw hex numbers for tokens [66], [67],
different protocols, e.g., using padding [63]. Since the header
 which fragment fields into less meaningful pieces. Treating
info of each packet is encoded using bit values, this is a perentire packets as single tokens has been proposed but poses
packet representation. However, such a simple encoding has
 challenges due to high dimensionality, leading to large vocabtwo serious limitations:
 ularies that complicate training [31]. Additionally, most of
 • Bit-level representation of header hard codes certain
 these works overlook sequential information between packets,
 fields, such as src/dst IP address, leading to model oversuch as inter-arrival time (IAT), which is helpful in capturing
 fitting. For example, in most cases, a benign computer
 temporal patterns in network traffic.
 that is infected or breached may start communicating
 with a C&C server. However, if the model has seen
 only benign traffic from this IP address, then it would C. Models for Network Traffic Analysis
 likely classify the attack flow as malicious because of A wide range of models have been developed for analyzing
 overfitting the IP address. nPrint proposed in [63] exhibits network traffic. In [70] and the works it surveys, statistical
 this overfitting tendency as the results are dependent methods, ML, and DL models have been widely applied
 on attacker IP addresses. Similarly, due to randomness, to tasks such as anomaly detection, device and website
 encoding ephemeral ports as such is not useful and might fingerprinting, location inference, quality of experience (QoE)
 mislead a model. measurement, and traffic classification. Statistical models rely
 • When using bit-level features for unsupervised repre- on well-established statistical principles to identify anomalies
 sentation learning, the smallest token unit is typically or deviations from normal traffic patterns [71], [72], [73].
 one byte (e.g., as in [66]). This approach can disrupt However, they often struggle with complex, evolving threats,
 meaningful fields due to the varying field sizes. For as they rely on predefined statistical assumptions that attackers
 example, the 16-bit port number in the header would can circumvent. ML models offer greater flexibility by being
 be split into two tokens instead of being represented able to learn from data. Techniques such as decision trees,
 by a single token. Furthermore, bit-level representation support vector machines (SVM), and ensemble methods like
 increases the model size when provided as input to a random forests have been widely used to classify network
 sequence model, leading to a higher consumption of traffic and detect intrusions [52], [53], [54], [55], [74]. These
 resources (compute and memory), besides increasing the models can adapt to new data, improving detection rates
 inference time. For instance, a header with a minimum over time. However, they often require significant feature
 of 20 bytes would require at least 20 tokens to represent engineering and may struggle with the high dimensionality of
 a single packet. network data. DL models, including CNNs, recurrent neural
 Semantic representations typically aggregate multiple pack- networks (RNNs), and transformers, are capable of extracting
ets or flows into constant-size feature vectors. For instance, meaningful information from raw data, capturing sequential
repeated failed connection attempts to diverse destinations patterns and relationships that traditional ML models might
can signify bot activity reaching out to command-and-control miss [23], [27]. DL models are also particularly good at
(C&C) servers. Aggregated features are widely used in handling large-scale data and can potentially adapt to various
WU et al.: UNINET: A UNIFIED MULTI-GRANULAR TRAFFIC MODELING FRAMEWORK FOR NETWORK SECURITY 2437

types of threats and attacks. Nevertheless, they require sub- [16] B. Claise, B. Trammell, and P. Aitken, “Specification of the IP
stantial computational resources and large labeled datasets for flow information export (IPFIX) protocol for the exchange of flow
 information,” IETF, RFC 7011, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.
training and model maintenance, which can be a barrier to their rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7011.txt
widespread adoption. A common disadvantage of the current [17] L. Bilge, D. Balzarotti, W. Robertson, E. Kirda, and C. Kruegel,
solutions is that they often rely on task-specific models, which “Disclosure: Detecting botnet command and control servers through
 large-scale NetFlow analysis,” in Proc. ACSAC, 2012, pp. 129–138.
may not generalize well across different types of network [18] D. Brauckhoff, X. Dimitropoulos, A. Wagner, and K. Salamatian,
anomalies or attack vectors. “Anomaly extraction in backbone networks using association rules,”
 IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1788–1799, Dec. 2012.
 [19] Z. Liu et al., “Jaqen: A high-performance switch-native approach for
 VIII. C ONCLUSION detecting and mitigating volumetric DDoS attacks with programmable
 In this work, we presented UniNet, a unified framework switches,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security),
 2021, pp. 3829–3846.
for network traffic analysis that introduces the T-Matrix [20] V. Rimmer, D. Preuveneers, M. Juarez, T. van Goethem, and W. Joosen,
multi-granularity representation and the lightweight attention- “Automated Website fingerprinting through deep learning,” in Proc. 25th
based model, T-Attent. UniNet addresses key limitations of Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp., San Diego, CA, USA, 2018,
 pp. 1–15.
existing approaches by seamlessly integrating session-level, [21] Z. Jin, T. Lu, S. Luo, and J. Shang, “Transformer-based model for multiflow-level, and packet-level features, enabling comprehensive tab Website fingerprinting attack,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput.
contextual understanding of network behavior. Its adaptable Commun. Security, 2023, pp. 1050–1064.
 [22] L. Csikor, Z. Lian, H. Zhang, N. Lakshmanan, and D. M. Divakaran,
architecture, featuring task-specific heads, supports a variety “DNS-over-QUIC and HTTP/3 in the era of transformers: The new
of network security tasks, including anomaly detection, attack Internet privacy battle,” IEEE Commun. Mag., early access, Jun. 2, 2025,
classification, IoT device fingerprinting, and encrypted website doi: 10.1109/MCOM.004.2400680.
 [23] J. Qu et al., “An input-agnostic hierarchical deep learning framework for
fingerprinting. Extensive evaluations across diverse datasets traffic fingerprinting,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX
demonstrated the superiority of UniNet over state-of-the-art Security), 2023, pp. 589–606.
methods in terms of accuracy, false positive rates, scalability, [24] S. Dong, Z. Li, D. Tang, J. Chen, M. Sun, and K. Zhang, “Your
 smart home can’t keep a secret: Towards automated fingerprinting of
and computational efficiency. IoT traffic,” in Proc. 15th ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Security
 (AisaCCS), 2020, pp. 47–59.
 R EFERENCES [25] X. Jiang, H.-R. Zhang, and Y. Zhou, “Multi-granularity abnormal traffic
 detection based on multi-instance learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 [1] “Google transparency report.” Google. 2024. [Online]. Available: https:// Manag., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1467–1477, Apr. 2024.
 transparencyreport.google.com/https/overview [26] A. Alsaheel et al., “ATLAS: A sequence-based learning approach for
 [2] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware attack investigation,” in Proc. 30th USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” security), 2021, pp. 3005–3022.
 in Proc. SIGKDD, 2017, pp. 1723–1732. [27] T. Van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
 [3] D. M. Divakaran, K. W. Fok, I. Nevat, and V. L. Thing, “Evidence on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security
 gathering for network security and forensics,” Digit. Investigat., vol. 20, Symp. (NDSS), vol. 27, 2020, pp. 1–18.
 pp. S56–S65, Mar. 2017. [28] M. Piskozub, F. De Gaspari, F. Barr-Smith, L. Mancini, and
 [4] I. Nevat et al., “Anomaly detection and attribution in networks with I. Martinovic, “Malphase: Fine-grained malware detection using network
 temporally correlated traffic,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 26, no. 1, flow data,” in Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Security, 2021,
 pp. 131–144, Feb. 2018. pp. 774–786.
 [5] Q. P. Nguyen, K. W. Lim, D. M. Divakaran, K. H. Low, and M. C. Chan, [29] D. Barradas, N. Santos, L. Rodrigues, S. Signorello, F. M. Ramos, and
 “GEE: A gradient-based explainable variational autoencoder for network A. Madeira, “FlowLens: Enabling efficient flow classification for MLanomaly detection,” in Proc. EEE CNS, 2019, pp. 91–99. based network security applications,” in Proc. NDSS, 2021, pp. 1–18.
 [6] P. Bosshart et al., “P4: Programming protocol-independent packet [30] T. Limisiewicz, J. Balhar, and D. Mareček, “Tokenization impacts
 processors,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 44, no. 3, multilingual language modeling: Assessing vocabulary allocation and
 pp. 87–95, 2014. overlap across languages,” in Findings of Assoc. Comput. Linguist.
 [7] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic (ACL), 2023, pp. 1–19.
 detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. [31] F. Le, M. Srivatsa, R. Ganti, and V. Sekar, “Rethinking data-driven
 Comput. Commun. Security (CCS), 2021, pp. 3431–3446. networking with foundation models: Challenges and opportunities,” in
 [8] G. Zhou, Z. Liu, C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “An efficient design of Proc. 21st ACM Workshop Hot Topics Netw., 2022, pp. 188–197.
 intelligent network data plane,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Security Symp. [32] S. Yehezkel and Y. Pinter, “Incorporating context into subword vocabu-
 (USENIX Security), 2023, pp. 6203–6220. laries,” in Proc. 17th Conf. Eur. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 2023,
 [9] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. NIPS, 2017, pp. 623–635.
 pp. 1–15. [33] K. Gurugubelli, S. Mohamed, and K. S. R. Krishna, “Comparative study
[10] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An of Tokenization algorithms for end-to-end open vocabulary keyword
 ensemble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” in detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process.
 Proc. 25th Annu. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Security Symp. (NDSS), 2018. (ICASSP), 2024, pp. 12431–12435.
[11] S. T. Jan et al., “Throwing darts in the dark? Detecting bots with [34] M. Sugiyama and K. M. Borgwardt, “Finding statistically signifilimited data using neural data augmentation,” in Proc. IEEE SP, 2020, cant interactions between continuous features,” in Proc. IJCAI, 2019,
 pp. 1190–1206. pp. 3490–3498.
[12] Y. Yin, Z. Lin, M. Jin, G. Fanti, and V. Sekar, “Practical GAN-based [35] Y. Chen, S. Liu, and X. Wang, “Learning continuous image represensynthetic ip header trace generation using netshare,” in Proc. ACM tation with local implicit image function,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 SIGCOMM Conf., 2022, pp. 458–472. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2021, pp. 8628–8638.
[13] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting Website [36] A. Asudeh, N. Shahbazi, Z. Jin, and H. Jagadish, “Identifying insuffifingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd cient data coverage for ordinal continuous-valued attributes,” in Proc.
 USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX Security), 2023, pp. 607–624. Int. Conf. Manage. Data, 2021, pp. 129–141.
[14] B. Wu, P. Gysel, D. M. Divakaran, and M. Gurusamy, “ZEST: Attention- [37] J. Dougherty, R. Kohavi, and M. Sahami, “Supervised and unsupervised
 based zero-shot learning for unseen IoT device classification,” in Proc. discretization of continuous features,” in Proc. Mach. Learn., 1995,
 IEEE Netw. Operations Manage. Symp. (NOMS), 2024, pp. 1–9. pp. 194–202.
[15] X. Jiang et al., “NetDiffusion: Network data augmentation through [38] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, and A. Babenko, “On embeddings for
 protocol-constrained traffic generation,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. numerical features in tabular deep learning,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 Comput. Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–32, 2024. Process. Syst., vol. 35, 2022, pp. 24991–25004.
2438 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOLUME 12, 2026

[39] M. G. Omran, A. P. Engelbrecht, and A. Salman, “An overview of [65] M. Swarnkar and N. Sharma, “OptiClass: An optimized classifier for
 clustering methods,” Intell. Data Anal., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 583–605, application layer protocols using bit level signatures,” ACM Trans.
 2007. Privacy Security, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2024.
[40] W. Chen, Y. Su, Y. Shen, Z. Chen, X. Yan, and W. Wang, “How large [66] X. Meng, C. Lin, Y. Wang, and Y. Zhang, “NetGPT: Generative
 a vocabulary does text classification need? A variational approach to pretrained transformer for network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2304.09513.
 vocabulary selection,” in Proc. NAACL-HLT, 2019, pp. 3487–3497. [67] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
[41] C. Toraman, E. H. Yilmaz, F. Şahinuç, and O. Ozcelik, “Impact of contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 tokenization on language models: An analysis for turkish,” ACM Trans. for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022,
 Asian Low-Resource Lang. Inf. Process., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2023. pp. 633–642.
[42] Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and [68] T. Mikolov et al., “Distributed representations of words and phrases and
 Q. V. Le, “XLNet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language their compositionality,” in Proc. NIPS, 2013, pp. 3111–3119.
 understanding,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019, [69] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized bert pretraining
 p. 517. approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692.
[43] H. Touvron et al., “LLAMA: Open and efficient foundation language [70] Y. Feng et al., “Unmasking the Internet: A survey of fine-grained
 models,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971. network traffic analysis,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., early access,
[44] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers Feb. 25, 2025, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2025.3545541.
 for image recognition at scale,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., [71] S. Fernandes, R. Antonello, T. Lacerda, A. Santos, D. Sadok, and
 2021, pp. 1–22. T. Westholm, “Slimming down deep packet inspection systems,” in Proc.
 IEEE INFOCOM Workshops, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[45] K. Wu, H. Peng, M. Chen, J. Fu, and H. Chao, “Rethinking and
 [72] X. Wang, J. Jiang, Y. Tang, B. Liu, and X. Wang, “StriD 2 FA: Scalable
 improving relative position encoding for vision transformer,” in Proc.
 regular expression matching for deep packet inspection,” in Proc. IEEE
 IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 10033–10041.
 Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2011, pp. 1–5.
[46] Z. Huang, D. Liang, P. Xu, and B. Xiang, “Improve transformer models
 [73] F. Simmross-Wattenberg, J. I. Asensio-Perez, P. Casaseca-de-la Higuera,
 with better relative position embeddings,” 2020, arXiv:2009.13658.
 M. Martin-Fernandez, I. A. Dimitriadis, and C. Alberola-Lopez,
[47] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training “Anomaly detection in network traffic based on statistical inference and
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018, α-stable modeling,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secur. Comput., vol. 8,
 arXiv:1810.04805. no. 4, pp. 494–509, Jul./Aug. 2011.
[48] R. Flood, G. Engelen, D. Aspinall, and L. Desmet, “Bad design smells [74] Y. Feng, J. Li, D. Sisodia, and P. Reiher, “On explainable and
 in benchmark NIDS datasets,” in Proc. IEEE 9th Eur. Symp. Security adaptable detection of distributed denial-of-service traffic,” IEEE Trans.
 Privacy (EuroSP), 2024, pp. 658–675. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2211–2226, Jul./Aug.
[49] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating 2024.
 a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 in Proc. ICISSP, vol. 1, 2018, pp. 108–116.
[50] A. Sivanathan et al., “Classifying IoT devices in smart environments Binghui Wu (Graduate Student Member, IEEE)
 using network traffic characteristics,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., received the B.Eng. degree from The Chinese
 vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1745–1759, Aug. 2019. University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, and the M.Eng.
[51] L. Csikor, “DoQ+QUIC Web traffic dataset,” IEEE Dataport, 2024. degree from the National University of Singapore,
 [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.21227/km5h-g294 where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
[52] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. 8th with the Department of Electrical and Computer
 IEEE Int. Conf. Data Min., 2008, pp. 413–422. Engineering. His research interests include network
[53] K.-L. Li, H.-K. Huang, S.-F. Tian, and W. Xu, “Improving one-class traffic analysis, deep learning, and AI for network
 SVM for anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Cybern., security.
 vol. 5, 2003, pp. 3077–3081.
[54] Z. Xu, D. Kakde, and A. Chaudhuri, “Automatic hyperparameter tuning
 method for local outlier factor, with applications to anomaly detection,” Dinil Mon Divakaran (Senior Member, IEEE)
 in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Big Data (Big Data), 2019, pp. 4201–4207. received the Doctoral degree from the joint lab of
[55] G. Münz, S. Li, and G. Carle, “Traffic anomaly detection using K-means INRIA and Bell Labs, ENS Lyon, France. He is
 clustering,” in Proc. GI/ITG Workshop MMBNET, vol. 7, 2007, pp. 1–8. a Senior Principal Scientist and a Group Leader
[56] J. Pereira and M. Silveira, “Unsupervised anomaly detection in energy (Network and System Security) with the Institute for
 time series data using variational recurrent autoencoders with atten- Infocomm Research, A*STAR, Singapore. He is also
 tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Appl. (ICMLA), 2018, an Adjunct Assistant Professor with the School of
 pp. 1275–1282. Computing, National University of Singapore. His
[57] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for research interests are network security, web security,
 robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” and AI security.
 IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
[58] W. J.-W. Tann, J. J. W. Tan, J. Purba, and E.-C. Chang, “Filtering DDoS
 attacks from unlabeled network traffic data using online deep learning,”
 Gurusamy Mohan (Senior Member, IEEE) received
 in Proc. ACM Asia Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (AsiaCCS), 2021,
 the Ph.D. degree in computer science and engipp. 432–446.
 neering from the Indian Institute of Technology
[59] A. Lazaris and V. K. Prasanna, “An LSTM framework for modeling Madras in 2000. He joined the National University
 network traffic,” in Proc. IFIP/IEEE Symp. Integr. Netw. Service Manage. of Singapore (NUS) in June 2000, where he is cur-
 (IM), 2019, pp. 19–24. rently an Associate Professor with the Department of
[60] A. Ali, T. Schnake, O. Eberle, G. Montavon, K.-R. Müller, and L. Wolf, Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE). He is
 “XAI for transformers: Better explanations through conservative propa- currently serving as an Associate Head of Graduate
 gation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 435–451. Programmes with the ECE Department and also as
[61] S. Abnar and W. Zuidema, “Quantifying attention flow in transformers,” an Assistant Dean of Graduate Programmes with
 in Proc. 58th Annu. Meeting Assoc. Comput. Linguist., 2020. the NUS College of Design and Engineering. He
[62] H. Chefer, S. Gur, and L. Wolf, “Transformer interpretability beyond has over 270 publications to his credit including two books and three book
 attention visualization,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern chapters in the area of optical networks. His research experience and interests
 Recognit., 2021, pp. 782–791. are in the areas of Internet of Things, 5G, software defined networks,
[63] J. Holland, P. Schmitt, N. Feamster, and P. Mittal, “New directions metaverse, cloud, and optical networks. He is serving on the editorial board
 in automated traffic analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. for Elsevier Computer Networks journal and Springer Photonic Network
 Commun. Security (CCS), 2021, pp. 3366–3383. Communications journal. He served as an Editor for IEEE I NTERNET OF
[64] X. Meng, Y. Wang, R. Ma, H. Luo, X. Li, and Y. Zhang, “Packet T HINGS J OURNAL, and IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C LOUD C OMPUTING.
 representation learning for traffic classification,” in Proc. 28th ACM He served as a TPC Co-Chair for several conferences including IEEE
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Disc. Data Min., 2022, pp. 3546–3554. GLOBECOM 2019 (ONS) and IEEE ICC 2008 (ONS).