IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026 1647

 Universal Embedding Function for Traffic
 Classification via QUIC Domain Recognition
 Pretraining: A Transfer Learning Success
 Jan Luxemburk , Karel Hynek , Richard Plný , and Tomáš Čejka

 Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification (TC) methods must better suited to protocol dissectors and pattern-matching.
adapt to new protocols and extensions as well as to advancements Additionally, in deployment scenarios where inference is not
in other machine learning fields. In this paper, we adopt a performed directly on monitoring probes, transmitting payload
transfer learning setup best known from computer vision. We
first pretrain an embedding model on a complex task with a large data introduces both privacy and performance issues.
number of classes and then transfer it to seven established TC Building on our previous research in fine-grained traffic
datasets. The pretraining task is recognition of SNI domains in classification (TC) for TLS [1] and QUIC [2], we design and
encrypted QUIC traffic, which in itself is a challenge for network train the embedding function using the CESNET-QUIC22 [3]
monitoring due to the growing adoption of TLS Encrypted Client dataset. This dataset includes Server Name Indication (SNI)
Hello. Our training pipeline—featuring a disjoint class setup,
ArcFace loss function, and a modern deep learning architecture— domains as labels, enabling a classification task focused on
aims to produce universal embeddings applicable across tasks. inferring exact domain names from packet sequences. This
A transfer method based on model fine-tuning surpassed SOTA domain recognition task serves two important roles in this
performance on nine of ten downstream TC tasks, with an paper. First, the growing adoption of the Encrypted Client
average improvement of 6.4%. Furthermore, a comparison with a Hello (ECH) extension has made domain recognition increasbaseline method using raw packet sequences revealed unexpected
findings with potential implications for the broader TC field. We ingly important. In combination with TLS 1.3, ECH removes
released the model architecture, trained weights, and codebase all plaintext handshake fields that have traditionally enabled
for transfer learning experiments. visibility into encrypted traffic. Our solution, which relies
 Index Terms—Traffic classification, transfer learning, deep solely on packet sequences and is unaffected by ECH, is able
learning, encrypted traffic, QUIC. to infer the correct domain name in 94.83% of cases, even
 when evaluated on test domains entirely disjoint from the
 I. I NTRODUCTION embedding function’s training set. Second, domain recognition
 N THIS paper, we propose a universal embedding (map- is well suited as a pretraining task due to its complexity,
I ping) function that transforms packet sequences into an
embedding vector space. The core idea is to map similar packet
 large number of classes, and straightforward labeling process.
 Transfer learning leverages models trained on one task to adapt
sequences close to each other in the embedding space while them for a different but related task, under the assumption
keeping dissimilar ones far apart. The embedding function that certain knowledge (i.e., extracted features, learned traffic
serves as a feature extractor, enabling a nearest neighbors patterns and characteristics) is shared and transferable. This
(k-NN) classifier to make predictions. As our focus is on
 approach is widely used in computer vision and natural
encrypted traffic, we utilize the standard input representation
 language processing, where the typical experimental pipeline
unaffected by encryption: packet size, direction, and interinvolves fine-tuning large models pretrained on public datasets.
packet time of the first N packets. We deliberately avoid using
 To evaluate the transfer learning approach, we tested
payload as a model input due to its limited value in analyzing
initial handshakes of encrypted protocols, a task we consider our pretrained embedding function on seven datasets:
 ISCXVPN2016 [4], MIRAGE19 [5], MIRAGE22 [6],
 Received 18 February 2025; revised 14 August 2025 and 6 November UTMOBILENET21 [7], UCDAVIS19 [8], CESNET-TLS22 [1],
2025; accepted 6 December 2025. Date of publication 11 December 2025;
date of current version 13 January 2026. This research was funded by the
 and AppClassNet [9], presenting ten downstream TC tasks in
Ministry of Interior of the Czech Republic, grant No. VJ02010024: “Flow- total. We evaluated three transfer techniques: (a) using fixed
Based Encrypted Traffic Analysis” and also supported by the Grant Agency pretrained embeddings with a k-NN classifier, (b) using fixed
of the CTU in Prague, grant No. SGS23/207/OHK3/3T/18. Computational
resources were provided by the e-INFRA CZ project (ID:90254), supported pretrained embeddings with a linear classifier (also known as
by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. The linear probing), and (c) fine-tuning the embedding function on
associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for each downstream task. To isolate the contribution of the transfer
publication was T. Inoue. (Corresponding author: Jan Luxemburk.)
 Jan Luxemburk, Karel Hynek, and Richard Plný are with the Faculty of learning, we also compared against training the same model
Information Technology, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague 160 from scratch on the downstream tasks.
00, Czech Republic, and also with the CESNET Association, Prague 160 00, The results are promising: the fine-tuning approach proved
Czech Republic (e-mail: luxemburk@cesnet.cz).
 Tomáš Čejka is with CESNET Association, Prague 160 00, Czech Republic.
 to be the best, surpassing state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3642984 on nine downstream tasks and outperforming training from
 1932-4537 
 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence
 and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
1648 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

scratch on eight. A k-NN classifier in the learned embedding A. Transfer Learning in Traffic Classification
space also exceeded SOTA performance, although the gains The objective of transfer learning is to capitalize on the
were more modest compared to fine-tuning. This offers a knowledge encoded in a model M0 , learned while solving a
viable alternative when fine-tuning or training from scratch task T0 , and adapt it to a different target task Ttarget . The
is not feasible, for example due to insufficient labeled data key intuition is that the closer the relationship between T0
for the downstream task. Finally, our experiments revealed and Ttarget , the more effectively the learned representations
an intriguing finding: a k-NN classifier using L1 distance on (i.e., features) can be reused and transferred. Depending on the
the first 10 packet features—referred to as the input-space application, the label spaces of T0 and Ttarget may be disjoint
baseline—also performed quite well across all datasets. (e.g., when pretraining on a pretext task), partially overlapping
 Main contributions (e.g., when adapting to new classes), or identical (e.g., when
 (i) We designed and developed an embedding function for adapting to a new operational environment). Transfer learning
packet sequences to serve as a foundation for classifiers of has gained significant traction in network classification and is
encrypted network traffic. It is based on a neural network applied in various scenarios discussed below.
architecture 30pktTCNET_256 that combines existing, well-
 1) Cross-Dataset: Pretraining on pretext tasks before
proven techniques, such as ResNet-like convolutional blocks,
 fine-tuning for downstream objectives. ET-BERT [12] and
packet feature embeddings, and Generalized Mean Pooling
 YaTC [13] exemplify this strategy, leveraging large unlabeled
(GeM) [10]. For initializing packet feature embeddings, we
 datasets to pretrain transformer models in an NLP-like fashion
adopted Piecewise Linear Encoding (PLE) [11], a method that
 using tokenization and masking. However, both operate on
outperforms random initialization and has not previously been
 packet payloads and are thus outside the scope of detailed
used in the TC domain. Although the architecture is largely
 comparison in this work. Rezaei et al. [14] pretrained a
based on established techniques—with the exception of PLE—
 1D-CNN on QUIC packet sequences via a pretext task
we rigorously tuned all its components to uncover the true
 targeting flow bandwidth and duration prediction, and sublimits of CNN-based processing of packet sequences.
 sequently transferred it to Web service classification. This
 (ii) We present a domain recognition solution that enables
 pretraining improved performance relative to direct training on
domain-level visibility into encrypted traffic, even in the
 Web services; nevertheless, jointly training all three tasks—
presence of TLS 1.3 and ECH. Using a k-NN classifier in
 bandwidth, duration, and Web service—yielded the strongest
the embedding space, our method achieves 94.83% accuracy
 performance.
and 79.35% recall under a class-disjoint evaluation setup. We
further show that domain recognition serves as an effective 2) New-Class Adaptation: Transferring knowledge from
pretraining task, as the learned embeddings generalize across frequent to rare classes in incremental learning and few-shot
ten downstream TC tasks. learning (FSL). When the main constraint is a limited number
 (iii) With the fine-tuning transfer method, we surpass of samples, transfer learning can serve as an alternative to, or a
the SOTA performance on nine of the ten downstream component within, various FSL approaches. Bovenzi et al. [15]
TC tasks, achieving a remarkable average improvement studied IoT attack detection across four datasets and found
of 6.4%. Compared to training from scratch, fine-tuning that FSL methods outperform transfer learning. However, subpretrained weights provides a 2.1% average gain, empirically sequent works by Di Monda et al. [16] and Monda et al. [17],
confirming the benefits of transfer learning. focusing on intrusion detection and fast adaptation to new
 The paper is organized as follows: Section II provides a attacks, reported the opposite result: transfer learning methods
review of related research. Section III describes the experi- were superior. In particular, the Rethinking Few-Shot method
mental setup used to develop the embedding function, covering of Tian et al. [18] achieved excellent performance using a base
the dataset, data preparation, training loop, loss function, model trained in a standard supervised fashion, with additional
and deep learning (DL) architecture. Section IV presents the self-distillation to enhance the learned representations. The
results of the domain recognition task, along with ablation Rethinking Few-Shot method highlights that a strong base
studies examining parts of the solution. Section V describes the model can offer performance comparable to, or better than,
transfer of the trained embedding function to seven additional standard FSL meta-learning approaches while enabling a
TC datasets and discusses the achieved results. Section VI simpler and arguably more straightforward adaptation to new
addresses limitations, and Section VII concludes the paper by classes. Tong et al. [19] proposed a feature-alignment approach
summarizing key contributions and outlining future directions. for encrypted traffic classification. In their problem setup,
 the source domain provides abundant labeled data, whereas
 the target domain has many samples but few or no labels
 II. R ELATED W ORK and includes additional classes. Their method introduces an
 We begin by outlining how transfer learning has been auxiliary optimization objective, termed the smooth characapplied within the TC domain. Next, we review influential teristic function, which encourages the feature distributions
papers on representation learning for TC, highlighting method- of the two domains to align during training. This alignment
ological similarities to our approach and key differences. facilitates classification of previously unseen classes in the
We deliberately omit detailed discussion of studies that rely target domain, although the approach requires target-domain
heavily on payload data, focusing instead on methods that data to be available during base-model training.
operate on packet sequences or on representations derived 3) Cross-Network: Adapting models trained in one envifrom them. ronment to operate in another. Unlike most approaches
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1649

discussed so far, which aim to learn embeddings of individual buffering. Although their objective—to train encrypted trafnetwork connections, Gioacchini et al. [20] learn embeddings fic classifiers that are more robust under changing network
of hosts. They employ DarkVec [21], a Word2Vec-based conditions—aligns with our focus on general traffic represenmethod that learns host embeddings from co-occurrence tations, we chose not to incorporate data augmentations into
patterns—for example, when hosts contact the same server our pipeline due to the increasing complexity of our proposed
ports at the same time. The authors then study two trans- approach.
fer settings: (a) adapting host embeddings from a provider Finamore et al. [26] conducted a comprehensive evaluation
network to different, potentially label-scarce client networks, of data augmentations of the FlowPic [27] representation,
and (b) transferring knowledge learned from honeypots to which is a 2D histogram that captures the evolution of packet
scanners observed by a network telescope. sizes over time. The authors replicated an earlier study [28],
 reproducing most of the original results while also incorporating three additional datasets. The most relevant contribution
B. Contrastive Learning & Augmentations for our work is the release of the tcbench open-source
 Guarino et al. [22] focused on the task of finding better framework, which we use for transfer learning evaluation.
representations for TC that generalize across tasks, which is Additionally, the best classification accuracies reported on the
in line with the goals we set up for this work. The authors UCDAVIS19 and UTMOBILENET21 datasets are used for
compared transfer-, meta-, and contrastive-learning approaches SOTA comparison.
on MIRAGE19 and AppClassNet datasets. Both datasets were
partitioned into training, validation, and test sets with disjoint III. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
classes, similar to how we partition domain names for the
 The overall domain recognition experimental setup is
domain recognition task. However, their partitioning approach
 designed as a retrieval task for finding the most similar
was based on class frequencies: the training set contained
 network flows, analogous to image retrieval tasks in computer
the most frequent classes, while the test set included the
 vision. The SNI-based classes are divided into three disjoint
least frequent ones. In contrast, we used random partitioning
 sets: training, validation, and test. The training domain set is
independent of class frequencies. One of the findings of
 used to train a neural network, which serves as the embedding
Guarino et al. is that supervised contrastive learning profunction that learns vector representations of network flows.
duces the best representations overall. Our work supports
 This embedding function, denoted as Φ, is formalized in Eq. 1
this finding, as there are notable similarities between the
 and illustrated in Figure 1.
loss function used in our work, ArcFace, and the contrastive
loss function used by Guarino et al.: SupCon [23] extended Φ : Flow → Rd , d = embedding size (1)
with class centers and cosine distance. Both loss functions
operate by pulling similar samples toward their class centers The validation domain set is used to measure performance
using cosine similarity. The key distinction is that ArcFace during training, select the best model, and for finding the
introduces angular margins, which enhance class separation in best configuration of hyperparameters. The test domain set
the embedding space. is reserved for measuring and reporting the final metrics.
 Wang et al. [24] presented a benchmark of data augmen- The training, validation, and test domain sets are disjoint,
tations, evaluating 18 of them on three datasets: MIRAGE19, so this setup pushes for strong generalization capabilities of
MIRAGE22, and a private one. They utilized the standard the embedding function. It must learn patterns and extract
packet sequence representation, consisting of the sizes, times, traffic characteristics that remain useful for domains not seen
and directions of the first 20 packets. The training pipeline during training. We based our experiments on the CESNETfeatured two stages: a contrastive self-supervised phase, where QUIC22 [3] dataset, which is described in the next section.
augmented versions of the same sample were pulled together,
followed by a supervised phase, where a classification head A. CESNET-QUIC22 Dataset
was trained on the extracted features. Wang et al. also The CESNET-QUIC22 [3] dataset includes four weeks of
experimented with a class-weighted sampler to achieve perfect traffic captured at the monitoring points of the CESNET
class balancing in each training epoch but found no success network, which is the national research and education network
with it. In contrast, our semi-balancing technique, detailed of the Czech Republic. The dataset consists of 153 million
in Section III-D1, proved to be beneficial in our experiments. anonymized network flows enriched with various traffic fea-
The differing outcomes may be due to the use of perfect tures suitable for the classification of encrypted traffic. For this
class balancing, whereas we employed the λsampler parameter work, the relevant features are the packet sequences and SNI
to control the strength of the balancing effect. We used the domains. The SNI domain is extracted from the Server Name
best classification accuracies reported by Wang et al. on Indication extension transmitted during the QUIC handshake.
the MIRAGE19 and MIRAGE22 datasets for SOTA com- The packet sequences include packet sizes, inter-packet times,
parison in Section V. Xie et al. [25] carefully designed and packet direction of the first 30 packets. Prior work has
three TCP-aware data augmentations that mimic real network shown that this packet sequence length is generally sufficient
dynamics, such as varying packet loss rates, retransmission for accurate classification [1], [2]. For further details on the
timeouts, or the interplay between RTT and MTU in packet dataset and its collection process, including the software used,
1650 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 1. A complete processing pipeline starting with network flows as input. The embedding function Φ, which is implemented as a neural network, maps
flows into a 256-dimensional vector space. The visualized ArcFace head is used during training to optimize the neural network, which is composed of a
backbone model and a compression neck.

sampling methods, flow export timeouts, and other relevant
aspects, please refer to the original data article [3].
 The dataset includes 102 service classes, where each service
groups one or more domain names under a single label.
However, since our objective is to predict individual domains,
we do not use these predefined service labels. Instead, we
utilized the exact SNI domains that are available in the
dataset. Moreover, since the dataset contains general background traffic, the domains are not limited to the 102 service
classes but represent all domains observed within the CESNET
network.
 In our previous experiments [2] with CESNET-QUIC22,
we observed significant data drift in the traffic from the first
two weeks of the dataset. In this work, we want to focus
on evaluating the embedding function for domain recognition Fig. 2. An overview of the experimental setup, highlighting the purpose of
and transfer learning, without introducing extra complexities the disjoint domain split along with the database and query preparation for
of the data drift. Therefore, we based our experiments on the validation and testing.
third week of the dataset (W-2022-46) and used 33.7 million
samples from this week for training, hyperparameter tuning, we created 40 regexes that remap thousands of domains with
and the final evaluation of the proposed solution. random parts into corresponding unified domain classes.
 After this domain preprocessing, we selected the 2000 most
 frequent domain classes and divided them randomly into three
B. Experimental Pipeline subsets: 1000 for training, 500 for validation, and 500 for
 The following subsections describe the individual steps of testing. These 2000 domains account for 99.38% of the total
the experimental setup, starting with domain preprocessing, flows in the dataset’s third week.
followed by data preparation, training and validation, and 2) Database and Query Preparation: Next, we prepare
finally model selection. An overview of the full pipeline is databases and query samples for validation and test domain
shown in Figure 2. sets. A database serves as a mini-training set for a k-NN
 1) Domain Preprocessing and Train/Val/Test Split: The classifier, which is then tested on query samples to measure
first step was to preprocess SNI domain names into performance. The exact same process is used for validation
class labels. We keep subdomains up to the fourth level and test domains, and we will describe it for validation.
and strip the rest (a.tile.openstreetmap.org is Validation samples (those having one of the 500 validation
a fourth-level domain). Some domains contain a random domains) are split into database and query parts. This split
string or parts related to locations or numbering. For is random and stratified, meaning the class frequencies are
example, the aforementioned openstreetmap domain has two preserved in both parts. We set the query part to contain one
“sister” domains [b,c].tile.openstreetmap.org. million samples and leave the rest for building the database.
We decided to group such domains into a single class Out of these remaining samples, we randomly select one
with the help of regexes. Another example would million to be included in the database. However, this second
be europe-west1-gcp.api.snapchat.com and database sampling is not uniform but instead we soften the
us-east4-gcp.api.snapchat.com, both remapped to class imbalances. We set the weight of a sample belonging
a single class $LOC-gcp.api.snapchat.com. In total, to class C to NC−λdb , where NC is the C class frequency
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1651

and λdb > 0 a parameter controlling the strength of the using two PyTorch Embedding1 layers—one for embedding of
balancing effect. We ended up using λdb = 12 , meaning the packet sizes and another for IPT. Each Embedding layer conweight formula is √N 1 . This method for the selection of tains a learnable matrix with the shape number of embeddings
 × embedding size, where each row represents the embedding
 C
database samples prioritizes classes that are less frequent at
the expense of the most frequent ones. To summarize, for both vector for a specific value. Packet sizes range from 0 to 1500,
validation and test domain sets, we selected one million query resulting in 1501 embeddings. For IPT, we first bin the values
samples (Qval , Qtest ) that follow the dataset’s original class into 200 bins and then use the index of a bin as the input for
distribution, and we created a database (DBval , DBtest ) from the Embedding layer. Packet directions are one-hot encoded,
one million samples with a more balanced class distribution. which we found to be more effective than the traditional ±1
 3) Training, Validation, and Ranking: After preprocessing encoding scheme. We set the embedding size to 20 for packet
domains, splitting them into disjoint sets, and preparing sizes and 10 for IPT. Thus, the stem outputs data in a shape
databases and query samples, we can start training the Φ (30 × 32),2 where 30 corresponds to the packet sequence
embedding function using the training domain set. The train- length, and 32 represents the combined embedding vector (20
ing loop runs for 30 epochs, measuring validation metrics for packet sizes, 10 for IPT, and 2 for directions).
each two epochs. The training loop is described in detail The Embedding layers for packet sizes and IPTs were
in Section III-D. The validation is performed as a similarity initialized using the Piecewise Linear Encoding (PLE) method
search in the embedding space. For each Qval sample, we proposed in [11], rather than the default random initialization.
find the most similar DBval samples, a process we refer PLE creates initial embeddings structured as bins, where each
to as database ranking. We limit the ranking to the closest bin corresponds to a segment of the feature’s range (hence
20 samples and compute several metrics that are described the name “piecewise”). Within each bin, linear relationships
in Section IV-A to measure the quality of the embeddings. are preserved, maintaining the inherent ordering of numeri-
Each time, validation reuses the same DBval and Qval cal features. During training, the embeddings are optimized
samples—what changes are the embeddings that are recom- alongside the other model weights to adapt to the data. While
puted with model weights from the current epoch. embedding packet features before convolutional processing is
 To compute distances in the embedding space, we use cosine not a novel concept—having been employed, for instance, by
similarity, which is a metric calculated as the dot product Nascita et al. [30], [31]—the PLE initialization technique has
of L2-normalized vectors. When applied to L2-normalized not yet been used in the TC domain.
vectors, cosine similarity produces the same ranking as the 2) Convolutional Blocks: The core processing in terms
well-known Euclidean distance. To efficiently compute cosine of feature extraction and parameter count is done with
similarities between all query samples and all database sam- convolutions, implemented as four residual blocks adapted
ples, we used the faiss library [29] specifically designed for from the popular ResNet architecture. Specifically, we use
efficient similarity search and clustering of vectors. Bottleneck Residual Block visualized in Figure 4, which was
 4) Model Selection and Final Evaluation: We chose the proposed in [32]. This block design reduces the number of
macro-average validation recall as our main objective, favoring parameters while preserving representational power. The term
models that perform well on all validation domains with “bottleneck” refers to the temporary reduction of channels
equal importance (macro-averaging disregards sample count with a 1×1 convolution before the main convolution, followed
per domain). After the 30 training epochs, the model from the by their restoration (or increase) afterward. Each block is
epoch with the best validation recall is saved and evaluated defined by the following parameters: the main convolution
on the test domain set. This final evaluation is identical to the kernel size k , the number of output channels Cout , the dropout
validation process but is using the test query samples Qtest rate, and the bottleneck ratio defining the reduction of channels
and test database DBtest . for the main convolution (we use a common setting of 14 ). The
 main convolution operation uses automatic padding to ensure
 that the spatial dimension (i.e., the length of packet sequences)
C. DL Architecture remains unchanged. For the same purpose, we also use a stride
 We based the neural network architecture on our previous of 1 in all convolutions, as we found that reducing the spatial
works on TLS and QUIC classification [1], [2], but due to dimension with a stride led to decreased performance. The four
substantial modifications, we describe it here in detail. The bottleneck blocks use different parameter settings: the number
architecture is single-modal and designed to process fixed- of output channels increases (192, 256, 384, 448), the kernel
sized packet sequences (N = 30) with the following features: sizes decrease (7, 7, 5, 3), and the dropout rates progressively
packet sizes, inter-packet times (IPT), and directions. Network rise (0%, 10%, 20%, 30%). Overall, the convolutional blocks
flows with fewer than N packets are padded with zeroes. process packet embeddings of shape (30 × 32) and produce
The network is visualized in Figure 3. It follows the standard feature maps of shape (30 × 448).
architecture of modern CNNs and consists of four main 3) Global Pooling: The next component of the network
components: a stem, convolutional blocks, global pooling, and is a global pooling operation, which aggregates each feature
a feature refinement block. map along the spatial dimension (length 30) into a single
 1) Stem: The purpose of our network stem is to embed
packet features into R-dimensional vectors to prepare them 1 https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Embedding.html
for subsequent processing with convolutions. This is achieved 2 The batch size is omitted from all data shapes discussed in Section III-C.
1652 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

Fig. 3. The architecture of the 30pktTCNET backbone model consists of four main components: a stem, convolutional blocks, global pooling, and feature
refinement. The main processing is done in the convolutional blocks, which include four Bottleneck Residual Blocks described in detail in Figure 4. Each
block has a different configuration of the following parameters: the number of output channels (e.g., 256c), kernel size (e.g., 7k), and dropout rate.

 block—a simple sequence of Linear, BatchNorm, and ReLU
 layers. This feature refinement block preserves the shape of
 the features, resulting in an output size of 448.
 Up to this point, the defined neural network architecture
 can be used for standard classification tasks; adding one extra
 Linear classification layer with a shape (448 × number of
 classes) would do the job. However, our goal is to produce
 embeddings of network flows. Thus, as the final part of the
 network, we add a compression neck that is composed of
 a Linear layer with a shape (448 × 256), BatchNorm, and
 a vector L2-normalization operation. The compression neck
 excludes a ReLU activation function on purpose, as its task is
 to compress features into the desired embedding size of 256
 without introducing additional non-linear transformations.
 We want to distinguish the backbone part—the stem, convolutional blocks, and the feature refinement block—from
 the entire neural network. We refer to this backbone as
 30pktTCNET (visualized in Figure 3), while the complete
 model representing the Φ embedding function is denoted as
Fig. 4. The diagram of Bottleneck Residual Block. k : the kernel size of the 30pktTCNET_256 (visualized in Figure 1). With the final
main convolution, Cout : the number of output channels, r : the dropout rate. hyperparameter configuration, 30pktTCNET_256 has one
The number of channels of the main convolution Cmid is set to Cout 4 . All million trainable parameters.
convolutions use a stride of 1 and automatic padding to ensure that the spatial
dimension is kept intact. Convolutions do not use biases.
 D. Training Loop
 This section outlines the training loop that we used to
scalar per channel, producing an output of size (1 × 448). optimize the neural network, describing the training sampler,
Common pooling methods include either averaging or taking loss function, optimizer, and learning rate (LR) scheduler.
the maximum of the values. We found maximum pooling to 1) Training Sampler: The training loop consists of 30
perform better than average pooling; however, our final choice epochs. In each epoch, one million training samples are
was Generalized Mean Pooling (GeM) [10]. GeM includes randomly selected for training. We used a modified random
a parameter p that enables interpolation3 between maximum sampler, where the weights of samples of class C are set
 −λ
pooling (p → ∞) and average pooling (p = 1). The parameter to NC sampler , with NC being the C class frequency. We
p can be a fixed value or trained along with the other model used the same value λsampler = 12 as in the formula for
weights. We initialized p to 3 and optimized it during training. selecting samples for the database. This approach softens class
 4) Feature Refinement & Compression Neck: The output imbalances in the training set of each epoch, gives more focus
of the GeM pooling is passed through a feature refinement on less frequent classes during training, and allows the model
 to learn traffic patterns from more diverse samples.
  1
  p 2) ArcFace Loss Function: In supervised metric learning,
 3 The exact GeM formula is 1 xp , where Xc denotes a
 |Xc |
 x ∈Xc
 there are two main categories of loss functions used for
single channel from the output of the convolutional blocks. training embedding models. The first consists of contrastive
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1653

 TABLE I
approaches, such as Contrastive [33] or Triplet [34] loss, which A N OVERVIEW OF THE H YPERPARAMETER S PACE
pull together embeddings of samples with the same label
and push apart those with different labels. These methods
operate within each mini-batch, using local sample-to-sample
comparisons. The other group of loss functions includes
softmax-based losses with class centers and margin modifications, such as ArcFace [35] and CosFace [36]. These
methods introduce class-specific centers and enforce angular
or cosine margins to better separate classes. Samples are
pulled toward their class centers based on global sampleto-class comparisons. ArcFace, along with its sub-center
variant [37], represents the current state-of-the-art. While
originally developed for face recognition, ArcFace has proven
effective across various tasks like image retrieval and finegrained classification. The following paragraph contains a in PyTorch. We used the AdamW optimizer with the default
short overview of how the ArcFace loss works. For a more parameters, a batch size of 1024, and an initial learning rate
technical and formal description, please refer to the original of 0.0025. We used cosine learning rate decay, with a linear
ArcFace paper [35]. warm-up phase from 0.0025 3 to 0.0025 for the first 150
 Training a neural network with the ArcFace loss involves iterations. Weight decay of 0.0017(≈ 10−2.75 ) was applied
adding an “ArcFace head” (see Figure 1), which is detached on all parameters except biases, BatchNorm affine parameters,
and not used when the network is used for generating packet size and IPT embedding matrices, and the GeM pooling
embeddings during validation and testing. The head contains a p parameter. All weights used PyTorch’s default initialization,
matrix of class centers, which are learnable during the training except for biases, which were set to zeros. We also use the
process. For computing the loss, both the embeddings and KoLeo [39] regularization technique, which promotes a more
the class centers are normalized, which projects them onto a uniform distribution of flow embeddings in the embedding
unit hypersphere. The ArcFace loss then calculates the angles space.
between the flow embeddings and all the class centers. A
fixed angular margin m is added to the angle corresponding E. Hyperparameter Search
to the correct class, which improves class separation (a larger
 The hyperparameter search was conducted on a single
angular gap between neighboring class centers). The cosine
 domain split (described in Section III-B1), and the best-found
of these angles is then computed and scaled by a parameter
 parameters were reused for other domain splits. Our goal was
s, producing the logits. These scaled logits are then passed
 to identify a configuration with the highest macro-average
to a cross-entropy loss function to calculate the final loss. By
 recall on the validation domain set. Due to the large hyperincorporating the angular margin, the ArcFace loss encourages
 parameter space, a full grid search was infeasible; instead,
the model to cluster embeddings of the same class closer
 we optimized and fixed subsets of hyperparameters step by
together while increasing the angular separation between
 step. The most important hyperparameters are summarized
different classes, resulting in more discriminative embeddings.
 in Table I. In total, we used the MetaCentrum computing grid.4
 3) Sub-Center ArcFace With Dynamic Margins: We experto run more than 4000 trials, each taking approximately two
imented with an enhanced variant of ArcFace called sub-center
 hours.
ArcFace [37], which uses K sub-centers per class instead of
a single center. During training, samples are pulled toward
the nearest positive sub-center. This loss is better suited for IV. D OMAIN R ECOGNITION R ESULTS
handling intra-class variations, which are common in TC This section presents experimental results for the domain
tasks—for instance, due to different API endpoints hosted recognition task. First, we describe performance metrics, introbehind a single SNI domain. Moreover, we used an ArcFace duce a simple baseline approach, and present the results. We
variant with dynamic margins, as introduced in [38] for tasks conclude this section with ablations analyzing the influence of
with extreme class imbalance. Each class uses a different various components and parameters in the experimental setup.
 −λ
angular margin, calculated as mC = a ∗ NC margin + b, where
NC is the C class frequency, a and b define the minimum A. Metrics
and maximum margins, and λmargin > 0 controls the rate During validation and final testing, we perform database
of change in the margin. We used λ = 14 , with a and b set ranking to find the neighborhood of all query samples, as
to produce margins in the range [0.15, 0.25]. Less frequent described in Section III-B3. The ranking relies on cosine simclasses, which require greater separation in the embedding ilarity in the embedding space, where higher cosine similarity
space for accurate classification, are given larger margins (up indicates more similar and closely related samples. To process
to 0.25) to widen their decision boundaries, whereas more a neighborhood into a domain prediction, we use three simple
frequent classes are assigned smaller margins (down to 0.15). voting schemes: selecting the domain of the closest sample
 4) Optimizer, LR Scheduler, Regularization, and
Implementation Details: The training loop was implemented 4 https://www.metacentrum.cz/en/
1654 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE II
 D OMAIN R ECOGNITION R ESULTS 1) Top-1 Performance: The achieved top1-acc of 94.83%
 and recall5 of 79.35% are both surprising, and we consider
 them a success. This is remarkable given the challenging
 nature of our setup: the embedding function is evaluated
 on a set of domains disjoint from those used for training, and the task involves a large number of fine-grained
 classes. Measurements of recall across domain quartiles reveal
 interesting trends. For the most frequent Q1 domains, recall
 reaches 89.63%. Between Q1 and Q2, there is a notable recall
 drop of around 8%, and the subsequent gaps Q2 → Q3 and
 Q3 → Q4 are around 5% each. It is evident that less frequent
 classes are much harder to recognize, a phenomenon that is
 well-known and understandable for a wide range of ML tasks.
 2) Benefits of Using a Neighborhood With Maj-3 and
(top-1) or taking the majority domain among the three or
 Maj-5: Considering a larger neighborhood of three or five
five closest samples (maj-3, maj-5). In the case of ties (e.g.,
 samples introduces a trade-off between prioritizing Q1
when all closest samples have different domains), the predicted
 domains and the rest. The Q1 recall improves for both maj-3
domain is determined by the order of the neighboring samples.
 (90.15%) and maj-5 (90.44%) compared to top-1 (89.63%).
This approach is equivalent to using a k-NN classifier, where
 However, the Q2–Q4 recalls for both maj-3 and maj-5 are
k corresponds to the size of the neighborhood.
 lower than for top-1. This decrease can be attributed to
 For each voting scheme, we compute classification accuracy
 sparse embeddings of less frequent domains, which have fewer
and macro-average recall. Among these metrics, we consider
 database samples and, therefore, lack sufficient representation
macro-average recall to be more important because it reflects
 to “win” in the maj-3 and maj-5 voting schemes. Overall, using
overall performance across all domains, regardless of their
 a larger neighborhood proves advantageous for the top 25%
frequencies. To better understand performance differences
 most frequent domains, while top-1 works better for the rest.
between frequent and infrequent domains, we also calcu-
 The improved performance on the most frequent domains also
late macro-average recall for quartiles of domains sorted
 explains that the classification accuracies of maj-3 (95.3%)
by frequency. For example, Q1 recall represents the macroand maj-5 (95.54%) exceed that of top-1 (94.83%), as frequent
average recall for the top 25% most frequent domains, whereas
 classes have a significant impact on micro-averaged metrics.
Q4 recall corresponds to the bottom 25% least frequent
 3) Baseline Performance: The input-space baseline was
domains.
 evaluated using the same experimental setup as the proposed Φ
 embedding function, enabling a direct performance comparison.
B. Baseline Definition The results show a significant 23.39% improvement in top1-acc
 It is good practice to compare deep learning models against of the proposed Φ embedding function over the baseline and
simple baseline methods to better understand the contribution even bigger improvements in Q1–Q4 recalls. This demonstrates
of more complex solutions. To this end, we devised an input- that the baseline method is inadequate for addressing the
space baseline that uses raw packet sequences as embeddings. domain recognition task within the given setup. However, our
The experimental setup for this baseline is identical to that of transfer learning experiments revealed that the input-space
the Φ embedding function, but flows are represented using the baseline can match SOTA performance on other TC datasets;
first 10 packet sizes, directions, and scaled inter-packet times. see Section V-D3 for more results and related discussion.
Because inter-packet times are generally less informative
than packet sizes, they are clipped to a maximum of one D. Ablations
second and scaled by a factor of 10 1 to reduce their relative
 The purpose of ablation studies is to investigate a system’s
influence in distance computation. The baseline uses L1 performance by removing or modifying certain components
distance for ranking and the top-1 voting scheme for making to gain a better understanding of their contributions to the
predictions. overall system. The following sections examine the role of
 certain hyperparameters and their effects on classification
C. Classification Performance performance and ranking speed. All ablation experiments were
 conducted using one specific domain split (identical to that
 The final results for the domain recognition task were
 used in the hyperparameter search), and we report average
obtained as averages of 10 domain splits. Each domain split
 results from 10 runs per configuration, if not stated otherwise.
randomly divides the top 2000 domains into 1000 training
 1) Packet Features - Direct Scalar Values, PLE Encoding,
domains, 500 validation domains, and 500 test domains.
 or Learnable Embedding Layer With PLE Initialization: We
Additionally, for each domain split, we perform 10 repetitions,
 evaluated the impact of our packet embedding scheme, referred
resulting in a total of 100 runs per reported value. Averaging
 to as Emb+PLE and detailed in Section III-C1, and present
over multiple domain splits ensures that the results are not
 the results in Table III. Most related works use direct scalar
biased for one specific set of domains. Results are presented
in Table II, followed by a detailed discussion. 5 All mentions of recall refer to top-1 recall, unless stated otherwise.
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1655

 TABLE III
 C OMPARISON OF A PPROACHES FOR E NCODING PACKET F EATURES

values, as did our previous architectures. In terms of recall,
our embedding scheme (79.29%) shows a 3.06% improvement
over the scalar approach (76.23%). The benefits are most Fig. 5. The impact of the λsampler balancing parameter of training sampler.
prominent for less frequent domains, with a Q4 recall improve- Both vertical axes of top1-acc and recall have a range of 2% to make the
 shapes of the lines comparable.
ment of 4.57%. We also tested a variant denoted as PLE, which
uses the initial embeddings created with PLE encoding without
further optimization (i.e., Embedding weights are frozen). The
results show PLE encoding accounts for most benefits, while
the trainable Embedding layer adds a smaller incremental
improvement. The gains in top1-acc are more modest, with
Emb+PLE providing a 0.4% improvement over scalars.
 Furthermore, we evaluated a variant denoted as Emb+Rand,
which is similar to the Emb+PLE scheme but uses random
initialization for the embedding matrices. It is likely that
related works utilizing packet embeddings [30], [31] employ
this variant, as no initialization method is specified and random
initialization is the common default. Table III shows that Fig. 6. The impact of the λdb balancing parameter. Both vertical axes of
Emb+Rand underperforms, further highlighting the strength of top1-acc and recall have a range of 10% to make the shapes of the lines
PLE initialization, which produces embeddings with inherent comparable.
ordering and thereby facilitates the training process.
 investigating the impact of the λdb parameter in Figure 6
 2) Training Sampler - the Impact of the Balancing
 shows a clear trade-off between decreasing top1-acc and
Parameter: In each training epoch, one million network flows
 increasing recall when λdb moves from 0 to 1. We ended up
are sampled using a semi-balanced random sampler, where
 choosing λdb = 12 , which, compared to no balancing, brings a
the λsampler parameter controls the balancing strength (see
 7% improvement in recall at the expense of a 0.51% decrease
details in Section III-D1). When λsampler = 0, all samples are
 in top1-acc. We believe this trade-off is worthwhile in most
assigned equal weight, and the original imbalance is preserved
 scenarios.
(no balancing). When λsampler = 1, the sampler creates a
 Combined effect: We also examined the combined effect
per-domain distribution that is as uniform as possible (perof λsampler and λdb . The results, presented in Table IV, highfectly uniform distribution is unattainable as we use sampling
 light the performance gains compared to the case where neither
without replacement).
 the database nor the training set is balanced (λsampler = 0
 Our expectation was that changing λsampler would provide a trade-off between focusing on more frequent with and λdb = 0).6 As expected, balancing has the greatest
λsampler = 0 (higher top1-acc) or less frequent domains with impact on Q4 recall, for which it provides a remarkable
λsampler = 1 (higher recall). However, it turned out that some 13.47% improvement. The gains for Q3 (+11.04%) and Q4
degree of balancing has a positive impact even for the top1- (+8.39%) recalls are also impressive, especially given that the
acc metric. We ended up choosing λsampler = 12 , meaning “cost” is merely a 0.4% decrease in top1-acc. Furthermore,
 1 . Compared to a standard the results indicate that database balancing and training set
the final weight formula is √N
 C balancing operate independently, as their combined effect is
random sampler without balancing (which corresponds to
 approximately the sum of their individual contributions.
λsampler = 0), this brings a 1.29% improvement in recall and
 4) Database - How Does the Number of Unique Domains
a minuscule improvement of 0.13% in top1-acc. The impact
 Affect Performance?: This section examines the sensitivity of
on both metrics is showcased in Figure 5.
 the domain recognition approach to the number of unique
 3) Database - the Impact of the Balancing Parameter: As domains we want to recognize. Previous work [40] demondescribed in Section III-B2, we also perform semi-balanced strated that TC tasks often become trivial when the number of
sampling for building the database. The weight formula is classes is small. To explore this, we tested our approach with
the same as for the epoch training sampler. When λdb = 0, the number of unique domains ranging from 100 to 1000.
the original imbalance is preserved in the database. When
λdb = 1, the database has the per-domain distribution as 6 Figure 5 shows the change between third and fourth rows of Table IV
uniform as possible (perfectly uniform distribution is unattain- with λdb = 12 fixed, while Figure 6 shows the change between second and
able as we use sampling without replacement). The graph fourth rows with λsampler = 12 fixed.
1656 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE IV
 T HE C OMBINED E FFECT OF B OTH DATABASE BALANCING λdb AND λsampler

Fig. 7. Sensitivity of the proposed domain recognition approach to the
number of unique domains.
 Fig. 8. The impact of the flow embedding size on domain recognition
 accuracy and ranking speed.

 To obtain up to 1000 domains, we first merge the validation
and test domain sets.7 Then, we randomly select the desired mismatch, and thus, top1-acc is increased when some of those
number of domains, choose all samples of those domains, are not selected in the given repetition.
and split them into query and database parts. A database is 5) Embedding Size - Ranking Speed vs Recall Trade-Off:
created using the λdb semi-balanced sampling. We measure The flow embedding size is a key parameter that influences
the performance of a single trained model, which is reused for the performance of the proposed domain recognition approach.
all domain counts and repetitions. For each domain count, we Larger embeddings improve recognition accuracy but come at
repeat this procedure 50 times and report the average. For the the cost of slower ranking speeds. To explore this trade-off,
maximum of 1000 domains, we use all available validation and we ran experiments with embedding sizes ranging from 32 to
test domains. Additionally, we compare the described random 448. As with other ablations, we performed 10 repetitions per
domain sampling with a sorted approach, where we select embedding size and report the average metrics. The results,
the N (100, 200, . . . , 1000) most frequent domains in each summarized in Figure 8, show that reducing the embedding
repetition. The results are presented in Figure 7. The top1- size has a limited impact on top1-acc (94.88% for size 32,
acc for random domain sampling ranges from 98.52% for 95.79% for size 448). However, recall is more sensitive,
100 domains to 93.22% for 1000 domains, while the recall decreasing from 79.46% (size 448) to 75.43% (size 32).
ranges from 88.65% to 74.54%. In contrast, the recall for the We observed a clear inverse relationship between ranking
top 100 most frequent domains is as high as 93.04%, which speed and embedding size: the smallest embeddings achieved
is notable considering these 100 domains cover 85% of all speeds of around 16.5k flows/s, while the largest slowed
dataset samples. the ranking to 4k flows/s. In contrast, the speed of creating
 An interesting difference is observed between the domain the embeddings with the neural network remained stable
selection methods: top1-acc is higher on random subsets of at around 33k flows/s, regardless of the used embedding
domains, while recall is better when using the top N domains. size. Both tasks—creating embeddings and faiss8 ranking—
This is because when domains are sampled, some less frequent were performed on an Nvidia Tesla T4 16GB GPU. Further
and harder-to-recognize domains are included. Since recall is performance-related discussion is provided in the final chapter.
macro-averaged, these harder domains have a larger impact 6) KoLeo Regularization: We investigated the impact of
on the overall metric. In contrast, for micro-averaged top1- KoLeo regularization, which uses a parameter λ to control
acc, the inclusion of less frequent domains has minimal effect its strength. Although KoLeo was originally designed [39]
on the overall metric. Moreover, top1-acc is higher with to improve embedding discretization—a step we do not
sampled domains because there are fewer misclassifications perform—we observed that without this regularization, trainin the region of the most frequent domains. Among these ing diverges before completing the 30 training epochs. Table V
domains, there are a lot of similar ones that are prone to
 8 The faiss library, which we use for database ranking, supports GPU
 7 We acknowledge that reusing validation domains for testing deviates from indexes that offer a 5× - 10× performance boost compared to CPU
our defined evaluation protocol; however, we did so only in this experiment implementations. https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-on-theto demonstrate performance across a wider range of classes. GPU.
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1657

 TABLE V
 KO L EO R EGULARIZATION I MPACT 3) Fine-Tuned Model: The fine-tuning method uses a linear
 classification head and allows the entire 30pktTCNET backbone to be updated during training on the downstream task.
 Fine-tuning was performed over 50 epochs using the AdamW
 optimizer and a cosine learning rate schedule with a warm-up
 phase. All BatchNorm layers were kept in evaluation mode
compares the results with (λ = 1) and without (λ = 0) KoLeo. to preserve the batch statistics learned during pretraining. For
When KoLeo was used, the best validation performance each downstream task, we conducted a hyperparameter search
was achieved later in training, indicating the neural network over the learning rate, warm-up length, batch size, dropout rate
continued improving over more epochs. The later peak in of the classification head, and the pooling operation (allowing
validation performance suggests that KoLeo contributes to the original GeM pooling to be replaced with either max or
a more stable training process and enhances resistance to average pooling). Hyperparameters were selected based on
overfitting. However, the performance gains are modest: a validation performance on the first data split.
0.32% improvement in recall and a 0.07% in top1-acc. If not addressed during fine-tuning, a neural network starts
 to forget its original capabilities and the general knowledge
 acquired during the pretraining task. To mitigate this, we
 V. T RANSFER TO D OWNSTREAM T RAFFIC
 implemented three fine-tuning techniques. (a) We use lower
 C LASSIFICATION TASKS
 learning rates for deeper layers [41], which extract low-
 To assess how well the proposed Φ embedding function level traffic patterns analogous to edges and shapes in image
pretrained on domain recognition generalizes, we evaluated it processing. Along with other hyperparameters, we optimize
on ten established TC tasks and compared its performance to a multiplicative factor, LR_mult ∈ (0, 1], which scales the
published SOTA results. We tested three transfer methods for learning rate of the backbone’s residual blocks based on their
each task: a k-NN classifier with fixed embeddings, a linear depth, using the formula: LRblock = LR × LR_mult depth .
classifier with fixed embeddings (known as linear probing), (b) We applied L2 Starting Point (L2SP) regularization [42], a
and a linear classifier with fine-tuning of the embedding technique designed to mitigate catastrophic forgetting (i.e., the
model. For each task, we also trained the same model from loss of knowledge from previous tasks). It adds a regularization
scratch in order to isolate the performance gains of the transfer term based on the L2 distance between the current model
learning methods. Furthermore, we measured the performance weights and the original pretrained weights (the starting
of the input-space baseline, which was defined in Section IV-B. point). This discourages large deviations from the pretrained
Overall, we report six measurements for each downstream TC weights, helps retain prior knowledge, and reduces overfitting
task: SOTA, input-space baseline, training from scratch, k-NN on downstream tasks with limited training data. (c) A related
transfer method, linear probing, and embeddings fine-tuning. but more recent method, called L2 Distance in Feature Space
The following sections describe transfer methods, provide an (LDIFS) [43], adds a regularization term based on the L2
overview of the used datasets, and discuss results. distance between embeddings of the current batch created
 with the original (pretrained) model and the updated model.
A. Transfer Methods This encourages alignment between the original and fine-tuned
 For all transfer methods, we used “intermediate embed- feature spaces. While Mukhoti et al. [43] applied LDIFS to
dings” of the Φ embedding function, taken after the global preserve intermediate features, we found that focusing on final
pooling and before the feature refinement block (see Figure 3). features was sufficient for our use case. Both L2SP and LDIFS
Features from deeper layers capture more general patterns and are controlled with regularization strength hyperparameters,
consistently offered better results for all tested methods. where setting the value to zero disables the corresponding
 1) k-NN Transfer With Fixed Embeddings: For the k-NN regularization. For downstream tasks with larger training sets
transfer method, we created embeddings for all samples of (CESNET-TLS22, AppClassNet, MIRAGE19), neither reguthe given downstream task, trained a k-NN classifier on larization term was necessary. Three tasks benefited from a
embeddings of the training set, and evaluated it on the test combination of both techniques, while the remaining tasks
set. Predictions were based on the label of the closest training achieved the best fine-tuned performance using LDIFS alone.
sample in the embedding space, and we did not use the λdb
semi-balancing technique. B. Code and Pretrained Model Availability
 2) Linear Probing With Fixed Embeddings: For linear
 We published the embedding model and its pretrained
probing, the setup was the same as for the k-NN method: we
 weights in the CESNET Models framework [44] under the
generated embeddings for the downstream task and trained
 name 30pktTCNET_256. The architecture code is available
a linear classifier on them. For smaller datasets (all except
 on GitHub.9 To select the best model (one specific set of
CESNET-TLS22 and AppClassNet), we used an exact solver
 weights), we chose the one with the highest sum of validation
from scikit-learn to fit the classifier, while for the large
 and test recalls on the domain recognition task, considering all
datasets, we used a single PyTorch Linear layer and impletraining runs with the final hyperparameter configuration. Prior
mented a simple training loop for it. Using the exact solver
provided performance gains of around 1%, but it did not 9 https://github.com/CESNET/cesnet-models/blob/main/cesnet_models/
converge in a reasonable time on large datasets. architectures/multimodal_cesnet_enhanced.py
1658 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

to transfer to downstream tasks, we made a single modification part of tcbench. Aceto et al. [5] published this dataset in 2019,
to the model, targeting the packet size embedding technique providing JSON files containing traffic capture experiments.
implemented in the model stem.10 Thanks to the model’s The authors of tcbench processed the JSON files, removed
publication and the availability of open-source tools that background traffic, and discarded flows with fewer than
provide access to the datasets, all transfer learning experiments 10 packets. This curation resulted in 64k samples, which
presented in this section are reproducible. To support this, we were then used to create five 80/10/10 train/validation/test
have published our transfer learning codebase,11 which enables splits. For SOTA comparison, we rely on results reported by
replication of the results presented in Tables VI and VII. Wang et al. [24]. Even though the authors do not explicitly
 mention using tcbench data, their dataset curation, preprocess-
C. Datasets ing steps, and splits are identical to those of tcbench. To be
 certain, we contacted the authors of both [24] and tcbench,
 To evaluate transfer learning methods, we used seven who confirmed it. Therefore, their experiments and ours are
additional datasets: ISCXVPN2016 [4], MIRAGE19 [5], based on identical data, making the results suitable for direct
MIRAGE22 [6], UTMOBILENET21 [7], UCDAVIS19 [8], comparison.
CESNET-TLS22 [1], and AppClassNet [9], covering ten MIRAGE22: Guarino et al. [6] introduced this mobile traffic
classification tasks in total. To streamline dataset handling, dataset in 2022, focusing on video meeting apps like Zoom,
we used the tcbench12 framework, which provides four Webex, and Teams. It includes traffic from nine Android
datasets: MIRAGE19, MIRAGE22, UTMOBILENET21, and applications. As the name suggests, MIRAGE22 comes from
UCDAVIS19. These datasets are cleaned, pre-filtered when the same research group as MIRAGE19, and therefore the
necessary, and include prepared train/validation/test splits. tcbench curation process is identical. For SOTA comparison,
Overall, tcbench significantly simplified cross-dataset evalu- we rely on the best results reported by Wang et al. [24].
ation and saved us considerable time. CESNET-TLS22 was UTMOBILENET21: A mobile traffic dataset containing 17
obtained via the CESNET DataZoo toolset [45], AppClassNet Android applications, with user interactions emulated through
was downloaded from its official Figshare repository [46], and the Android API. Heng et al. [7] published this dataset in 2021,
ISCXVPN2016 was kindly provided by Nascita et al. [31]. providing packet information in CSV format. The authors of
The following sections introduce each dataset and explain how tcbench cleaned the data, assembled flows, filtered flows with
it was used. We also provide related work used for SOTA less than 10 packets (9.5k samples remained), and prepared
comparison, with additional details about SOTA performance five 80/10/10 train/validation/test splits. For SOTA compariavailable in Appendix A. For all datasets, train/validation/test son, we rely on results reported by Finamore et al. [26], which
splits were used as follows: the training set was used to is the paper that introduced the tcbench framework. We can
fit the k-NN classifier, perform linear probing, or fine-tune thus be sure that experiments were performed on identical data
the model—depending on the selected transfer method. The and that the results are suitable for direct comparison.
validation set was used for hyperparameter search, and we UCDAVIS19: A small dataset published in 2019 [8] conreport the average performance across all test splits. taining QUIC traffic of five Google services: Google Drive,
 ISCXVPN2016: A lab-generated traffic dataset that covers Google Docs, Google Search, Google Music, and YouTube. It
three classification tasks: encapsulation (VPN vs. nonVPN), includes a pretraining partition with 6.5k samples and two test
traffic types, and applications. We used the preprocessed ver- sets: human (83 samples) and script (150 samples). Although
sion provided by Nascita et al. [31], where broadcast flows and the small test sets limit the dataset’s representativeness, we
other noisy data were filtered out. We divided the dataset into chose to include it in our evaluation as it is readily available in
ten stratified 60/20/20 train/validation/test splits. For SOTA tcbench. We opted not to use the prepared splits, which consist
comparison, we rely on the results reported by Nascita et al., of class-balanced subsets of the pretraining partition with
who evaluated several models—some leveraging payload (e.g., only 100 samples per class. Instead, we create ten stratified
the multi-modal network DISTILLER-Embeddings [31]), 80/20 train/validation splits. For SOTA comparison, we rely
and others that do not (e.g., the 1D CNN over packet sequences on results reported by Finamore et al. [26].
by Rezaei and Liu [14]). Since we focus on TC solutions that CESNET-TLS22: A large TLS traffic dataset collected from
do not use payload data, we primarily compare against models the backbone lines of CESNET, the Czech national research
operating under this same constraint. and education network. The dataset spans two weeks and
 MIRAGE19: A well-known mobile traffic dataset from the contains 141 million flows categorized into 191 Web service
MIRAGE dataset series. The traffic of this dataset is based classes. Luxemburk and Čejka [1], the dataset authors, used
on real users interactions with 20 Android applications. A the first week for training and the second week for testing—a
private version that contains 40 applications exists but is not time-based train-test split that we adopt in our experiments.
 10 In the model stem, the Embedding layer generates a learned vector
 Ten splits are created, each consisting of 1M training flows
representation for each packet size. However, some packet sizes (e.g., and 100k validation flows sampled from the first week, and
1453–1471, 1473–1500) are never observed during training, leaving their 1M test flows from the second week. For SOTA comparison,
representations untrained. To address this, we assign them the representation we rely on results reported by Fauvel et al. [47].
of the nearest observed packet sizes, except for packet sizes 1–19, which are
given the representation of zero packet size. AppClassNet: A large traffic dataset published in 2022 by
 11 https://github.com/CESNET/tc-transfer Wang et al. [9] that contains 500 applications. It includes two
 12 https://github.com/tcbenchstack/tcbench official splits: one for the top 200 applications and another for
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1659

 TABLE VI
 D OWNSTREAM P ERFORMANCE OF THE T HREE T RANSFER M ETHODS . D ELTAS A RE C OMPUTED R ELATIVE TO T RAINING F ROM S CRATCH ON E ACH
 D OWNSTREAM TASK

 Results are averages across ten splits. For tcbench datasets with five prepared splits, we used each split twice. Standard deviations of linear probing and
 k-NN transfer are omitted to conserve space, but they do not differ considerably from the values shown. All results are classification accuracies.

the remaining 300. We used the top-200 split as follows: the While fine-tuning is the overall best approach, we argue that
original training and validation sets were merged and re-split the k-NN transfer method remains valuable in scenarios with
into ten stratified train/validation partitions (while keeping the limited downstream training data or when fine-tuning is not
test set unchanged). To ensure reasonable experiment runtimes, viable for other reasons. It outperforms training from scratch
each split was then downsampled to 1M training flows, 100k on four tasks and even surpasses SOTA on all tasks except
validation flows, and 1M test flows. Before the release of CESNET-TLS22 and AppClassNet. The strong performance
AppClassNet, its packet sequences were transformed to protect of k-NN transfer demonstrates that even the original, non-finebusiness-sensitive information: feature amplitudes were mod- tuned embeddings generalize well across diverse TC tasks.
ified, and sequences were partially shuffled. Wang et al. [9] 2) Surpassing SOTA: We established that fine-tuning the
evaluated several models on both the original and public entire model is the most effective transfer method. Table VII
(transformed) versions of the dataset; for SOTA comparison, compares this approach to SOTA performance, showing that
we use the results reported on the public version. it surpasses it on nine of the ten downstream TC tasks,
 with an average improvement of 6.4%. In particular, strong
 gains exceeding 5% were achieved on the ISCXVPN2016,
D. Transfer Learning Results MIRAGE19, UTMOBILENET21, and UCDAVIS19 datasets.
 This section presents transfer learning results obtained on The performance on ISCXVPN2016 warrants a closer
ten downstream TC tasks. Section V-D1 and Table VI compare examination. For SOTA comparison, we used a 1D CNN
the three transfer methods with each other and with training model of Rezaei and Liu [14], which does not utilize
from scratch, whereas Section V-D2 and Table VII benchmark payload as input. Nevertheless, our results are close to—
the best-performing transfer method and the input-space base- or even surpass—the strongest SOTA method that does
line against the SOTA. Finally, Section V-D3 discusses the utilize payload data, namely DISTILLER-Embeddings
unexpectedly strong performance of the input-space baseline. from Nascita et al. [31] (results provided in Appendix A).
 1) Ranking of Transfer Methods: The results in Table VI The performance deltas of our fine-tuned model relshow a consistent performance ranking among the transfer ative to DISTILLER-Embeddings are as follows:
methods: linear probing < k-NN transfer < fine-tuned model. applications Δ−2.48%, traffic types Δ−1.52%, encap-
This order holds across all downstream tasks except for sulation Δ+1.36%. This comparison provides a better
the two UCDAVIS19 test sets. When we compare the fine- estimate of the actual value of including payload as model
tuned model—the best transfer approach—with training from input on ISCXVPN2016 and shows that packet-sequencescratch, it performs better on all tasks except for AppClassNet processing and payload-processing models are much closer in
and UCDAVIS19 script test, with an average improvement of performance than previously suggested.
2.1%. Due to its feature transformation process, AppClassNet 3) Surprising Performance of the Input-Space Baseline:
is a hard downstream task where training from scratch is Among the transfer approach, the input-space baseline, and
expected to perform better. In the case of UCDAVIS19, which SOTA methods, we initially expected the input-space baseline
is the smallest dataset evaluated, the application of the LDIFS to perform the worst due to its absolute simplicity. Surprisingly,
regularization technique led to a fine-tuned model that avoided however, it outperforms SOTA on four tasks (ISCXVPN2016
overfitting compared to training from scratch. As a result, it tasks and UTMOBILENET21), delivers worse yet comparable
performed much better on the human test (+11.57%, which performance on three (MIRAGE19, MIRAGE22, and UCDAVIS
comes from a different distribution than the training set) but script), and falls significantly behind only on the remaining
underperformed on the script test (−0.6%, which shares the three (CESNET-TLS22, AppClassNet, and UCDAVIS human).
same distribution as the training set). To the best of our knowledge, this intriguing finding—that a
1660 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 TABLE VII
 C OMPARISON OF THE B EST T RANSFER L EARNING M ETHOD (F INE -T UNED M ODEL ) W ITH SOTA AND THE I NPUT-S PACE BASELINE .
 D ELTAS A RE C OMPUTED R ELATIVE TO SOTA P ERFORMANCE

simple k-NN classifier using features from the first 10 packets In this work, we used semi-balanced sampling to select
performs comparably to SOTA on several datasets—has not one million samples for the database. We believe that a
been reported in prior work and remains largely unexplored more informative strategy for choosing database samples—
within the TC research domain. We emphasize that no dataset- for instance, one guided by clustering—could reduce
specific modifications were made, such as adjusting the number the database size while preserving domain recogniof packets or the IPT scaling factor. If the baseline were tuned tion performance by prioritizing highly discriminative
for each dataset, its performance could likely be improved even samples.
further. More research on the input-space baseline needed: Our
 We believe that the underlying cause is the high data redun- motivation for designing a simple baseline and evaluating it
dancy in TC datasets. During dataset collection, it is highly under the same conditions as the Φ embedding function was
probable—or almost certain for script-generated datasets—that to establish a reference point. The results, however, turned
multiple instances of the same network communication are out to be far more intriguing than anticipated. In the crosscaptured, such as repeated API requests sent to the same server dataset evaluation, the baseline achieved performance quite
with identical TCP and TLS configurations. Consequently, TC close to SOTA, even surpassing it for the ISCXVPN2016
datasets often contain numerous near-duplicate samples with and UTMOBILENET21 datasets. Our hypothesis is that the
the same label. When such a dataset is randomly split into data redundancy inherent in TC datasets, when combined
training and test sets, these duplicates can end up in both sets. with random splitting into training and test subsets, makes
In this scenario, it is not surprising that a classifier relying on classification trivial for nearest neighbors search. As this
the closest training sample achieves high performance. observation may influence best practices for constructing and
 splitting TC datasets, further research is required to rigorously
 VI. L IMITATIONS verify it.
 Nearest neighbors search: We want to address potential
performance concerns related to our use of nearest neighbors VII. C ONCLUSION
search for the domain recognition task. In Section IV-D5, we The main objective of this work was to design a universal
measured the ranking speed across different embedding sizes. embedding function suitable for a wide range of TC tasks.
For instance, with an embedding size of 128, the ranking of a We first developed the Φ embedding function for the exact
database containing one million samples achieves a speed of domain recognition task on the CESNET-QUIC22 dataset and
10k samples per second. This speed is made possible thanks then evaluated how well it generalizes to other TC datasets. To
to faiss, which provides efficient methods for finding nearest summarize the core components of the proposed embedding
neighbors and can even run on GPUs for faster processing. function: (a) the CNN-based feature extractor that embeds
In this work, we opted to use the IndexFlatIP index that packet features before processing with ResNet-like blocks;
provides exact ranking results. However, faiss also offers other (b) the ArcFace loss, which enhances class separation by
indexes that provide a trade-off between ranking speed and the pulling samples toward class centers while enforcing angular
precision of nearest neighbors search. Thus, if higher ranking margins; and (c) a nearest neighbors classifier using cosine
speeds were needed, a natural solution would be to use an distance in the embedding space.
index with faster ranking, such as IndexIVFFlat13 , at the The domain recognition task is a significant challenge,
cost of losing the guarantee of exact and exhaustive results. particularly when monitoring networks with high volumes
 Database construction: A further opportunity for
improvement lies in the database construction process. 13 https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-indexes
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1661

 TABLE VIII
 D OWNSTREAM TASK P ERFORMANCE U SING W EIGHTS T RAINED F ROM S CRATCH ON S OURCE TASKS , R EPLACING THE O RIGINAL D OMAIN
 R ECOGNITION W EIGHTS . T HE L AST ROW P RESENTS L INEAR P ROBING R ESULTS OF THE O RIGINAL M ODEL F ROM TABLE VI.
 R ESULTS A RE AVERAGES OF C LASSIFICATION ACCURACIES ACROSS F IVE S PLITS

of TLS and QUIC traffic protected by the ECH extension, A. Future Directions
which encrypts entire ClientHello messages and hides SNI We conclude this paper by outlining future directions and
domains from network operators. We tackled this task in discussing the advantages of leveraging a network flow’s
a setup where domain names were disjoint across training, neighborhood in the embedding space. Producing a ranked
validation, and test sets, which forced the embedding function list of the N closest samples—i.e., the most similar flows
to learn traffic patterns that generalize to unseen domains. previously observed—offers flexibility in how the results
After an extensive hyperparameter search and tuning of are processed into final predictions. For example, server IP
our training pipeline and model architecture, we achieved a addresses or AS numbers could be used for additional postclassification accuracy of 94.83% and a recall of 79.35%, filtering of the neighborhood. We see this as a reasonable
which we consider a strong outcome considering the diffi- direction for combining IP-related information with traffic
culty of the disjoint-class setup. The proposed architecture shape characteristics. The ranking output also includes dismaintained a high throughput of 33k embedding inferences tance values that can support out-of-distribution detection:
per second on a single Nvidia Tesla T4. We also conducted if all nearest samples exceed a predefined threshold, the
six ablations, each focusing on a specific component to prediction could be rejected or adjusted, for example by
assess its contribution to the overall solution. Notably, the selecting the most common second-level domain in the neighcombination of training and database semi-balancing samplers, borhood instead of the full domain prediction. Moreover,
along with the PLE initialization method for packet size predictions based on the most similar samples are inherently
and IPT Embedding layers, proved crucial for achieving high more interpretable, as they are accompanied by concrete examrecall. ples, even though the embeddings themselves are produced
 We then transferred the Φ embedding function to by a closed-box neural network. Finally, we believe that flow
seven TC datasets: ISCXVPN2016, MIRAGE19, MIRAGE22, embeddings hold promise for other network monitoring tasks
UTMOBILENET21, UCDAVIS19, CESNET-TLS22, and such as device profiling and identification.
AppClassNet. The transfer learning approach proved to
be highly successful, beating SOTA performance on nine
 A PPENDIX A
of ten downstream TC tasks. Strong gains exceeding
 S TATE - OF - THE -A RT C OMPARISON
5% were achieved on the ISCXVPN2016, MIRAGE19,
UTMOBILENET21, and UCDAVIS19 datasets. Overall, the For each dataset, we reference the prior work used for
embedding function demonstrated strong generalization across the SOTA comparison. We specify the evaluation metric
all tested tasks. To our knowledge, no similar transfer learning and indicate the exact tables from which information on
achievements have been reported in the TC domain. We the best-performing classifiers was obtained. In some cases,
conclude that the domain recognition task, on which we measurements from multiple tables must be combined to
developed and trained the embedding function, is well suited provide the best achieved result reported in the cited work.
for the pretraining of TC models due to its complexity, ISCXVPN2016, accuracy – Table III of Nascita et al. [31].
large number of classes, and straightforward labeling process. We primarily compare to a model that does not utilize
An additional experiment presented in Appendix B evaluates payload as input, “1D-CNN (PSQ)”, which achieves
individual TC tasks for pretraining, and the results indi- 85.45% on the Encapsulation task, 65.56% on the
cate that domain recognition clearly outperforms the other Traffic Type task, and 63.92% on the Application
tasks. task. In Section V-D2, we also compare to the
1662 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOLUME 23, 2026

 DISTILLER-Embeddings model, likewise reported An open question is whether domain recognition itself
 in Table III of Nascita et al. [31]. This payload- constitutes an effective pretraining task, or whether the
 processing model achieves 93.01% on the Encapsulation ArcFace-based training pipeline described in Section III is
 task, 81.71% on the Traffic Type task, and 79.92% on the primary driver behind the strong transfer performance.
 the Application task. Evaluating and tuning the training pipeline for all source tasks
MIRAGE19, weighted F1-score – Table VII of is, however, beyond the scope of this paper. Nonetheless,
 Wang et al. [24]. Deltas from this table need to be added we conclude that the combination of domain recognition—
 to the baseline performance of 75.43%. The best result as a challenging task with hundreds of classes—and our
 is “MaskedStack (p = 0.7)” with 80.06% (75.43% + optimized training pipeline produces features that are effective
 4.63%). across all tested downstream tasks. Based on the preliminary
MIRAGE22, weighted F1-score – Table VII of experiments presented here, such effectiveness is difficult to
 Wang et al. [24]. Deltas from this table need to be added achieve through pretraining on other source tasks.
 to the baseline performance of 94.92%. The best result
 is “MaskedStack (p = 0.3)” with 97.18% (94.92% + R EFERENCES
 2.26%).
UTMOBILENET21, weighted F1-score – Table VIII of [1] J. Luxemburk and T. Čejka, “Fine-grained TLS services classification
 with reject option,” Comput. Netw., vol. 220, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 109467.
 Finamore et al. [26]. The best result for the >10pkts [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2022.109467
 version is “Time shift” with 81.91%. [2] J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek, and T. Čejka, “Encrypted traffic classification:
UCDAVIS19, accuracy – Table VII of Finamore et al. [26], The QUIC case,” in Proc. 7th Netw. Traffic Meas. Anal. Conf. (TMA),
 2023, pp. 1–10.
 which reports results for an enlarged training set. The [3] J. Luxemburk, K. Hynek, T. Čejka, A. Lukačovič, and P. Šiška,
 best result on the human test set is “SimCLR + fine- “CESNET-QUIC22: A large one-month QUIC network traffic dataset
 tuning” with 80.45%. For the script test set, the best from backbone lines,” Data Brief , vol. 46, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 108888.
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2023.108888
 result is “Packet loss” with 98.63%. [4] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
CESNET-TLS22, accuracy – Table V of Fauvel et al. [47]. “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
 The best result of 97.2% is achieved with the LEXNet features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Security Privacy, 2016,
 pp. 407–414.
 architecture. [5] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapé,
AppClassNet, accuracy – Table III of Wang et al. [9]. The “MIRAGE: Mobile-app traffic capture and ground-truth creation,” in
 best result of 88.3% on the public version of the dataset Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Security (ICCCS), 2019, pp. 1–8.
 [6] I. Guarino, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and
 is achieved with random forest. A. Pescapè, “Contextual counters and multimodal deep learning
 for activity-level traffic classification of mobile communication apps
 during COVID-19 pandemic,” Comput. Netw., vol. 219, Dec. 2022,
 A PPENDIX B Art. no. 109452.
 P RETRAINING × D OWNSTREAM TASK M ATRIX [7] Y. Heng, V. Chandrasekhar, and J. G. Andrews,
 “UTMobileNetTraffic2021: A labeled public network traffic dataset,”
 To further assess the strength of domain recognition as a IEEE Netw. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 156–160, Sep. 2021.
pretraining task, we used individual TC tasks for pretraining [8] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “How to achieve high classification accuracy with
instead of domain recognition. Specifically, we used models just a few labels: A semi-supervised approach using sampled packets,”
 2020, arXiv:1812.09761.
trained from scratch (those reported in the From Scratch [9] C. Wang, A. Finamore, L. Yang, K. Fauvel, and D. Rossi, “AppClassNet:
column of Table VI). We then performed linear probing to A commercial-grade dataset for application identification research,”
evaluate how well these models transfer to other tasks. In ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 19–27,
 Jul. 2022.
other words, for each row in Table VIII, we repeated the linear [10] F. Radenović, G. Tolias, and O. Chum, “Fine-tuning CNN image
probing experiment described in Section V-A, but replaced the retrieval with no human annotation,” 2018, arXiv:1711.02512v2.
original model weights obtained via domain recognition with [11] Y. Gorishniy, I. Rubachev, and A. Babenko, “On embeddings for
 numerical features in tabular deep learning,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2022,
weights trained from scratch on the source task. pp. 24991–25004.
 We did not perform cross-transfer among the three [12] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A
ISCXVPN2016 tasks, as this would risk data snooping given contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2022,
our experimental setup with separate train/validation/test splits pp. 633–642.
for these tasks. We chose linear probing for this experiment [13] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
because it provides a straightforward interpretation of the based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 37th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. 35th Conf. Innov. Appl. Artif. Intell. 13th
results: it measures how linearly separable the features trans- Symp. Educ. Adv. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 5420–5427. [Online]. Available:
ferred across TC tasks are. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i4.25674
 [14] S. Rezaei and X. Liu, “Multitask learning for network traffic classification,” in Proc. 29th Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. (ICCCN), 2020,
A. Results pp. 1–9.
 The results indicate that pretraining on other datasets pro- [15] G. Bovenzi, D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè,
 “Classifying attack traffic in IoT environments via few-shot learnduces features that do not generalize well. Larger datasets, ing,” J. Inf. Security Appl., vol. 83, Jun. 2024, Art. no. 103762.
such as CESNET-TLS22 and AppClassNet, achieve some- [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
what comparable performance but still lag behind domain S2214212624000656
 [16] D. Di Monda, A. Montieri, V. Persico, P. Voria, M. De Ieso, and A. Pescapè,
recognition pretraining by approximately 5–10%. Smaller “Few-shot class-incremental learning for network intrusion detection
datasets perform poorly as pretraining tasks in this setup. systems,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 5, pp. 6736–6757, 2024.
LUXEMBURK et al.: UNIVERSAL EMBEDDING FUNCTION FOR TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 1663

[17] D. D. Monda, G. Bovenzi, A. Montieri, V. Persico, and A. Pescapè, [40] L. Yang, A. Finamore, F. Jun, and D. Rossi, “Deep learning and
 “IoT botnet-traffic classification using few-shot learning,” in Proc. IEEE zero-day traffic classification: Lessons learned from a commercial-
 Int. Conf. Big Data (BigData), 2023, pp. 3284–3293. grade dataset,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4,
[18] Y. Tian, Y. Wang, D. Krishnan, J. B. Tenenbaum, and P. Isola, pp. 4103–4118, Dec. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/
 “Rethinking few-shot image classification: A good embedding is all you tnsm.2021.3122940
 need?” 2020, arXiv:2003.11539. [41] X. Dong et al., “CLIP itself is a strong fine-tuner: Achieving 85.7%
[19] V. Tong et al., “Encrypted traffic classification through deep domain and 88.0% top-1 accuracy with ViT-B and ViT-L on ImageNet,” 2022,
 adaptation network with smooth characteristic function,” IEEE Trans. arXiv:2212.06138.
 Netw. Service Manag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 331–343, Feb. 2025. [42] X. Li, Y. Grandvalet, and F. Davoine, “Explicit inductive bias for
[20] L. Gioacchini et al., “Cross-network embeddings transfer for traffic anal- transfer learning with convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 ysis,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2686–2699, Represent. (ICLR), 2018, pp. 1–12.
 Jun. 2024. [43] J. Mukhoti, Y. Gal, P. Torr, and P. K. Dokania, “Fine-tuning can cripple
[21] L. Gioacchini, L. Vassio, M. Mellia, I. Drago, Z. B. Houidi, and D. Rossi, your foundation model; preserving features may be the solution,” in
 “DarkVec: automatic analysis of darknet traffic with word embeddings,” Proc. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., 2024, pp. 1–26. [Online]. Available:
 in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Emerg. Netw. Exp. Technol., 2021, pp. 76–89. https://openreview.net/forum?id=kfhoeZCeW7
 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3485983.3494863 [44] J. Luxemburk and K. Hynek, “Towards reusable models in traffic
[22] I. Guarino, C. Wang, A. Finamore, A. Pescapè, and D. Rossi, “Many classification,” in Proc. 8th Netw. Traffic Meas. Anal. Conf. (TMA), 2024,
 or few samples? Comparing transfer, contrastive and meta-learning in pp. 1–4.
 encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 7th Netw. Traffic Meas. Anal. [45] J. Luxemburk and K. Hynek, “DataZoo: Streamlining traffic classifi-
 Conf.(TMA), 2023, pp. 1–10. cation experiments,” in Proc. Explainable Safety Bounded, Fidelitous,
[23] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” 2020, Mach. Learn. Netw., 2023, pp. 3–7. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/
 arXiv:2004.11362. 10.1145/3630050.3630176
[24] C. Wang, A. Finamore, P. Michiardi, M. Gallo, and D. Rossi, [46] D. Rossi, “AppClassNet—A commercial-grade dataset for
 “Data augmentation for traffic classification,” in Passive and Active application identification research,” Aug. 2022. [Online]. Available:
 Measurement. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Nat., 2024, pp. 159–186. https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/AppClassNet_-_A_commercial-
 [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-56249-5_7 grade_dataset_for_application_identification_research/20375580
[25] R. Xie et al., “Rosetta: Enabling robust TLS encrypted traffic clas- [47] K. Fauvel, F. Chen, and D. Rossi, “A lightweight, efficient and
 sification in diverse network environments with TCP-Aware traffic explainable-by-design convolutional neural network for Internet traffic
 augmentation,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Security Symp. (USENIX classification,” in Proc. KDD, 2023, pp. 4013–4023.
 Security), Aug. 2023, pp. 625–642.
[26] A. Finamore, C. Wang, J. Krolikowski, J. M. Navarro, F. Chen, and
 D. Rossi, “Replication: Contrastive learning and data augmentation in Jan Luxemburk He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
 traffic classification using a FlowPic input representation,” in Proc. IMC, degree with the Faculty of Information Technology,
 2023, pp. 36–51. Czech Technical University in Prague. He is a
[27] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: A generic representation for Researcher with CESNET. His research focuses on
 encrypted traffic classification and applications identification,” IEEE applying deep learning to network traffic monitoring,
 Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1218–1232, Jun. 2021. particularly on classifying encrypted TLS and QUIC
[28] E. Horowicz, T. Shapira, and Y. Shavitt, “A few shots traffic classification traffic using packet-level metadata sequences. He
 with mini-FlowPic augmentations,” in Proc. 22nd ACM Internet Meas. contributed to the design of large-scale traffic collec-
 Conf., 2022, pp. 647–654. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/ tion infrastructure at CESNET and curated several
 3517745.3561436 publicly available datasets, including CESNET-
[29] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. Jégou, “Billion-scale similarity search with TLS22 and CESNET-QUIC22.
 GPUs,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 535–547, Jul. 2021.
[30] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and Karel Hynek received the Ph.D. degree from the
 A. Pescapé, “XAI meets mobile traffic classification: Understanding and Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical
 improving multimodal deep learning architectures,” IEEE Trans. Netw. University in Prague. He is a Researcher with
 Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4225–4246, Dec. 2021. CESNET, the Czech national research and education
[31] A. Nascita, A. Montieri, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, V. Persico, and network. His expertise lies in network security, with
 A. Pescapé, “Improving performance, reliability, and feasibility in an emphasis on high-speed monitoring and ISP-scale
 multimodal multitask traffic classification with XAI,” IEEE Trans. Netw. protection systems. His research outputs, such as
 Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1267–1289, Jun. 2023. traffic classifiers, detectors, and data exporters, are
[32] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for actively deployed to support and protect a production
 image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. ISP monitoring infrastructure.
 (CVPR), 2016, pp. 770–778.
[33] S. Chopra, R. Hadsell, and Y. LeCun, “Learning a similarity metric Richard Plný is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree
 discriminatively, with application to face verification,” in Proc. IEEE with the Faculty of Information Technology, Czech
 Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), vol. 1, 2005, Technical University in Prague. His research focuses
 pp. 539–546. on explainable network traffic classification based on
[34] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “FaceNet: A unified heterogeneous methods and data fusion. He is also a
 embedding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Researcher with CESNET, where he works on threat
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2015, pp. 815–823. detection in large ISP-level networks, including the
 [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298682 identification of cryptomining activity.
[35] J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue, and S. Zafeiriou, “ArcFace: Additive angular
 margin loss for deep face recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), 2019, pp. 4685–4694.
[36] H. Wang et al., “CosFace: Large margin cosine loss for deep face
 recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Tomáš Čejka is an Associate Professor with the
 2018, pp. 5265–5274. Faculty of Information Technology, Czech Technical
[37] J. Deng, J. Guo, T. Liu, M. Gong, and S. Zafeiriou, “Sub-center ArcFace: University in Prague. His research is centered around
 Boosting face recognition by large-scale noisy Web faces,” in Proc. 16th high-speed network traffic monitoring and analysis.
 Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020, pp. 741–757. [Online]. Available: https:// He founded the NETMON Laboratory, where he
 doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58621-8_43 supervises bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral stu-
[38] Q. Ha, B. Liu, F. Liu, and P. Liao, “Google landmark recognition 2020 dents. He also serves as the Head of a Research
 competition third place solution,” 2020, arXiv:2010.05350. Department with CESNET, the operator of the Czech
 national research and education network.
[39] A. Sablayrolles, M. Douze, C. Schmid, and H. Jégou, “Spreading vectors
 for similarity search,” 2019, arXiv:1806.03198.