2040 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 Unraveling Spatio-Temporal Foundation Models via
 the Pipeline Lens: A Comprehensive Review
 Yuchen Fang, Hao Miao , Yuxuan Liang , Member, IEEE, Liwei Deng , Yue Cui ,
 Ximu Zeng , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Yuyang Xia, Yan Zhao , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Torben Bach Pedersen , Senior Member, IEEE, Christian S. Jensen , Fellow, IEEE,
 Xiaofang Zhou , Fellow, IEEE, and Kai Zheng , Senior Member, IEEE

 (Survey Paper)

 Abstract—Spatio-temporal data proliferates in numerous presents a novel data property taxonomy to divide existing methods
real-world domains, such as transportation, weather, and energy. according to data sources and dependencies, providing efficient and
Spatio-temporal deep learning models aims to utilize useful effective model design and selection for researchers. On this basis,
patterns in such data to support tasks like prediction, imputation, we further illustrate the training objectives of primitive models, as
and anomaly detection. However, previous one-to-one deep learning well as the adaptation techniques of transferred models. Overall,
models designed for specific tasks typically require separate our survey provides a clear and structured pipeline to understand
training for each use case, leading to increased computational and the connection between core elements of spatio-temporal
storage costs. To address this issue, one-to-many spatio-temporal foundation models while guiding researchers to get started quickly.
foundation models have emerged, offering a unified framework Additionally, we introduce emerging opportunities such as multicapable of solving multiple spatio-temporal tasks. These foundation objective training in the field of spatio-temporal foundation models,
models achieve remarkable success by learning general knowledge providing valuable insights for researchers and practitioners.
with spatio-temporal data or transferring the general capabilities
of pre-trained language models. While previous surveys have Index Terms—Foundation models, spatio-temporal data, preexplored spatio-temporal data and methodologies separately, they training, adaptation.
have ignored a comprehensive examination of how foundation
models are designed, selected, pre-trained, and adapted. As a result,
the overall pipeline for spatio-temporal foundation models remains
 I. INTRODUCTION
unclear. To bridge this gap, we innovatively provide an up-to-date
review of previous spatio-temporal foundation models from the PATIO-TEMPORAL data are continuously generated from
pipeline perspective. The pipeline begins with an introduction
to different types of spatio-temporal data, followed by details of
data preprocessing and embedding techniques. The pipeline then
 S various real-world domains including transportation, energy, and weather. These data inherently exhibit an intricate
 temporal evolution over time and complex spatial interactions
 across different regions [1]. Various types of spatio-temporal
 Received 6 May 2025; revised 3 November 2025; accepted 26 December data (e.g., trajectory data, traffic data, and video data) share
2025. Date of publication 12 January 2026; date of current version 13 February
2026. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 62472068, in part common challenges in capturing spatio-temporal dependencies,
by the Municipal Government of Quzhou under Grant 2024D036, and in part requiring specialized methods to competently extract inherent
by DFF Inge Lehmann under Grant 4303-00014. Recommended for acceptance correlations. The mining and analysis of these spatio-temporal
by Y. Gao. (Corresponding authors: Yan Zhao; Kai Zheng.)
 Yuchen Fang, Ximu Zeng, and Yuyang Xia are with the University of correlations play a crucial role in building intelligent systems,
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, China (e-mail: enabling real-world applications to support decision-making in
fangyuchen@std.uestc.edu.cn; ximuzeng@std.uestc.edu.cn; xiayuyang@std. fundamental tasks including planning, reasoning, and anomaly
uestc.edu.cn).
 Hao Miao is with the The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong detection.
SAR, China (e-mail: hao.miao@polyu.edu.hk). In recent years, considerable progress has been made in
 Yuxuan Liang is with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, spatio-temporal data mining by one-to-one specialized models
Guangzhou Guangzhou 510530, China (e-mail: yuxliang@outlook.com).
 Liwei Deng, Torben Bach Pedersen, and Christian S. Jensen are with Aalborg based on the development of deep learning. These methods
University, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark (e-mail: lide@cs.aau.dk; tbp@cs.aau.dk; lie in the spatio-temporal modeling capabilities of sequential
csj@cs.aau.dk). and spatial neural networks, such as recurrent neural networks
 Yue Cui and Xiaofang Zhou are with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR, China (e-mail: ycuias@cse.ust.hk; (RNNs) [2], Transformers [3], convolution neural networks
zxf@me.com). (CNNs) [4], and graph neural networks (GNNs) [5]. Neverthe-
 Yan Zhao is with the Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of less, addressing the wide range of spatio-temporal tasks across
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen 518100, China (e-mail:
zhaoyan@uestc.edu.cn). diverse applications requires training numerous task-specific
 Kai Zheng is with the University of Electronic Science and Technology models, which demands substantial computational resources
of China, Chengdu 610054, China, and also with the Shenzhen Institute for and incurs significant costs. Fortunately, with the advent of
Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China,
Shenzhen 518100, China (e-mail: zhengkai@uestc.edu.cn). self-supervised learning strategies and the discovery of scaling
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TKDE.2026.3651536 laws [6], foundation models have been designed in the natural
 1041-4347 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2041

 TABLE I
COMPARISON BETWEEN OUR SURVEY AND RELATED SURVEYS. COMMON SPATIO-TEMPORAL DATA CATEGORIES CONSIDERED IN THIS SURVEY—TRAJECTORIES
 (T), EVENTS (E), ST GRIDS (G), VIDEOS (V), AND ST GRAPHS (H). THE CLASSIFICATION CRITERIA ARE DETAILED IN SECTION II. FOR TRAINING PRIMITIVE
MODELS, OBJECTIVES INCLUDE REGRESSION (R), MASKED MODELING (M), CONTRASTIVE (C), AND DIFFUSION (D). MOREOVER, THE ADAPTATION TECHNIQUES
 FOR TRANSFERRED MODELS INCLUDE PROMPT ENGINEERING (P), FEATURE ENHANCEMENT (F), CROSS-DOMAIN ALIGNMENT (A), AND SUPERVISED
 FINE-TUNING (S).

 models. 2) Lack of property consideration: Prior surveys tend to
 adopt coarse-grained classifications of STFMs (e.g., data type
 and deep learning methodology perspectives) without explaining why similar methodologies are applied to different data that
 share common characteristics. These taxonomies ignore deep insights from data properties in selecting or designing foundation
 models. 3) Fragmented presentation: Existing surveys tend to
 discuss spatio-temporal data, foundation models, training objectives, and transfer adaptation techniques in isolation. This siloed
 approach prevents a cohesive understanding of what models, objectives, and adaptation strategies should be utilized for different
 spatio-temporal tasks, datasets, and real-world applications.
 To address the issue of fragmented descriptions, our survey
Fig. 1. The paradigm of spatio-temporal foundation models (STFMs). offers a comprehensive examination of the entire pipeline of
 spatio-temporal foundation models (STFMs), systematically
language processing and computer vision communities to uni- presenting the workflow from data harmonization and model
versally solve multiple tasks through resource-efficient few-shot conception to training, adaptation, and real-world application.
fine-tuning or even resource-free zero-shot prompting without In addition to a brief overview of spatio-temporal data and
additional training [7], [8]. available datasets, our survey—illustrated in the bottom of
 With the remarkable success of foundation models in natural Fig. 2—provides a detailed account of data preprocessing, emlanguage processing (e.g., ChatGPT), the concept of one-to- bedding techniques, and side information associated with varimany foundation models has been introduced as an attractive ous spatio-temporal data categories, thereby completing the first
and promising direction in spatio-temporal communities. As stage of the STFM pipeline: data harmonization. By leveraging
illustrated in Fig. 1, the goal of spatio-temporal foundation side information and appropriate preprocessing methods, the
models is to learn general spatio-temporal knowledge within a quality of spatio-temporal data can be significantly enhanced,
single universal model. This enables the same model to handle a which in turn improves the performance of STFMs. Furtherwide range of spatio-temporal tasks across different applications more, due to the unique characteristics of spatio-temporal data
and objectives, significantly reducing the reliance on numerous such as spatial and temporal dependencies, which differ fundatask-specific models and thus lowering both training and storage mentally from other data types (e.g., language data), embedding
costs. By increasing the training scale of spatio-temporal data techniques play a critical role in aligning data with STFMs.
and using general self-supervised learning objectives to derive These techniques effectively bridge the gap between raw spatioprimitive foundation models, or transferring the general knowl- temporal data and model input representations.
edge of pre-trained foundation models from other fields such The second step of STFM pipelines is to construct models
as natural language processing to derive transferred foundation based on diverse data. To mitigate the confusion brought by the
models, the effectiveness of current spatio-temporal foundation coarse-grained data type or methodology taxonomies, as shown
models has been validated on various tasks, showing the promis- in the middle of Fig. 2, we present a data property taxonomy
ing prospect of the universal framework to advance this field. on STFMs. At the top of our taxonomy, STFMs are classified
 Despite recent improvements of spatio-temporal foundation into two main categories: primitive and transferred models.
models (STFMs), existing surveys on this topic still face several This classification is based on whether the models are trained
key challenges. 1) Weak linkage between data and models: directly on primitive spatio-temporal data or transferred from
As illustrated in Table I, while previous surveys do describe models that are pre-trained on other data, such as text-based
various categories of spatio-temporal data, they often overlook language models or image-based vision models. Furthermore,
critical steps in the data harmonization process such as em- we divide not only primitive models into temporal, spatial,
bedding techniques. This omission creates confusion regarding and spatio-temporal classes according to clear data dependenhow spatio-temporal data is effectively aligned with foundation cies, but also transferred models into vision, language, and
2042 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 2. The pipeline of STFMs.

multi-modal classes based on the available data modalities. The more holistic perspective on available data sources and their
data property taxonomy provides efficient and effective model corresponding model training and adaptation methods. Finally,
design and selection because deep learning methods used for we discuss the current challenges facing STFMs and explore
the same category under our taxonomy are based on the same future opportunities for advancing the field.
data sources, dependencies, or modalities and can be extended The main contributions of this survey are summarized as
to other data types. follows.
 The third stage of STFM pipelines delves into training ob- r Comprehensive and up-to-date review. Our paper presents
jectives for primitive models and adaptation techniques for the most extensive and current survey of spatio-temporal
transferred models, as shown in the top of Fig. 2. Through an in- foundation models (STFMs), covering a broad spectrum
depth analysis of these methodologies, we highlight their respec- of data types, models, training objectives, and adaptation
tive advantages and challenges across different data categories, techniques.
tasks, or application scenarios. In the final stage of the pipeline, r Novel property taxonomy. We propose an innovative data
we examine the current applications of STFMs, showcasing property taxonomy that categorizes STFMs from coarse to
their broad real-world impact across domains such as energy, fine levels based on data sources and their dependencies,
finance, weather, healthcare, transportation, and public services, enabling more efficient and effective model design and
as illustrated in Fig. 1. selection.
 By presenting clear and step-by-step pipelines, our survey not r Novel pipeline-oriented survey. To the best of our knowlonly organizes and clarifies the core components of STFMs but edge, this is the first survey to examine STFMs from a
also highlights the deeper connections between them, facilitating pipeline perspective, offering the research community a
the rapid and effective deployment of these models. Moreover, systematic understanding of how these models are develas shown in Table I, existing surveys often overlook key aspects oped and why they achieve superior performance.
such as essential spatio-temporal data types, training objectives, r Identification of future research opportunities. We outline
and adaptation techniques, resulting in an incomplete under- key challenges in applying foundation models to spatiostanding of STFMs. Our survey addresses this gap by covering temporal tasks, with the goal of guiding future research
the most comprehensive range of these elements, providing a and inspiring the development of more advanced STFMs.
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2043

 The structure of our survey is as follows. We begin by review- TABLE II
 SUMMARY OF NOTATION
ing the crucial data harmonization process in Section II. Following this, Section III focuses on the model design and training
objectives of primitive foundation models. Next, in Section IV,
we delve into transferred foundation models, exploring model
selection and transfer adaptation. Section V introduces a broad
range of applications where spatio-temporal foundation models have demonstrated significant impact. Beyond the pipeline
aspects, Section VI identifies emerging opportunities and open
research challenges in the field. Finally, Section VII provides a
conclusion of the key components of our survey.

 II. DATA HARMONIZATION
 As shown in the bottom of Fig. 2, data harmonization is the
first step of pipelines to align raw spatio-temporal data with deep
learning methods, which have three important components. The
 A. Trajectory Data
left element is preprocessing, which demonstrates data standardization (e.g., noise filtering) and feature extraction (e.g., tempo- 1) Data Description: Spatio-temporal trajectory data, such
ral pattern decoupling) processes. The middle element is embed- as vehicle and pedestrian trajectories, refer to sequences of
ding, which transforms preprocessed data into low-dimensional movement locations recorded with specific timestamps by edge
numerical representations, including tokenization techniques to devices like mobile phones, which can be formulated as X =
break data into smaller units, spatial embeddings to capture spa- {(lt , τt )|t = 1, 2, . . ., N } ∈ RN ×3 , where lt = (lngt , latt ) detial relationships, temporal embeddings to encode time-related notes the location of the tth point, τt represents the recorded
features, and frequency embeddings to analyze frequency-based time stamp of the tth point, and N denotes the length of the
characteristics. Moreover, incorporating additional information input trajectory [14], [15], [16].
through retrieval, exogenous data, and multi-modal inputs can 2) Data Preprocessing: To train a foundation model with
further improve the performance of STFMs. The pipelines from high-quality spatio-temporal trajectory data, many data prepreprocessing to embedding generation, enhanced by side in- processing methods have been proposed such as trajectory
formation, create rich and structured representations of data for compression, noise filtering, and map-matching. Specifically,
STFMs. UniTraj [17] filters out meaningless short trajectories and unre-
 However, spatio-temporal data vary widely in format, res- alistic fast trajectories, and PTR [18] inserts placeholder tokens
olution, acquisition methods, and semantics, so the commu- into low-sampling trajectories to transform them into a uniform
nity employs data harmonization practices tailored to each sampling interval. Besides, map-matching techniques [19] are
category. We therefore organize them into five canonical commonly used in many methods [17], [18], [20], [21] to align
categories—trajectory, event, video, spatio-temporal grid, and recorded spatio-temporal trajectories with realistic road network
spatio-temporal graph—using two orthogonal criteria: (i) spatial paths. This is necessary since edge devices used for recording
dynamics and (ii) data acquisition. Spatially, video, ST grid, and trajectories suffer from errors by building obstructions, poor
ST graph data are anchored to fixed spatial units (pixels, cells, phone service, and receiver noise [22].
sensors/nodes), whereas trajectories and events involve moving 3) Data Embedding: To incorporate spatio-temporal patentities or discrete occurrences not tied to a fixed unit. By acqui- terns of individual trajectories into foundation models, varisition, ST grids typically come from satellite or reanalysis prod- ous spatio-temporal embeddings are used in current methods.
ucts, ST graphs from fixed sensor networks or infrastructure, KGTS [23] uses a knowledge graph to bring local spatial invideos from cameras, trajectories from GPS/mobile devices, formation into spatial embeddings, MMTEC [24] provides an
and events from reporting news or logs. These criteria yield index-fetching technique to add spatial semantic information of
distinct representations and feature structures: videos as dense road segments into spatial embeddings, and GTR [25] combines
3-channel sequences on a pixel, ST grids as multi-band fields the graph- and segment-based spatial information as comprehenover regular cells, ST graphs as node time series with irregular sive embeddings. RETE [26] leverages learnable Fourier embedspatial distributions, trajectories as variable-length coordinate ding to capture periodicity in distance and time intervals, and
sequences, and events as sparse time-stamped records with UniTraj [17] uses rotary position embedding [27] to maintain
categorical attributes. Because data formats, feature schemas, spatio-temporal relative positional information of trajectories
and acquisition characteristics differ, preprocessing, embedding, for capturing patterns. Moreover, PTR [18] and START [20]
and auxiliary-information integration strategies are not identical. introduce time-of-day and day-of-week temporal embeddings
Accordingly, we introduce each category in turn below. to assist foundation models in learning personalized behavior
 To improve readability and reduce potential ambiguity, we patterns at specific times. With the assistance of powerful spatioprovide a comprehensive notation table (Table II) that consoli- temporal patterns and travel semantics, trajectory foundation
dates all symbols used throughout the paper. models can be universally adapted to diverse downstream tasks.
2044 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 4) Side Data: To further enhance the understanding of travel for reasoning and prediction. For example, Yuan et al. [39]
semantics in trajectories of foundation models, external text de- utilize an explainable TKG reasoning model, e.g., TLogic [40],
scriptions of locations and POI categories are used as additional to generate reasoning path embeddings between entities s and
information [18], [28]. Moreover, geographic features such as o, and then generate the prediction and explanation by polished
road network data can constrain trajectories to valid routes [29], or revised prompts.
[30] and time-related features such as day-of-week can influence 4) Side Data: Generally, events can be concisely represented
commuting patterns in human mobility trajectories [18]. as quintuples (s, r, o, l, t), denoting the entity, relation, location,
 and time. Such a representation has been commonly employed
 in existing graph-based event forecasting studies [41], [42], as
B. Event Data it effectively captures the structural relationships among events.
 1) Data Description: Spatio-temporal event data, such as Nevertheless, such representations often lack the rich contextual
political events and epidemic outbreaks, refer to a series of information needed for accurate forecasting. To address this
quintuples (s, r, o, l, t), where s and o are entities, r is a binary limitation, researchers incorporate side information, such as
relation between s and o, l, and t indicate the location and retrieved news articles [31] and generated content [39], which
time when event (s, r, o) occurs, respectively. Notably, although provide additional context relevant to specific query events. For
location information is often ignored by existing event-related instance, Yuan et al. [39] devise a prompt-based mechanism to
models, the quintuple formulation provides a more general exploit the generative potential of ChatGPT, thereby generating
representation of an event. Moreover, t is generally a discrete more diverse and coherent context documents in response to a
representation of time, such as day, week, and month, which is given query event. This enriched context helps improve both the
based on the practical requirements of an application. precision and robustness of event forecasting models.
 2) Data Preprocessing: Spatio-temporal event data are often
represented by graph structures to better model the underlying
dependencies among entities and relations. For example, ON- C. Spatio-Temporal Grid Data
SEP [31] uses a temporal knowledge graph (TKG) to struc- 1) Data Description: Spatio-temporal grid data, such as trafture the time-sequenced events as a series of multi-relational fic flow, crime, and weather data, consist of sequential obdirected graphs denoted as T KGt = {G1 , G2 , . . . , Gt }, where servations over regularly partitioned grids that span cities or
each Gi = (V, R, Ei ) consists of the events in time i. Here, V larger geographical areas. These data sequences are typically
and R denote the sets of entities and relation types, respectively, collected from either automated sources (e.g., satellites, sensors)
and Ei contains a set of event quintuples at time stamp t. or human-reported statistics. Formally, this type of data can be
Similarly, Xia et al. [32] explore and incorporate high-order formulated as X ∈ RL×H×W ×C , where xi,j C
 t ∈ R indicates the
historical dependencies in TKGs into large language models to collected features of the grid cell in the ith row and j th column
improve event inference accuracy. Different from these studies at time stamp t. Next, L, H, W , and C denote the length of the
that transform the event forecasting problem into a knowledge sequence, the number of rows in the grid data, the number of
graph completion task, Deng et al. [33] focus on political columns in the grid data, and the number of features collected
event forecasting and instead formulate it as a classification per grid cell, respectively.
problem. Specifically, they divide features into two categories, 2) Data Preprocessing: To address the issue of varying data
i.e., static Sl and dynamic Xt−k+1:t,l , for each location l, and scales in training a foundation model, normalization methods,
aim to learn a classifier f (Sl , Xt−k+1:t,l ) → Yt∗ ,l that maps the such as Z-score [43] and Min-Max [44] normalization, are
input to a binary event vector Yt∗ ,l ∈ {0, 1}M at the future time commonly applied to transform features into a fixed range. To
stamp t∗ for the target location l. Here, Sl denote a set of static reduce computation needs in training foundation models with
features such as population and political ideology, Xt−k+1:t,l high spatial resolutions, a patching technique is used to merge
are the collection of dynamic features for location l before time some adjacent grids into a patch [45]. In detail, the original
stamp t within a historical window, and M indicates the number spatial resolution H × W will be patched into a small feature
of possible event types that can occur concurrently, where the map with the resolution H̄ × W̄ , where H̄ = H W
 h , W̄ = w , and
dynamic features can include TKGs or other data formats. h × w is the size of each patch. Moreover, 3D patching is
 3) Data Embedding: In order to precisely forecast the oc- further adopted on spatio-temporal grid data to merge grids from
currence of an event, various sources of information, including spatio-temporal dimensions simultaneously [44], i.e., the shape
text content and causal relationships among events, need to be L × H × W is patched into L̄ × H̄ × W̄ , where L̄ = Ll and
taken into account. For example, DynamicGCN [34] constructs the patch size is l × h × w. Besides, to extract seasonal and
dynamic graphs based on document-based point-wise mutual trend information, methods like Fast Fourier transform (FFT)
information, where each node represents a word extracted from and daily flashback techniques are often used, capturing essential
an article. These nodes are then encoded with word embedding temporal patterns that enhance model understanding [46], [47].
vectors pre-trained on the Wikipedia database [35]. Recently, 3) Data Embedding: Projection layers are typically used
numerous methods have incorporated large language models to transform numerical spatio-temporal grid data into high-
(LLMs) for event forecasting [31], [32], [36], [37], [38], [39]. dimensional representations. To preserve the order and proxim-
These methods typically encode historical events by prompt ity of spatio-temporal grid data within Transformers, diverse poengineering techniques and use LLM-derived text embeddings sitional embedding techniques are designed, including temporal
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2045

embeddings (e.g., learnable embeddings [43] or sinusoidal en- E. Spatio-Temporal Graph Data
codings [44]) and spatial embeddings (e.g., earth-specific posi-
 1) Data Description: Spatio-temporal graph data, such as
tional biases [45] and ground sample distance embeddings [48]).
 traffic speed, electroencephalography (EEG), and electricity
Moreover, task-specific embeddings are applied to the variability
 data, refer to sequential observations recorded by irregularly
in feature types and dimensions across different datasets and
 distributed sensors in a spatial modeled as graphs. This type of
tasks [49], ensuring flexibility and alignment with different
 data can be defined as X ∈ RL×N ×C , where xnt ∈ RC denotes
tasks.
 the feature vector recorded by sensor n at time stamp t. Next,
 4) Side Data: Spatio-temporal grid tasks incorporate various L, N , and C denote the length of the sequence, the number of
external features, including temporal features like holiday, time observations, and the number of features for each observation.
of day, and day of week; environmental features like temperature
 The key difference between spatio-temporal grid data and graph
and wind speed (beyond the primary input); and spatial features data lies in how spatial correlations are defined. In graph data,
like POI category distributions and structural attributes of road spatial correlations are manually defined by various spatial
networks. These external features are either directly integrated
 metrics rather than relying on explicitly adjacent grid cells, as
into primitive foundation models or converted into textual de- is the case with grid data.
scriptions for transferred foundation models [46], [50].
 2) Data Preprocessing: For learning intricate temporal patterns of spatio-temporal graph data, time series decoupling
 techniques such as wavelet decomposition and seasonal-trend
D. Video Data decomposition procedure based on loess are applied on spatio-
 1) Data Description: Spatio-temporal video data is com- temporal graph data to isolate different temporal patterns and
posed of a series of consecutive images. Each image is formed avoid mutual influence [63], [64], [65]. Moreover, long spatioby regularly spaced pixels with RGB colors, which can be temporal graph sequences are typically selected as input for
formulated as X ∈ RL×H×W ×3 , where xi,j 3
 t ∈ R indicates the
 most STFMs [66], [67], [68]. The input sequence with length
 th th
RGB values of the pixel in the i row and j column of the L is segmented into L̄ non-overlapping patches to decrease the
tth frame. Next, L, H, and W denote the number of frames in complexity of the foundation models, because the information
the video and the spatial resolution (height and width) of each density of original spatio-temporal graph sequences is lower
frame, respectively. than texts, where the temporally patched sequences can be
 2) Data Preprocessing: Similar to spatio-temporal grid data, mathematically formulated as L̄ = Ll , and l denotes the capacity
video data often require patching when processed by models of each patch. Moreover, to efficiently model the spatial dimenwithout the pre-trained vision foundation models [51], where sion of graph data, an irregular spatial patching technique has
the patched shape is L̄ × H̄ × W̄ with the patch size l × h × w. been proposed [69]. Specifically, indices of N observations are
Notably, video data can be directly fed into pre-trained vision reordered so that spatially adjacent observations are arranged
foundation models, e.g., ViT [52], without any preprocessing consecutively, allowing N to be divided into N̄ non-overlapping
operations [53], [54]. patches. This segmentation decreases the complexity of the
 3) Data Embedding: For foundation models that do not use spatial dimension, where the spatially patched sequences can
pre-trained vision backbones, pre-trained tokenization models, be mathematically formulated as N̄ = N n , where n denotes the
such as VQ-GAN and VQ-VAE, should be utilized on the video capacity of each patch.
data to transform raw pixels into discrete embedded tokens [55], 3) Data Embedding: To further enable the foundation mod-
[56]. Alternatively, pre-trained image models, such as CLIP ViT- els to grasp structural and periodic characteristics of spatio-
L/14 [57], are leveraged to process each video frame indepen- temporal graph data, various temporal and spatial embeddings
dently instead of using pre-trained video models to embed pixels have been proposed and integrated as part of the model ininto visual features with temporal semantics [58], [59]. To obtain puts. For example, the learnable point embeddings [66], [67],
LLM-compatible embeddings for video understanding tasks, fixed point embeddings (e.g., day-of-week embeddings [68],
models like pre-trained Q-former from BLIP [60] should be [70], [71]), and power spectral density-based frequency embedapplied on each embedded frame followed by pre-trained image dings [65], [72] have been successively proposed as temporal
models [53], [54]. Moreover, temporal positional embeddings embeddings, serving as one of the model’s input components.
can be added to frame-level representations after embedding In terms of spatial embeddings, sinusoidal embeddings [68], disthe video data since temporal dependencies are often ignored in tance embeddings [73], and eigenvectors-based graph spectral
pre-trained tokenization, vision, and multi-modal models [61]. embeddings [71] are utilized to inject essential spatial structure
 4) Side Data: Video-text pairs from text corpora are essential information into foundation models. By incorporating these
external factors for multi-modal video tasks, such as video spatial, temporal, frequency, and spectral embeddings, spatioquestion answering and video understanding [58], [59]. For temporal graph foundation models gain a deeper understanding
single-modality-based prediction tasks, captions of each frame of the structural and periodic nature of spatio-temporal graph
should be automatically derived through pre-trained vision- data, significantly enhancing their generalization capabilities
language models [62]. Moreover, the audio modality and future across diverse tasks and domains.
action conditions are often considered as auxiliary information 4) Side Data: Similar to spatio-temporal grid tasks, spatioto support video-based tasks [61], [62]. temporal graph tasks also incorporate temporal features like
2046 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 TABLE III
 SUMMARY OF USED DATASETS IN STFMS

holiday, time of day, and day of week and spatial factors like POI wide range of tasks. For spatio-temporal models, which capture
category distributions and structural attributes of road networks. patterns over both space and time, the diversity and richness of
Moreover, as weather is correlated with wind power generation, the data are crucial for effectively identifying complex spatiotemperature and humidity are often used as exogenous variables temporal relationships. As illustrated in Table III, we summarize
in spatio-temporal graph-based power foundation models [74]. the trajectory, event, spatio-temporal grid, video, and spatiotemporal graph datasets adopted across different spatio-temporal
 foundation models, including the spatial size, temporal range,
F. Representative Datasets and Statistics
 sampling interval of the temporal dimension, and the recorded
 The emergent abilities of general-purpose models are heavily features of data.
influenced by the size and quality of the training data. This These datasets are widely used in various real-world applisuggests that as the model encounters more diverse and high- cations, e.g., transportation, weather, healthcare, energy, finanquality data, it becomes more capable of generalizing across a cial, and public services. As shown in Table III, one of the
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2047

significant challenges highlighted is the variability across For spatio-temporal models, spatio-temporal dependencies are
datasets, even within the same application domain (e.g., trans- simultaneously needed because of the significant spatial distinportation or healthcare). For example, spatial size, temporal guishability and temporal patterns of the input data.
range, and sampling intervals can differ widely, making it dif- 1) Temporal Models: A key aspect of primitive spatioficult for a single foundation model to generalize across these temporal foundation models is to capture the complex temporal
differences. This could lead to issues where a model trained on dependencies, such as trend and seasonality [107]. Specifione dataset performs poorly on another due to the mismatched cally, to model short-term temporal dependencies, recurrent
characteristics of the data. The heterogeneity of the datasets adds neural networks, such as GRU [108] and LSTM [109], are
complexity to model training and deployment, as models may often adopted, especially for spatio-temporal trajectory and
struggle to adapt to different scales and granularities of data. graph data [72], [110], [111]. However, recurrent neural net-
Another challenge is the comparison between the scale of spatio- works fall short in capturing long-term temporal dependentemporal datasets and that of LLMs. Spatio-temporal datasets cies [112]. To address this problem, Vanilla Transformer is
tend to be much smaller in scale, often in the million-item utilized in temporal-only foundation models, e.g., TrajFM [113],
range, compared to LLMs, which can be trained on datasets with UniTraj [17], EEGPT [114], and STD-MAE [68], to model
billions of items. This suggests that while LLMs benefit from long-term temporal dependencies. In particular, patch embedmassive amounts of data, spatio-temporal foundation models ding layers are often used before Transformers for long-term
may have limited scalability due to the smaller size and special- spatio-temporal graph data [66], [115], with the aim of reducized nature of the datasets available. The fact that many smaller ing computation costs. Further, the pure MLP architecture is
datasets are used to train these models indicates that scaling them adopted in TTM [116] to substitute Transformers for efficient
up to the same size as LLMs may not be feasible, or at least may long-term time series modeling. In terms of efficient trajectory
not yield the same performance improvements. On the other modeling, the neural controlled differential equation is prohand, the statement about scaling laws also hints at a potential posed in MMTEC [24]. In addition to the above-mentioned
trade-off between data quality and quantity for spatio-temporal discriminative foundation models, diffusion model based methfoundation models. While increasing the quantity of data might ods [117] have also been proposed for generative tasks, e.g., Conimprove a model’s performance, the effectiveness of spatio- trolTraj [30] and Score-CDM [63]. For conditional temporaltemporal models might be more dependent on the quality and only diffusion models, the attention mechanism is widely used
relevance of the data rather than sheer size. This is particularly in the denoising networks to learn temporal patterns from conimportant in fields like healthcare, weather, or transportation, ditional input. For example, ControlTraj [30] and FGTI [64]
where specific domain knowledge and high-quality data may adopt geo-attention and time-frenquency attention to learn road
matter more than the raw scale. In summary, the heterogeneity of constraints in trajectory generation and frequency knowledge
spatio-temporal data poses challenges, and while scaling these in spatio-temporal graph imputation, respectively. Besides, fremodels is important, it’s likely that other factors such as data quency kernel supported global convolution is proposed as the
quality and domain relevance will play a more significant role denoising network in Score-CDM [63] to replace attention for
in improving performance than only increasing dataset size. spatio-temporal graph imputation.
 Beyond architectural considerations, temporal-only models
 III. PRIMITIVE SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS are primarily suited to data whose generative process is dominated by time-evolving dynamics and exhibits clear temporal
 As an essential branch of spatio-temporal foundation models,
 regularities. Typical inputs include ST graph data (e.g., enprimitive models refer to foundation models pre-trained with
 ergy demand, financial indicators, physiological signals such as
primitive spatio-temporal data, which can be generalized across
 EEG/ECG), event sequences, and temporally ordered trajectodifferent downstream tasks. To derive primitive spatio-temporal
 ries when spatial heterogeneity is weak or explicitly controlled.
foundation models, as illustrated in Fig. 2, model architectures
 In these settings, temporal models are appropriate because their
need to be carefully designed based on spatio-temporal properinductive bias emphasizes sequence order, enabling efficient
ties of the embedded data. Then the presented primitive STFM
 representation learning even when spatial coordinates are noisy,
is trained with specific self-supervised learning objectives to
 sparse, or non-informative.
achieve general capabilities according to the input data category
 2) Spatial Models: Topology-constrained spatio-temporal
and the applied downstream task. We present the detailed model
 data often exhibit complex spatial dependencies [118], including
design and objectives below.
 local and global spatial correlations [107]. Local spatial correlations are always reflected by the first law of geography, i.e.,
A. Model Design things that are near are more related than things that are far
 In this study, we present the model design of STFMs according away. Moreover, global spatial correlations also exist in spatioto three categories: temporal models, spatial models, and spatio- temporal data due to the regional functionality. Thus, another
temporal models. For temporal models, spatial dependencies are line of research focuses on capturing spatial correlations by
not taken into account due to insignificant spatial distinguisha- means of foundation models for spatio-temporal data. To model
bility of spatio-temporal data [106]. For spatial models, temporal local spatial dependencies, existing studies often use graph
dependencies are not taken into account because of unclear neural networks in various tasks [119], [120] with a pre-defined
and unstable temporal patterns of spatio-temporal data [106]. topology (e.g., road networks and paths) [121]. However, it is
2048 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

difficult to fully pre-define the complex spatial dependencies by
spatial topologies, where global spatial correlations are often
ignored [99], [118]. To address this problem, Vision Transformers are utilized in foundation models to capture global spatial
dependencies of spatio-temporal grid data [43], [48], [49], [122],
[123]. Further, UniST [44] and PanGu-Weather [124] apply
the Vision Transformer on the 3D-patched grid data to capture
cross-time spatial dependencies. Moreover, FourCastNet [125]
leverages the Fourier neural operator to substitute the attention
mechanism in Transformers for efficient grid data-based global
spatial correlations modeling. To combine the advantages of
graph neural networks and Transformers, G2PTL [73] integrates
the graph Transformer into the geography foundation model,
where the spatial correlation matrix calculated by attention
is refined by a pre-defined spatial topology and thus a more
realistic matrix is derived. Moreover, generative foundation
models with only spatial diffusion are also explored for crime
risk inference [88] and trajectory generation [126]. Specifically, Fig. 3. The regression modeling objective, where and indicate the unknown
 future observation and active parameters, respectively.
the concatenation-based conventional U-Net [88] and the crossattention enhanced U-Net [46] are used in the diffusion model
to capture conditional spatial knowledge of grid data effectively. While integrating spatial and temporal modules can yield
 Models that focus exclusively on spatial dependencies are richer representations, the effectiveness of spatio-temporal fupreferentially applied to data where the principal signal is en- sion depends on data properties and the fusion strategy. Gains
coded in the spatial arrangement, topology, or field structure are most likely when clear temporal patterns coexist with meanand temporal variation is either negligible or can be aggregated. ingful spatial heterogeneity or inter-location coupling, whereas
Representative inputs include static or quasi-static grids (re- weak temporal regularity or spatial indistinguishability can limit
mote sensing imagery, climate reanalyses at single time slices), the benefit. Therefore, model design should be informed by divideos, and spatial fields derived from PDEs. In these settings, agnostics of temporal autocorrelation, spatial correlation scales,
temporal sampling is sparse, asynchronous, or confounded by and cross-lag dependencies.
nonstationary regimes, spatial-only modeling can avoid spurious
temporal signals and yield stable estimates driven by geometry,
adjacency, and regional functional dependencies. B. Training Objectives
 3) Spatio-Temporal Models: Spatio-temporal models aim Training objectives are also crucial for primitive STFMs, and
to learn intricate spatial and temporal correlations simultane- aim to guide the direction of model updates for achieving satously [71], [74]. Orginally, the trajectory foundation model isfactory results. We present four promising training objectives
KGTS [23] combines recurrent neural networks and graph neu- in STFMs. We begin with regression modeling, exploring how
ral networks to learn temporal and spatial correlations, respec- it learns universal historical knowledge. Then, we study masked
tively. Recently, to efficiently capture long-term temporal depen- modeling, pointing out the importance of learning knowledge
dencies, temporal convolutions and Transformers emerge, which from bidirectional spatio-temporal contexts. Next, we focus
are combined with graph neural networks to build foundation on contrastive learning, emphasizing its role in learning genmodels across spatio-temporal data [20], [71], [127], [128]. On eralizable representations of spatio-temporal data. Finally, we
the spatial aspect, the traditional graph neural networks with introduce the diffusion generation, revealing its potential for
limited local receptive fields are also upgraded by hypergraph generative pre-training.
neural networks, hierarchical graph neural networks, and Trans- 1) Regression Modeling: Inspired by the success of autoreformers in spatio-temporal graph and grid tasks [65], [74], [87] gressive trained large language and vision models [133], redue to their capabilities to capture global spatial correlations. gression has become a powerful self-supervised optimization
Moreover, MSTEM [129] integrates all of the spatio-temporal function during the pre-training stage based on the sequence
convolutions and spatio-temporal Transformers into one foun- properties of spatio-temporal data. The regression paradigm is
dation model to learn long-short spatio-temporal knowledge for shown in Fig. 3, where STFMs are trained by the historical ST
event forecasting. For generative conditional diffusion mod- data and aim to forecast the future.
els, spatio-temporal convolutions and Transformers are often For example, PointGPT [134] directly forecasts point
chosen as the denoising network for historically-concatenated patches autoregressively during the pre-training phase for point
spatio-temporal graph data [130], [131]. Moreover, in addition to cloud-based tasks. To achieve a universal trajectory model,
spatio-temporal Transformers, spatio-temporal cross-attention UVTM [135] and TrajFM [113] support different trajectoryis used on unmasked trajectories in the traffic signal control related tasks, which autoregressively generate future features
model DiffLight [132] to capture spatio-temporal condition with the mask placeholder. Moreover, FourCastNet [125] iterainformation. tively utilizes the output of the trained high-resolution weather
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2049

 At the beginning, STEP [66] uses the conventional MAE
 on the temporal dimension of spatio-temporal graph data to
 pre-train a foundation model for learning the robust representation of long input, which can be used to construct dynamic
 graphs in traffic forecasting. In addition, GPT-ST [67] uses
 cluster-aware masking to replace the random masking in STEP
 for cross-cluster knowledge learning. However, both of them
 only pre-trained an auxiliary tool instead of a model that can
 be directly applied to downstream tasks. Therefore, Brant [65]
 masks the neural signal to train a spatio-temporal encoder-only
 intracranial neural signal foundation model for analyzing a broad
 range of tasks. PowerPM [74] follows this paradigm to pre-train
 a power foundation model with a hierarchical spatial encoder.
 Next, UniTraj [17] proposes block masking and key points
 masking on the trajectory data to achieve a trajectory foundation
 model. Different from the above methods that mask tokens
 on the temporal dimension, Scale-MAE [48], G2PTL [73] and
Fig. 4. The masked modeling objective, where and indicate the masked WeatherGFM [49] pre-train foundation models by masking the
observation and active parameters, respectively. spatial dimension of grid data, which can handle various downstream tasks in terms of geographic and weather. Further, Pointforecasting model as the input of the next timestamp in the infer- MAE [146] uses the MAE on the patched tokens of 3D point
ence stage. Apart from autoregressive training, OpenCity [71] cloud to train a point cloud foundation model, TFMAE [147]
trains a large foundation model for traffic forecasting with the masks time series with small amplitude in the frequency domain,
regression function, which aims to perform forecasting only and EMSTGAE [148] leverages the graph masking strategy
once. In addition, FengWu [122] treats the numerical weather for the spatio-temporal graph data. Consequently, UniST [44]
prediction as a multi-task regression problem based on the view combines spatial and temporal masking to pre-train a foundation
that the prediction of each variable can be treated as a inde- model related to spatio-temporal grid tasks across different
pendent task. ClimaX [43] proposes a randomized forecasting applications. Moreover, STD-MAE [68] reveals that using two
objective for foundation model training, where the goal is to separate spatial and temporal MAEs during the pre-train stage
predict an arbitrary set of input variables at an arbitrary time can achieve better performance in traffic forecasting. However,
into the future. LaBraM [136] pre-trains a neural tokenizer most existing masked modeling methods fail to contend with
model through predicting the Fourier spectrum of the EEG distribution shifts when meeting streaming spatio-temporal data,
time series. Further, the EEGPT [114] and iVideaoGPT [137] resulting in significant performance degradation. In addition,
perform next-token prediction on the EEG and video data, which current methods are mostly used on high-density information
transform the sequential input data into tokens via embedding data such as spatio-temporal graph data [66], and the perfortechniques. Besides, the next-frame and next-scale predictions mance of using the masked technique on spatio-temporal data
are also explored in video-related tasks [138], [139]. However, with low-density information such as event data needs to be
most existing regression-based methods rely on the iterative further improved in the future.
prediction paradigm, which requires significant computational Therefore, the strengths of masked modeling include efficient
resources and fails to adapt to streaming settings. It is promising self-supervision that encourages learning semantically meaningto invent new methods to improve efficiency and mitigate time ful structure from partial observations and robustness to missing
series distribution shifts in the future. data common in sensor and mobility streams. However, its weak-
 In practice, regression-based training offers direct alignment nesses involve potential bias toward reconstructing low-level
with forecasting objectives and end-to-end efficiency without statistics rather than task-relevant dynamics, sensitivity to mask
complex sampling or reconstruction pipelines. However, it is ratio and strategy that can affect spatial–temporal coherence,
sensitive to error accumulation and exposure bias in long- and possible misalignment between reconstruction objectives
horizon forecasting, and may overfit short-term trends unless and downstream predictive goals unless complemented by foreregularized or enhanced with curriculum learning, scheduled casting or contrastive signals.
sampling, or probabilistic outputs. 3) Contrastive Learning: Contrastive learning [149] exhibits
 2) Masked Modeling: Benefiting from the success of masked strong capabilities in aligning representations of different views
language and image modeling, e.g., BERT [140] and masked of data to improve performance, which has been verified in
autoencoder (MAE) [141], masked modeling has emerged as a vision [150], language [151], and graph [152] tasks. Contrastive
significant pre-training strategy for spatio-temporal foundation learning is also a mainstream pre-training strategy in spatiomodels [142], [143], [144], [145]. As shown in Fig. 4, the con- temporal data mining [123], [147], [153], [154], [155], [156],
ventional MAE randomly masks tokens, allowing its encoder to and the process of contrastive learning is shown in Fig. 5.
learn from unmasked tokens and the decoder to recover masked STGCL [157] first explores the effectiveness of conones. trastive pre-training in traffic forecasting, and designs four
2050 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 5. The contrastive training objective, where indicates active parameters. Fig. 6. The diffusion generation objective, where indicates active parameters.

spatio-temporal data augmentation strategies (edge masking and MM-Path [161] designs an urban foundation model with
and input masking on the spatial domain, and temporal shift- language-image contrastive pre-train. Specifically, representaing and input smoothing on the temporal domain) to derive tions from different modals that have the same semantics are
different views of data as the positive sample for contrastive aligned by contrastive learning, and the cross-modal-enriched
learning. STSSL [127] and SPGCL [158] further propose an model achieves significant improvements in downstream tasks.
adaptive spatio-temporal graph augmentation strategy to avoid In this context, the advantages of contrastive-based models inthe hand-craft issue. Using contrastive learning differently on clude strong representation transfer under diverse environments
the same representation granularity of the data, CL-TSim [110] and the ability to encode invariances across spatial neighborand TrajCL [159] incorporate contrastive learning into route hoods and temporal contexts. However, its limitations stem from
representation learning and trajectory similarity learning, re- sensitivity to augmentation design and view construction (which
spectively, with diverse point- (distorting and masking) and may distort spatio-temporal semantics), potential reliance on
trajectory-level (truncating and simplification) augmentation large batches or memory banks to provide informative negastrategies. To perform spatio-temporal graph contrastive learn- tives, and a possible gap between spatio-temporal instance-level
ing on different granularities, ST-HSL [87] considers repre- discrimination and task-specific objectives that may require
sentations achieved from convolution and hypergraph convo- additional supervision or fine-tuning.
lution as different views for effective spatio-temporal modeling. 4) Diffusion Generation: Denoising diffusion models have
In particular, the convolution and hypergraph convolution in achieved prominence in unsupervised visual generation
ST-HSL can collaboratively enhance each other to mitigate tasks [162], [163] due to their abilities to learn distributions
data sparsity, which is important for various ST tasks, e.g., of intricate unlabeled data, which can adapt to unsupervised
crime prediction. However, these methods mainly focus on one spatio-temporal grid and video tasks [63], [132], [164], [165]. As
specific downstream task and are hard to generalize to other shown in Fig. 6, denoising diffusion models first add Gaussian
domains or tasks. To address this problem, AutoST [119] pro- noise to transform data (forward process) into standard Gaussian
poses an automated spatio-temporal graph contrastive learning and then utilize a network to learn data reconstruction from noise
paradigm to adaptively derive different views. The automated (reverse process).
contrastive paradigm on the heterogeneous graph neural network To adapt diffusion models with spatio-temporal forecasting,
is implemented by a random walk with learnable Gaussian DiffSTG [130] and MaTCHS [166] treat the history data as
noise, which alleviates noise and distribution heterogeneity. the condition in the reverse process and concatenate it with
FlashST [70] uses contrastive learning on the prompt embedding the noised data to generate target future. Subsequently, Cato ensure a consistent distribution across diverse downstream Paint [167] utilizes the discovered causal data as the condition
tasks based on an optimized uniform embedding distribution. to generate multiple sequences. On the other hand, SPDiff [168]
To learn a universal trajectory representation for downstream and DiffCrime [88] utilize two independent channels in the
tasks, START [20], JGRM [111], and MMTEC [24] utilize the denoising network to learn representations of noised data and
map-matched road network as a positive view to introduce travel the history condition, which can mitigate the negative influsemantics into the foundation model. PTrajM [28] further uses ence caused by the discrepancy of the data. Moreover, Diffthe closest POI to each trajectory point as another positive POI Traj [126] utilizes a diffusion model for trajectory recovery, and
view to enhance travel semantics. To deal with the multi-modal the recorded motion properties serve as conditions. In particular,
urban spatial image and text description data, UrbanCLIP [160] the forecasting task is considered as a special case of recovery
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2051

in USTD [131], i.e., the future to be predicted is a missing stronger frame-level features and better temporal consistency.
value to be recovered. To further extract deterministic condi- Early studies use pre-trained spatio-temporal convolution modtional knowledge, existing studies in imputation, forecasting, els to extract local visual and temporal features. For examand fine-grained inference like DSTPP [169], PriSTI [170], ple, DCLR [153] leverages the pre-trained R(2+1)D-18 [175]
DiffUFlow [46], and FGTI [64] leverage an external network to obtain general spatio-temporal representations, yielding imto learn representations of condition inputs and use the cross- proved retrieval and recognition performance relative to trainattention to capture deterministic information from conditional ing from scratch. Moreover, Transformer architectures exhibit
inputs. Further, to decrease the optimization difficulty in the strong learning capabilities in vision. MAESTL [142], Videodenoising process, ControlTraj [30] pre-trains a road represen- MAE [144], and CaPaint [167] adopt patch-based pre-trained
tation network with the masked modeling to embed topology ViTs with masked modeling, which has been shown to enconstraints of road segments as conditional information for tra- hance video representation quality, improve robustness to occlujectory generation. USTD [131] also pre-trains a spatio-temporal sion/missing frames, and boost performance on standard video
graph neural networks with the masked modeling to capture understanding benchmarks. Additionally, LLM-AR [176] and
dependencies of conditions. Additionally, SaSDim [171] re- iVideoGPT [137] first apply vector quantization (e.g., VQGAN,
places the conventional stochastic differential equation with its VQVAE) to obtain token sequences, then train Transformerprobabilistic high-order form to more accurately estimate the based foundation models. Tokenization enables efficient longvariance of the noise in spatial time series and PhyDA [172] horizon modeling and reduces compute, while maintaining compresents a physically regularized diffusion objective to keep petitive generation and prediction quality. To further improve
consistency with physical laws in atmospheric systems, which video understanding, large-scale ViT-G [177] is employed in
can address the data generation bias. VideoChat [53] and MovieChat [54], which results in stronger
 In practice, the strengths of diffusion-based methods lie in multimodal alignment and more accurate temporal grounding in
strong generative fidelity and calibration for complex spatio- video question answering and dialogue.
temporal distributions and a natural ability to handle missing These pre-trained vision models reduce labeled data requiredata via controllable perturbations. However, they also entail ments, speed up convergence, and improve downstream acsubstantial computational cost due to many diffusion steps curacy for spatio-temporal tasks, while enhancing robustness
(impacting both training and inference latency), sensitivity to to occlusion and missing frames and strengthening temporal
noise schedules and samplers that can affect spatio-temporal consistency across video. Tokenization-based pipelines further
coherence, and a potential mismatch between generative metrics enable efficient long-horizon modeling with competitive genand downstream predictive accuracy unless augmented with eration and prediction quality, and large-capacity ViTs provide
additional objectives or guidance. more accurate temporal grounding in video understanding.
 2) Pre-Trained Language Models: Pre-training a universal
IV. TRANSFERRED SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS model to solve diverse language tasks has led to general-purpose
 LLMs with strong reasoning and compositional abilities. The
 Transferred spatio-temporal foundation models transfer the
 most notable example is ChatGPT [178]. Spatio-temporal inforgeneralized knowledge of pre-trained foundation models trained
 mation (e.g., time, location, events, and numerical values) can
on one or more other domains, such as language and vision, for
 be naturally expressed in text, enabling LLMs to assist ST tasks
spatio-temporal tasks. As shown in Fig. 2, to derive a transferred
 through instruction following and chain-of-thought reasoning,
spatio-temporal foundation model, the pre-trained foundation
 which reduces task-specific engineering and improves sample
model from other domains is first selected according to the
 efficiency. A straightforward usage pattern is to convert ST data
corresponding data modalities. Then the pre-trained model is
 into textual prompts and iteratively interact with LLMs to comadapted to the specific spatio-temporal task and application by
 plete the target task. For instance, QWEN [179], GLM [180], and
transforming the model or spatio-temporal data. In the follow-
 GPT [178] are employed in MAS4POI [181], LLMob [182], and
ing, we provide a detailed discussion about model selection and
 ST-GIA+[183] to interpret human intent from trajectories, yieldtransfer adaptation.
 ing more accurate next-location prediction and more realistic
 trajectory generation. Similarly, GPT, QWEN, and Mixtral [184]
A. Model Selection are used for spatio-temporal event understanding [31], [185],
 In this section, we divided the mainstream pre-trained founda- where LLM reasoning helps uncover causal relations and imtion models into three categories according to the data modality, proves the quality of event forecasting. Beyond instruction use,
i.e., vision, language, and multi-modal models. transferred foundation models directly feed ST sequences into
 1) Pre-Trained Vision Models: There have been many vision LLM backbones to leverage their strong sequential modeling:
foundation models in recent years that range from convolution- masked/regressive BERT [18], [186] and GPT-2 [187], [188],
based ResNet [173] to Transformer-based ViT [174]. Trained [189], [190] enable self-supervised imputation and forecasting
on large-scale image and video corpora, these models provide with fewer labels and faster convergence. To combine reasontransferable visual representations that reduce labeled data re- ing with sequence prediction, AuxMobLCast [191] uses BERT
quirements, accelerate convergence, and improve downstream for context knowledge of historical trajectories and GPT-2 for
accuracy without task-specific training. As a popular backbone, prediction, while Llama-based models [192] in ST-LLM [193],
they preprocess frames of spatio-temporal video data to deliver LLM4POI [194], and ExpTime [39] further improve predictive
2052 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

accuracy and interpretability by unifying domain instructions
with temporal patterns.
 These LLM-based approaches reduce annotation demand,
provide interpretability through natural-language rationales, improve location and event forecasting quality, and enable flexible
zero- or few-shot transfer to new cities or domains. Typical
gains come from stronger temporal reasoning, better handling
of sparse or incomplete inputs, and the ability to integrate
heterogeneous side information via text.
 3) Pre-Trained Multi-Modal Models: Spatio-temporal data
often appear across modalities (e.g., image and text), motivating
pre-trained multi-modal models that align cross-modal representations so that images can be grounded in language and
vice versa. This alignment enables label-efficient transfer, robust
retrieval and grounding, and unified modeling across views. For
urban region profiling, UrbanCLIP [160], USPM [195], and
UrbanVLP [196] employ image-to-text pipelines (e.g., LLaMA- Fig. 7. Prompt engineering, where indicates frozen parameters.
AdapterV2 [197], SPHINX-V2 [198]) to generate rich textual
descriptions from satellite imagery, providing informative side
information that improves downstream classification and clus- numeric data into textual descriptions. The former directly
tering. For video understanding, the CLIP image encoder [57] embeds numeric values into predefined templates directly
is applied to video frames [61] so that language models can ac- (e.g., “The average temperature is {value} degrees”) [191],
cess aligned visual features, improving temporal grounding and [201], [202]. In contrast, the latter converts numeric data into
question answering. This is possible because CLIP’s image and textual representations aiming to leverage the powerful memory
text encoders are aligned via contrastive learning. Conversely, capabilities of large language models. This is typically achieved
CLIP’s text encoder conditions video generation [51], [56], by replacing numeric values with categorical labels based on preenhancing semantic controllability and faithfulness to prompts. defined rules, such as using “D1” to denote data within the first
Moreover, image–text encoders are jointly used to compute bin [203]. These numeric-to-text transformations enable large
CLIP scores, which guide answer retrieval in video QA [59] and language models to process quantitative data within their textual
support navigation in street-view environments [199], leading reasoning frameworks, albeit in a more coarse-grained manner.
to better retrieval precision and instruction. To further improve accuracy, recent studies emphasize enriching
 Multi-modal pre-training enhances cross-modal transfer, im- prompts with contextual information, such as historical trends,
proves semantic grounding and retrieval accuracy, enables con- statistical summaries, or metadata relevant to the task [191],
trollable generation, and enriches ST models with language- [202], [204], [205]. These methods are particularly valuable in
accessible descriptions—benefits that translate into more accu- domain-specific applications. For instance, in terms of stock
rate profiling, better video QA, and more reliable navigation. price prediction, one study [203] constructs prompts, which
 include instructions, company profiles, historical temporal
 news summaries, and categorized stock price time series to
B. Transfer Adaptation
 enhance predictions. This design allows large language models
 Existing transferred adaptation methods, as a form of trans- to integrate cross-sequence information from multiple stocks
ferring pre-trained foundation models for spatio-temporal tasks, and leverage their inherent knowledge to generate forecasts and
employ various transformations on pre-trained models and prim- explanations. In real-world applications, incorporating timely
itive spatio-temporal data to bridge the gap between them, background information into contextual prompts helps the
enabling effective transfer adaptation. Despite significant differ- model identify temporal patterns and domain-specific nuances,
ences in their design, transfer adaptation in spatio-temporal tasks leading to more accurate and robust performance. Additionally,
can be categorized into four representative approaches: prompt few-shot examples are frequently employed to further enhance
engineering, feature enhancement, cross-domain alignment, and prediction performance [203], [206]. For example, a limited
supervised fine-tuning. number of samples (3-shot, 10-shot, and 25-shot) are provided
 1) Prompt Engineering: The most important challenge for to the large language model to contextualize it for the specific
transferred spatio-temporal foundation models is to bridge the task [206]. These samples are embedded into textual templates
domain gap between original spatio-temporal data and pre- to form question-answer pairs, which enhance the large
trained foundation models. It is intuitive to employ prompt language model in understanding the task structure and context.
engineering [200] to facilitate pre-trained foundation models The large language model is subsequently trained on these
understanding spatio-temporal data. few-shot examples to learn a task-specific prompt embedding,
 Existing prompt engineering methods for spatio-temporal which is appended to each sample during inference. Moreover,
foundation models can be divided into two categories: 1) directly TEST [204] uses soft prompting to refine prediction accuracy
incorporating numeric data into texts and 2) transforming by generating task-specific embeddings that improve the large
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2053

Fig. 8. Feature enhancement, where and indicate frozen and active parameters, Fig. 9. Cross-Domain alignment, where and indicate frozen and active paramrespectively. eters, respectively.

language model’s comprehension of the input data. These soft the skeleton data to build the distance-based adjacency matrix
prompts are trained using the loss derived from outputs of the for skeleton-based action recognition. Next, PromptGAT [211],
large language model and ground truth of the task, effectively Orca [212], LLMPOI [213], and ST-GIA+ [183] utilize a prebridging the gap between the large language model and the trained large language model to generate predictions or emspecific requirements of time series forecasting tasks. According beddings as the input of the subsequent tasks based on the
to existing studies [201], [203], we observe that the performance spatio-temporal prompts, e.g., weather and road information
of STFMs is highly dependent on manually designed prompts, in spatio-temporal graph tasks, and locations and categories
and thus it requires improving the generalization of prompt in spatio-temporal trajectory tasks. Finally, LLMob [182], Urengineering techniques in the future. banKGent [214], MAS4POI [181], and CoMaPOI [215] use
 2) Feature Enhancement: Benefiting from the powerful text large language models to design a multi-agent collaboration
and image understanding capabilities of pre-trained foundation system for spatio-temporal trajectory tasks. These methods feed
models, the high-level semantic features of spatio-temporal text the detailed description of trajectories into a large language
and image data can be extracted for downstream tasks. model, which generates complete or fine-grained trajectories
 For example, VideoChat [53] first extracts visual semantic for recovery or up-sampling tasks, and then uses different large
features from video contents by the pre-trained video foundation language models to refine or verify the previously generated tramodel, and then feeds these features into large language models jectories. Although feature-enhanced STFMs achieved superior
to conduct the video question answering. R2A [59] further performance utilizing generated side information, it remains a
utilizes the pre-trained vision encoder of the CLIP model [57] to problem to alleviate potential noise and fake information caused
extract semantic features of each frame of the input video, and by the hallucination of pre-trained models.
then retrieve the top-k similar texts to answer the question of the 3) Cross-Domain Alignment: Pre-trained large language
input video. In addition, UrbanCLIP [160] and USPM [195] use models can also be directly used as the backbone for spatiopre-trained image-to-text models [197], [207] to generate cap- temporal modeling considering their powerful context inference
tions of urban images, which represents the text modality for the capabilities. Existing methods often align the spatio-temporal
subsequent contrastive training. Moreover, CLIP-LSTM [100] data with the text and then feed the aligned data into frozen
transforms the stock data into texts and images and then lever- large language models for downstream spatio-temporal tasks.
age the pre-trained CLIP encoders to extract the features from VideoLLM [51] uses a trainable projection-based semanlanguage and visual domains, which is beneficial to market fore- tic translator to transform the visual spatial features into the
casting. Further, ChatGNN [208] and RealTCD [209] directly textual embedding space of large language models for video
leverage large language models to generate spatial correlations understanding tasks. To inject temporal information into the
for spatio-temporal graph data. Specifically, ChatGNN feed the aggregated frame-level representation for video understanddetail description of companies and daily media information ing, MovieChat [54] and Video-LLaMA [61] train a queryinto ChatGPT [178] to derive adjacency matrices of companies ing Transformer of the BLIP2 [60] model before the projecfor stock prediction. RealTCD inputs the textual information tion layer. LLM-AR [176] proposes a VQ-VAE-based [216]
of industrial systems into a large language model to reveal linguistic projection layer to reprogram the action signal in
temporal causal relationships for anomaly detection. Different videos into language sentences through the human inductive
from ChatGNN and RealTCD, LA-GCN [210] utilizes the pre- bias, such as Zipf’s law [217], and the hyperbolic codetrained BERT [140] to encode the texts of labels and joints of book. VideoPoet [218] utilizes the pre-trained text and visual
2054 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 imputation, where the model only fine-tunes the weights of
 layer normalization modules in the pre-trained large language
 model during the supervised training stage. To preserve the
 sequential modeling capabilities acquired during pre-training,
 ST-LLM [193] further fine-tunes the last few attention layers
 in the pre-trained large language model for traffic forecasting.
 Moreover, TPLLM [188], PTR [18], and FOTraj [222] incorporate the well-known parameter-efficient fine-tuning method,
 low-rank adaptation [7], into the pre-trained large language
 model for traffic forecasting, trajectory recovery, and trajectory
 anomaly detection, respectively. Specifically, in the supervised
 fine-tuning stage, two low-rank matrices are matrix multiplied
 to substitute original attention weights of the pre-trained large
Fig. 10. Supervised fine-tuning, where indicates active parameters. language model, which can significantly reduce the number of
 parameters and improve the efficiency of fine-tuning. To further
 decrease computation costs of fine-tuning, LLM4POI [194] uses
foundation models to derive the aligned text and visual to- not only the low-rank adaptation but also the 4-bit quantization
kens. Additionally, FrozenBiLM [58] adds a trainable projection technique for the next point-of-interest recommendation. While
layer between the frozen Transformer blocks of large language low-rank and quantization techniques reduce parameter redunmodels, which enhances the video question answering due to dancy during the supervised fine-tuning, they may also degrade
the multi-cycle alignment. For the spatio-temporal graph tasks, model performance, particularly in complex tasks.
embedding- and reprogramming-based alignment in foundation
models have been proposed [219]. Specifically, STG-LLM [189] V. APPLICATIONS
concatenated the time-of-day and day-of-week embeddings with
the projected spatio-temporal graph enabling periodicity-aware Next, we discuss primary application domains of STFMs.
large language models. REPST [190] aligns the spatio-temporal As shown in Fig. 1, STFMs are widely adopted in various
graph data with the textual embedding space by reprogram- domains, encompassing energy, finance, weather, healthcare,
ming the data from most correlated pre-trained word embed- transportation, and public services.
dings. TimeCMA [220] utilizes similarity retrieval-based crossmodality alignment to incorporate text information into time A. Energy
series. In addition, a trainable output projection layer [50] is Primitive spatio-temporal foundation models for diverse enadded into transferred foundation models to convert the trans- ergy applications have been designed including demand-side
ferred results into the original spatio-temporal domain. Although management, grid stability, and consumer behavior analysis.
many existing methods focus on cross-domain data alignment, This is because of the abundant electricity time series and the
they mainly rely on simple addition and concatenation and fail inherent hierarchical spatial correlations of multiple electricity
to capture the complex relationships. time series [74]. Moreover, one of the most compelling use
 4) Supervised Fine-Tuning: Supervised fine-tuning retrains cases of STFMs in energy is in the predictive maintenance of
the pre-trained model with the domain-specific data and has renewable energy sources, like wind turbines and solar panels.
become a popular technique to align pre-trained foundation For example, models trained on historical data of turbine permodels with spatio-temporal data. This is because the data of the formance and environmental conditions (such as wind speed
specific realm in the supervised fine-tuning is able to incorporate and temperature) can predict when a turbine is likely to fail
domain knowledge into the pre-trained large language models. or require maintenance, which reduces downtime and improve
 In the early stage, the supervised fine-tuning techniques have the efficiency of wind farms by anticipating mechanical issues
been adopted in the textual-related spatio-temporal tasks (e.g., before they occur, optimizing maintenance schedules, and mingeo-entity representation and geospatially language understand- imizing operational disruptions [223], [224].
ing). Specifically, SPABERT [186] and GeoLM [221] directly
retrains full parameters of BERT [140] with geo-texts due to
the same modality of the source model and target task. Aux- B. Finance
MobLCast [191] retrains all parameters in BERT-based encoder Portfolio management [225], fraud detection [226], and stock
and GPT-based [178] decoder for human mobility forecasting, market prediction [166] are highly essential for the financial
which aligns the source model and target task by transforming industry, and the implicit inter-relations across multiple time
the numerical mobility data into language sentences. However, series of stock and supply–demand of enterprises are expected to
fine-tuning full parameters in pre-trained large language models be considered in them [227], [228]. Thus, proposed finance founis inefficient and be restricted in resource-constrained envi- dation models can capture not only temporal correlations but
ronments. To improve efficiency, partial fine-tuning methods also spatial dependencies. In particular, spatial correlations are
emerge. Specifically, GATGPT [187] combines graph attention shown to provide better trading and investing [98]. Beyond traand a pre-trained large language model for spatio-temporal ditional financial analytics, spatial crowdsourcing has emerged
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2055

as a spatio-temporal economic application that leverages geo- Based on the spatial properties of transportation data reflected
graphically distributed contributors for market intelligence, de- by connected road networks and the temporal properties of
mand sensing, and urban mobility services [229], [230]. Recent transportation data through mobilities, spatio-temporal modworks demonstrate complementary directions: a crowdsourcing- ules should be introduced in transportation foundation models
informed LLM chain framework that builds robust multi-step to improve performance. Specifically, STFMs have played a
pipelines for task decomposition and error mitigation [231] and a key role in intelligence transportation systems and autonomous
sidewalk navigation platform that fuses real-time crowdsourced vehicle systems. For intelligence transportation, STFMs have
accessibility, adaptive routing, and LLM assistance to dynami- been used to analyze traffic patterns across time and space,
cally adjust paths and enhance user experience [232]. Besides, which has allowed for the optimization of traffic lights and
it is worth noting that pre-trained language models can also congestion managementl [113], [236]. This has led to smoother
assist financial analysis by deducing relationships between target traffic flows, reduced travel times, and lower emissions. For
entities [208]. autonomous vehicles, STFMs are crucial in enabling vehicles
 to understand both the spatial and temporal context of their
C. Weather environment—knowing not just where other cars are but also
 predicting their movements over time, improving both safety
 Spatio-temporal foundation models play an important role and efficiency in urban environments [62], [237], [238].
in weather-related applications. This is because a wide range
of weather variables in the real-world such as precipitation
 F. Public Services
vary with time and location, the seasonal and transmission
properties of these weather variables are helpful for learning a Public services are one of the greatest concerns to maintaining
spatio-temporal foundation model. To quickly and accurately a harmonious society, textual and vision events that influence
solve global weather forecasting tasks at any time, spatio- public services such as crimes and natural disasters are both
temporal weather foundations models [122], [124] with a million closely related to geographic and seasonal variations. With
parameters are pre-trained by massive European Centre for the large amount of available event and video data, one-to-
Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) reanalysis data. many primitive foundation models are pre-trained with spatio-
Moreover, spatio-temporal foundation models can be pre-trained temporal considerations for flood prediction [239], earthquake
by multi-modal weather data to further tackle various weather monitoring [240], extreme weather forecasting [124], and crime
tasks such as super-resolution and image translation [49]. These prediction [241]. To further leverage the multi-modal data, the
models have been instrumental in providing early warnings transferred and primitive spatio-temporal foundation models
for disasters like Hurricane Dorian, which allowed for better- are designed with pre-trained cross-domain foundation modpreparedness and evacuation efforts, saving lives and reducing els [242], [243] and trained with multi-modal conditions [88]
property damage. In addition, STFMs have enhanced the ability for seismic tasks and crime inference, respectively.
to predict climate change impacts by analyzing long-term seasonal patterns, helping researchers and policymakers anticipate VI. FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES
shifts in weather systems, which has been crucial for agricultural Although STFMs have achieved remarkable performance replanning, water resource management, and disaster resilience. cently, several avenues for future work remain open.

D. Healthcare A. Scalability
 Electroencephalogram signals are typical spatio-temporal The scaling law in natural language processing inspired redata due to neuronal transmissions and are pivotal for healthcare searchers to develop large language models with tens of billions,
because many diseases can be detected through brain activity. To hundreds of billions, or even trillions of parameters. As for
simultaneously address multiple tasks on electroencephalogram spatio-temporal foundation models, it is also vital to prove that
data with diverse formats, primitive foundation models with performance is positively correlated with the data scale across
universal temporal represent abilities of electroencephalogram different model sizes. The scalability of spatio-temporal foundasignals are pre-trained [114]. Subsequently, primitive spatio- tion models determines whether this research line is meaningful
temporal foundation models are designed to further capture spa- (i.e., the large model represents the capability to improve perfortial dependencies between neural signals [65], [136]. Moreover, mance as the data scale increasing) and provides valuable guidelectronic health records [233] are also key for healthcare AI ance for training and fine-tuning foundation models effectively.
systems by predicting clinical and operational events to assist However, the size of current spatio-temporal foundation models
decisions, and thus foundation models are pre-trained to solve is not sufficient to support the scaling law [71], [113]. Larger
all-purpose clinical tasks [185], [234], [235]. models and more data are still needed to derive the emergence
 of LLM-like spatio-temporal capabilities.
E. Transportation
 B. Efficiency
 Massive amounts of transportation data have been generated by human, vehicles, and roads in recent years, which Despite current achievements in spatio-temporal foundation
provides the possibility to use foundation models for various models, they remain highly complex, leading to expensive comdownstream transportation-related tasks to assist daily travel. putation needs. Particularly, the size of large-scale data-based
2056 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

primitive foundation models and large language models make E. Multi-Objective Training
them impractical to deploy for spatio-temporal applications in
 While using a single self-supervised training objective for
resource-constrained environments such as mobile phones or
 primitive foundation models can achieve superior performance
embedded systems. The trade-off between performance and efon simple spatio-temporal tasks, their performance on complex
ficiency of spatio-temporal foundation models is still a research
 tasks is still limited, such as the task of predicting the future with
problem, requiring foundation models to retain high one-tomissing historical data, which is difficult when using only regresmany performance without too intricate designs and too large a
 sion or masked modeling. However, through combining denoissize. Efficient deep learning methods such as distillation [244],
 ing diffusion with masked modeling, spatio-temporal foundapruning [245], quantization [246], condensation [247], and deep
 tion models can obtain powerful generative capabilities while
learning units with subquadratic complexity [69] can be utilized
 improving computational efficiency by masking. Moreover, inin spatio-temporal foundation models in the future to make a
 corporating different training objectives can capture complebalance between computation demands and one-to-many permentary aspects of spatio-temporal data. For example, regresformance, which can bridge the gap between scientific research
 sion is good at learning effective temporal patterns and trends
and industrial needs.
 while masked modeling encourages contextual understanding.
 In addition, contrastive learning enhances feature discrimination
 and robustness, and denoising diffusion enhances generative
C. Generalization capabilities. By combining these objectives, spatio-temporal
 Apart from using foundation models on the single spatio- foundation models are expected to gain stronger representation
temporal domain, extending foundation models for the spatio- learning, better predictive capabilities, and improved robustness
temporal graph domain to other domains, such as the trajectory across different downstream tasks.
and spatio-temporal grid domains, provides considerable opportunities for future research. Most spatio-temporal grid data is F. Multi-Modal Foundation Models
generated by satellite images and spatio-temporal graph data is
recorded by sensors. The difference between them is that sensors Currently, most spatio-temporal foundation models are
are irregularly distributed in the spatial dimension. Fortunately, learned from single modality data, e.g., time series, video, or
universal spatial patch methods for the grid and graph data are grid. However, such single modality data might fall short in
proposed [69] and foundation models across these two domains capturing important spatio-temporal context information and
are expected to be designed. Moreover, trajectories can be seen as increases the difficulty in learning spatio-temporal general
univariate spatio-temporal graph data for integration into cross- knowledge. Moreover, multi-modal knowledge from different
domain foundation models [248], yet the irregular time interval sources can make models more robust to missing or noisy
and the spatial correlations of the same sequence should be care- data. This may lead to better generalization, and enable various
fully considered in future research. Addressing these issues will downstream tasks, such as autonomous driving. Besides, recent
yield real universal spatio-temporal foundation models, which breakthroughs in foundation models (e.g., CLIP and VideoGPT)
are more versatile and applicable to a broader range of tasks. highlight the power of multi-modal integration. In fact, the multi-
Developing foundation models that effectively incorporate many modal information can also be extracted from spatio-temporal
spatio-temporal domains will be essential for emerging LLM- data, e.g., heatmap images for trajectory data and text descriplike spatio-temporal intelligence and further reducing energy tions for event data. Therefore, multi-modal spatio-temporal
consumption. foundation models are a feasible frontier research direction to
 improve robustness and generalization.

D. Lack of Benchmarks VII. CONCLUSION
 Different from the diverse application-crossed tasks that In this paper, we present a comprehensive survey of recent adspatio-temporal foundation models were applied for, dedi- vancements in spatio-temporal foundation models, a growing recated benchmarks are provided for the time series forecasting search direction that solves various downstream spatio-temporal
task [249]. Therefore, systematic evaluation and comprehensive tasks via a single model. We offer an innovative pipeline
benchmarks for all spatio-temporal domains need to be proposed perspective to categorize existing spatio-temporal foundation
urgently for a fair comparison of spatio-temporal foundation models. We first give an introduction to data harmonization
models. Proposing various and representative benchmarks that for foundation models, providing researchers and practitioners
encompass a wide range of spatio-temporal domains, includ- with a holistic understanding to enhance the assessment of
ing event tasks, video tasks, trajectory tasks, spatio-temporal spatio-temporal data properties. Then primitive and transferred
graph tasks, and spatio-temporal grid tasks, will offer a more foundation models are introduced, covering the model desigthorough evaluation of the performance of STFMs. Systematic nation and training objectives of primitive methods, and the
benchmarks will reflect the strengths and weaknesses of spatio- model selection and transfer adaptation of transferred methods.
temporal foundation models in a fair comparison, promoting un- Finally, we underscore the restrictions of current spatio-temporal
derstanding and stimulating the improvement of spatio-temporal foundation models, while highlighting the opportunities in effifoundation models. ciency, scalability, generalization, and benchmarks. We expect
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2057

that this survey not only explains the current state-of-the-art [24] Y. Lin, H. Wan, S. Guo, J. Hu, C. S. Jensen, and Y. Lin, “Pre-training
but also inspires further innovations and breakthroughs in the general trajectory embeddings with maximum multi-view entropy coding,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 9037–9050,
future. Dec. 2024.
 [25] X. Wang, Z. Fang, C. Huang, D. Hu, L. Chen, and Y. Gao, “GTR: A
 general, multi-view, and dynamic framework for trajectory representation
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2025, pp. 1–20.
 REFERENCES [26] Y. Chen, G. Cong, and C. Anda, “TERI: An effective framework for tra-
 [1] G. Jin et al., “Spatio-temporal graph neural networks for predictive jectory recovery with irregular time intervals,” Proc. VLDB Endowment,
 learning in urban computing: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 17, pp. 414–426, 2023.
 vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 5388–5408, Oct. 2024. [27] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, “Roformer: Enhanced
 [2] Z. Lv, J. Xu, K. Zheng, H. Yin, P. Zhao, and X. Zhou, “LC-RNN: A deep transformer with rotary position embedding,” Neurocomputing, vol. 568,
 learning model for traffic speed prediction,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. 2024, Art. no. 127063.
 Intell., 2018, pp. 3470–3476. [28] Y. Lin et al., “TrajMamba: An efficient and semantic-rich vehicle trajec-
 [3] Y. Fang, F. Zhao, Y. Qin, H. Luo, and C. Wang, “Learning all dynamics: tory pre-training model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Traffic forecasting via locality-aware spatio-temporal joint transformer,” 2025, pp. 1–26.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 23433–23446, [29] T.-Y. Fu and W.-C. Lee, “Trembr: Exploring road networks for trajectory
 Dec. 2022. representation learning,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. vol. 11, no. 1,
 [4] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in Proc. pp. 1–25, 2020.
 Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp. 2961–2969. [30] Y. Zhu et al., “ControlTraj: Controllable trajectory generation with
 [5] X. Jiang, D. Zhuang, X. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Luo, and X. Gao, “Uncertainty topology-constrained diffusion model,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf.
 quantification via spatial-temporal tweedie model for zero-inflated and Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4676–4687.
 long-tail travel demand prediction,” in Proc. 32nd ACM Int. Conf. Inf. [31] X. Yu, W. Sun, J. Li, K. Liu, C. Liu, and J. Tan, “ONSEP: A novel
 Knowl. Manage., 2023, pp. 3983–3987. online neural-symbolic framework for event prediction based on large
 [6] J. Kaplan et al., “Scaling laws for neural language models,” 2020, language model,” in Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024,
 arXiv:2001.08361 . pp. 6335–6350.
 [7] E. J. Hu et al., “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,” [32] Y. Xia, D. Wang, Q. Liu, L. Wang, S. Wu, and X.-Y. Zhang, “Chain-ofin Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021, pp. 1–20. history reasoning for temporal knowledge graph forecasting,” in Proc.
 [8] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2024, pp. 16144–16159.
 language models,” in Proc. 36th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., [33] S. Deng, M. de Rijke, and Y. Ning, “Advances in human event modeling:
 2022, pp. 24824–24837. From graph neural networks to language models,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
 [9] M. Jin et al., “Large models for time series and spatio-temporal data: A Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 6459–6469.
 survey and outlook,” 2023, arXiv:2310.10196 . [34] S. Deng, H. Rangwala, and Y. Ning, “Learning dynamic context graphs
 [10] Y. Liang et al., “Foundation models for time series analysis: A tutorial for predicting social events,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 and survey,” in Proc. 30th ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Discovery Data Mining, 2019, pp. 1007–1016.
 Mining, 2024, pp. 6555–6565. [35] T. Mikolov, I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Dis-
 [11] W. Zhang, J. Han, Z. Xu, H. Ni, H. Liu, and H. Xiong, “Urban foundation tributed representations of words and phrases and their compositionality,”
 models: A survey,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2013, pp. 1–9.
 Mining, 2024, pp. 6633–6643. [36] C. Ye et al., “MIRAI: Evaluating LLM agents for event forecasting,”
 [12] A. Goodge, W. S. Ng, B. Hooi, and S. K. Ng, “Spatio-Temporal 2024, arXiv:2407.01231 .
 foundation models: Vision, challenges, and opportunities,” 2025, [37] X. Shi et al., “Language models can improve event prediction by few-shot
 arXiv:2501.09045 . abductive reasoning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
 [13] Y. Liang et al., “Foundation models for spatio-temporal data science: A pp. 29532–29557.
 tutorial and survey,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery [38] Z. Song, C. Yang, C. Wang, B. An, and S. Li, “Latent logic tree extraction
 Data Mining, 2025, pp. 1–14. for event sequence explanation from LLMs,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 [14] L. Deng, Y. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Liu, Y. Xia, and K. Zheng, “Learning to Learn., 2024, pp. 46238–46258.
 hash for trajectory similarity computation and search,” in Proc. IEEE [39] C. Yuan, Q. Xie, J. Huang, and S. Ananiadou, “Back to the future: Towards
 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2024, pp. 4491–4503. explainable temporal reasoning with large language models,” in Proc.
 [15] D. Hu, L. Chen, H. Fang, Z. Fang, T. Li, and Y. Gao, “Spatio-Temporal ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1963–1974.
 trajectory similarity measures: A comprehensive survey and quantitative [40] Y. Liu, Y. Ma, M. Hildebrandt, M. Joblin, and V. Tresp, “TLogic: Tempostudy,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 2191–2212, ral logical rules for explainable link forecasting on temporal knowledge
 May 2024. graphs,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 4120–4127.
 [16] Z. Fang, Y. Du, L. Chen, Y. Hu, Y. Gao, and G. Chen, “E2 DTC: An end [41] S. Deng, H. Rangwala, and Y. Ning, “Robust event forecasting with spato end deep trajectory clustering framework via self-training,” in Proc. tiotemporal confounder learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 IEEE 37th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2021, pp. 696–707. Discovery Data Mining, 2022, pp. 294–304.
 [17] Y. Zhu, J. J. Yu, X. Zhao, X. Wei, and Y. Liang, “UniTraj: Learn- [42] Z. Chen and Y. Wang, “Civil unrest event forecasting using graphical and
 ing a universal trajectory foundation model from billion-scale world- sequential neural networks,”in Proc. Artif. Neural Netw. Mach. Learn.,
 wide traces,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025, 2021, pp. 192–203.
 pp. 1–38. [43] T. Nguyen, J. Brandstetter, A. Kapoor, J. K. Gupta, and A. Grover,
 [18] T. Wei et al., “PTR: A pre-trained language model for trajectory recovery,” “ClimaX: A foundation model for weather and climate,” in Proc. Int.
 2024, arXiv:2410.14281 . Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 25904–25938.
 [19] C. Yang and G. Gidofalvi, “Fast map matching, an algorithm integrating [44] Y. Yuan, J. Ding, J. Feng, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “UniST: A prompt-empowered
 hidden markov model with precomputation,” Int. J. Geographical Inf. universal model for urban spatio-temporal prediction,” in Proc. ACM
 Sci., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 547–570, 2018. SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 4095–4106.
 [20] J. Jiang, D. Pan, H. Ren, X. Jiang, C. Li, and J. Wang, “Self-supervised [45] K. Bi, L. Xie, H. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Gu, and Q. Tian, “Accurate
 trajectory representation learning with temporal regularities and travel medium-range global weather forecasting with 3D neural networks,”
 semantics,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 843–855. Nature, vol. 619, no. 7970, pp. 533–538, 2023.
 [21] Z. Liu, H. Miao, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, K. Zheng, and H. Li, “LightTR: A [46] Y. Zheng et al., “DiffUFlow: Robust fine-grained urban flow inference
 lightweight framework for federated trajectory recovery,” in Proc. IEEE with denoising diffusion model,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl.
 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2024, pp. 4422–4434. Manage., 2023, pp. 3505–3513.
 [22] B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, and E. Wasle, GNSS–Global [47] Y. Yuan, C. Han, J. Ding, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “UrbanDiT: A foundation
 Navigation Satellite Systems: GPS, GLONASS, Galileo, and More. model for open-world urban spatio-temporal learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2025, pp. 1–29.
 [23] Z. Chen et al., “KGTS: Contrastive trajectory similarity learning over [48] C. J. Reed et al., “Scale-MAE: A scale-aware masked autoencoder
 prompt knowledge graph embedding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., for multiscale geospatial representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 2024, pp. 8311–8319. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 4088–4099.
2058 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 [49] X. Zhao et al., “WeatherGFM: Learning a weather generalist foundation [74] S. Tu, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, and Y. Yang, “PowerPM: Foundation model
 model via in-context learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Log. Program., 2025, for power systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
 pp. 1–21. pp. 115233–115260.
 [50] Z. Li et al., “UrbanGPT: Spatio-temporal large language models,” in [75] L. Wu et al., “LaDe: The first comprehensive last-mile delivery dataset
 Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, from industry,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
 pp. 5351–5362. Mining, 2024, pp. 1–23.
 [51] G. Chen et al., “VideoLLM: Modeling video sequence with large lan- [76] D. Yang, D. Zhang, V. W. Zheng, and Z. Yu, “Modeling user activity
 guage models,” 2023, arXiv:2305.13292 . preference by leveraging user spatial temporal characteristics in LBSNs,”
 [52] A. Dosovitskiy, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 129–142,
 recognition at scale” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2020, Jan. 2015.
 pp. 1–22. [77] E. Cho, S. A. Myers, and J. Leskovec, “Friendship and mobility: User
 [53] K. Li et al., “VideoChat: Chat-centric video understanding,” Sci. China movement in location-based social networks,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD
 Inf. Sci., vol. 68, no. 10, 2025, Art. no. 200102. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2011, pp. 1082–1090.
 [54] E. Song et al., “MovieChat: From dense token to sparse memory for long [78] Y. Zheng et al., “GeoLife: A collaborative social networking service
 video understanding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern among user, location and trajectory,” IEEE Data Eng. Bull., vol. 33, no.
 Recognit., 2024, pp. 18221–18232. 2, pp. 32–39, 2010.
 [55] X. Chen et al., “SEINE: Short-to-long video diffusion model for genera- [79] Z. Wang et al., “OpenForecast: A large-scale open-ended event foretive transition and prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, casting dataset,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Comput. Linguistics, 2025,
 2024, pp. 1–15. pp. 5273–5294.
 [56] X. Gu, C. Wen, W. Ye, J. Song, and Y. Gao, “Seer: Language instructed [80] K. Leetaru and P. A. Schrodt, “GDELT: Global data on events, location,
 video prediction with latent diffusion models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. and tone,” in Proc. ISA Annu. Conv., 2013, pp. 1–49.
 Representations, 2024, pp. 1–31. [81] F. Zhang, Z. Zhang, X. Ao, F. Zhuang, Y. Xu, and Q. He, “Along the time:
 [57] A. Radford et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natu- Timeline-traced embedding for temporal knowledge graph completion,”
 ral language supervision,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2021, in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022, pp. 2529–2538.
 pp. 8748–8763. [82] Z. Zhang et al., “PromptST: Prompt-enhanced spatio-temporal multi-
 [58] A. Yang, A. Miech, J. Sivic, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Zero-shot video attribute prediction,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023,
 question answering via frozen bidirectional language models,” in Proc. pp. 3195–3205.
 Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 124–141. [83] A. E. Johnson et al., “MIMIC-III: A freely accessible critical care
 [59] J. Pan et al., “Retrieving-to-answer: Zero-shot video question answering database,” Sci. Data, vol. 3, 2016, Art. no. 160035.
 with frozen large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., [84] S. Rasp, P. D. Dueben, S. Scher, J. A. Weyn, S. Mouatadid, and
 2023, pp. 272–283. N. Thuerey, “WeatherBench: A benchmark data set for data-driven
 [60] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “BLIP-2: Bootstrap- weather forecasting,” J. Adv. Model. Earth Syst., vol. 12, no. 11, 2020,
 ping language-image pre-training with frozen image encoders and Art. no. e2020MS002203.
 large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, [85] M. Veillette, S. Samsi, and C. Mattioli, “SEVIR: A storm event impp. 19730–19742. agery dataset for deep learning applications in radar and satellite
 [61] H. Zhang, X. Li, and L. Bing, “Video-LLaMA: An instruction-tuned meteorology,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020,
 audio-visual language model for video understanding,” in Proc. Conf. pp. 22009–22019.
 Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., Syst. Demonstrations, 2023, [86] S. Jamali, A. Ghorbanian, and A. M. Abdi, “Satellite-observed spatial
 pp. 543–553. and temporal sea surface temperature trends of the baltic sea between
 [62] J. Yang et al., “Generalized predictive model for autonomous driv- 1982 and 2021,” Remote Sens., vol. 15, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 102.
 ing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024, [87] Z. Li, C. Huang, L. Xia, Y. Xu, and J. Pei, “Spatial-temporal hypergraph
 pp. 14662–14672. self-supervised learning for crime prediction,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Int.
 [63] S. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Miao, H. Chen, C. Fan, and J. Zhang, “Score- Conf. Data Eng., 2022, pp. 2984–2996.
 CDM: Score-weighted convolutional diffusion model for multivariate [88] S. Wang et al., “DiffCrime: A multimodal conditional diffusion model
 time series imputation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, for crime risk map inference,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 pp. 2551–2560. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 3212–3221.
 [64] X. Yang, Y. Sun, X. Yuan, and X. Chen, “Frequency-aware generative [89] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous
 models for multivariate time series imputation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural driving? The KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 52595–52623. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2012, pp. 3354–3361.
 [65] D. Zhang, Z. Yuan, Y. Yang, J. Chen, J. Wang, and Y. Li, ”Brant: [90] C. Schuldt, I. Laptev, and B. Caputo, “Recognizing human actions: A
 Foundation model for intracranial neural signal,” in Proc. Int. Conf. local SVM approach,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., 2004,
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 26304–26321. pp. 32–36.
 [66] Z. Shao, Z. Zhang, F. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Pre-training enhanced spatial- [91] K. Soomro, “UCF101: A dataset of 101 human actions classes from
 temporal graph neural network for multivariate time series forecasting,” videos in the wild,” 2012, arXiv:1212.0402 .
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2022, [92] C. Lu, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Abnormal event detection at 150 fps in
 pp. 1567–1577. MATLAB,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2013, pp. 2720–2727.
 [67] Z. Li, L. Xia, Y. Xu, and C. Huang, “Generative pre-training of spatio- [93] R. Goyal et al., “The ‘something something’ video database for learning
 temporal graph neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. and evaluating visual common sense,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.,
 Syst., 2023, pp. 70229–70246. 2017, pp. 5842–5850.
 [68] H. Gao, R. Jiang, Z. Dong, J. Deng, Y. Ma, and X. Song, “Spatial- [94] M. Bain, A. Nagrani, G. Varol, and A. Zisserman, “Frozen in time: A
 temporal-decoupled masked pre-training for spatiotemporal forecasting,” joint video and image encoder for end-to-end retrieval,” in Proc. Int.
 in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 3998–4006. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 1728–1738.
 [69] Y. Fang et al., “Efficient large-scale traffic forecasting with transformers: [95] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent
 A spatial data management perspective,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2025, pp. 1–11. Representations, 2017, pp. 1–16.
 [70] Z. Li, L. Xia, Y. Xu, and C. Huang, “FlashST: A simple and universal [96] C. Song, Y. Lin, S. Guo, and H. Wan, “Spatial-temporal synchronous
 prompt-tuning framework for traffic prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. graph convolutional networks: A new framework for spatial-temporal
 Learn., 2024, pp. 28978–28988. network data forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2020,
 [71] Z. Li et al., “Open spatio-temporal foundation models for traffic predic- pp. 914–921.
 tion,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., 2025. [97] X. Liu et al., “LargeST: A benchmark dataset for large-scale traf-
 [72] Z. Yuan, D. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Chen, and Y. Li, “PPi: Pretraining brain fic forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2023,
 signal model for patient-independent seizure detection,” in Proc. Int. pp. 75354–75371.
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 69586–69604. [98] Y. Fang, R. Liu, H. Huang, P. Zhao, and Q. Wu, “A spatio-temporal
 [73] L. Wu et al., “G2PTL: A geography-graph pre-trained model,” in Proc. diffusion model for missing and real-time financial data inference,” in
 ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 4991–4999. Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 602–611.
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2059

 [99] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting the [123] L. Yuan et al., “Contextualized spatio-temporal contrastive learning
 dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural networks,” with self-supervision,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2020, Recognit., 2022, pp. 13977–13986.
 pp. 753–763. [124] K. Bi, L. Xie, H. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Gu, and Q. Tian, “Pangu-weather: A
[100] C. Wimmer and N. Rekabsaz, “Leveraging vision-language models for 3D high-resolution model for fast and accurate global weather forecast,”
 granular market change prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. Nature, vol. 619, pp. 533–538, 2023.
 Muffin, 2023, pp. 1–11. [125] J. Pathak et al., “FOURCASTNET: A global data-driven high-resolution
[101] X. Yi, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, T. Li, and Y. Zheng, “Deep distributed fusion weather model using adaptive fourier neural operators,” in Proc. Platform
 network for air quality prediction,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Adv. Sci. Comput. Conf., 2023, pp. 1–11.
 Discovery Data Mining, 2018, pp. 965–973. [126] Y. Zhu, Y. Ye, S. Zhang, X. Zhao, and J. Yu, “DiffTraj: Generating GPS
[102] Y. Liang et al., “AirFormer: Predicting nationwide air quality in trajectory with diffusion probabilistic model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 China with transformers,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, Inf. Process. Syst., 2023, pp. 65168–65188.
 pp. 14329–14337. [127] J. Ji et al., “Spatio-temporal self-supervised learning for traffic flow
[103] W.-L. Zheng and B.-L. Lu, “Investigating critical frequency bands and prediction,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4356–4364.
 channels for EEG-based emotion recognition with deep neural net- [128] J. Deng, R. Jiang, J. Zhang, and X. Song, “Multi-modality spatioworks,” IEEE Trans. Auton. Mental Develop., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 162–175, temporal forecasting via self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Int. Joint
 Sep. 2015. Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2018–2026.
[104] B. Blankertz, G. Dornhege, M. Krauledat, K.-R. Müller, and G. Curio, [129] Z. Gu et al., “MSTEM: Masked spatiotemporal event series modeling
 “The non-invasive berlin Brain–computer interface: Fast acquisition for urban undisciplined events forecasting,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf.
 of effective performance in untrained subjects,” NeuroImage, vol. 37, Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 685–694.
 pp. 539–550, 2007. [130] H. Wen et al., “DiffSTG: Probabilistic spatio-temporal graph forecasting
[105] A. L. Goldberger et al., “Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet: with denoising diffusion models,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Adv. Geocomponents of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals,” graphic Inf. Syst., 2023, pp. 1–12.
 Circulation, vol. 101, pp. e215–e220, 2000. [131] J. Hu, X. Liu, Z. Fan, Y. Liang, and R. Zimmermann, “Towards unifying
[106] Z. Shao et al., “Exploring progress in multivariate time series forecasting: diffusion models for probabilistic spatio-temporal graph learning,” in
 Comprehensive benchmarking and heterogeneity analysis,” IEEE Trans. Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2024, pp. 135–146.
 Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 291–305, Jan. 2025. [132] H. Chen, Y. Jiang, S. Guo, X. Mao, Y. Lin, and H. Wan, “DiffLight:
[107] Y. Fang et al., “When spatio-temporal meet wavelets: Disentangled traffic A partial rewards conditioned diffusion model for traffic signal control
 forecasting via efficient spectral graph attention networks,” in Proc. IEEE with missing data,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 517–529. pp. 123353–123378.
[108] W. Shu, K. Cai, and N. N. Xiong, “A short-term traffic flow predic- [133] F. Du et al., “A survey of LLM datasets: From autoregressive model to
 tion model based on an improved gate recurrent unit neural network,” ai chatbot,” J. Comput. Sci. Technol., vol. 39, pp. 542–566, 2024.
 IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 16654–16665, [134] G. Chen, M. Wang, Y. Yang, K. Yu, L. Yuan, and Y. Yue, “PointGPT:
 Sep. 2022. Auto-regressively generative pre-training from point clouds,” in Proc.
[109] T. Bogaerts, A. D. Masegosa, J. S. Angarita-Zapata, E. Onieva, and P. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 29667–29679.
 Hellinckx, “A graph CNN-LSTM neural network for short and long-term [135] Y. Lin et al., “UVTM: Universal vehicle trajectory modeling with ST
 traffic forecasting based on trajectory data,” Transp. Res. Part C, Emerg. feature domain generation,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., pp. 1–14,
 Technol., vol. 112, pp. 62–77, 2020. 2025.
[110] L. Deng, Y. Zhao, Z. Fu, H. Sun, S. Liu, and K. Zheng, “Efficient trajectory [136] W. Jiang, L. Zhao, and B.-l. Lu, “Large brain model for learning generic
 similarity computation with contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. representations with tremendous EEG data in BCI,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2022, pp. 365–374. Learn. Representations, 2024, pp. 1–22.
[111] Z. Ma et al., “More than routing: Joint GPS and route modeling for [137] J. Wu et al., “iVideoGPT: Interactive videoGPTs are scalable world modrefine trajectory representation learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, els,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 68082–68119,
 pp. 3064–3075. [138] G. T. Hudson et al., “Everything is a video: Unifying modalities through
[112] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FED- next-frame prediction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2025, pp. 22004–
 former: Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long- 22013.
 term series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, [139] K. Tian, Y. Jiang, Z. Yuan, B. Peng, and L. Wang, “Visual autoregressive
 pp. 27268–27286. modeling: Scalable image generation via next-scale prediction,” in Proc.
[113] Y. Lin et al., “TrajFM: A vehicle trajectory foundation model for region Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 84839–84865.
 and task transferability,” 2024, arXiv:2408.15251 . [140] J. D.M.-W. C. Kenton and L. K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep
[114] T. Yue et al., “EEGPT: Unleashing the potential of EEG generalist foun- bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. Conf.
 dation model by autoregressive pre-training,” 2024, arXiv:2410.19779 North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, Hum. Lang. Technol.,
 . Vol. 1 (Long Short Papers), 2019, pp. 4171–4186.
[115] W.-B. Jiang, L.-M. Zhao, and B.-L. Lu, “Large brain model for learning [141] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, “Masked
 generic representations with tremendous EEG data in BCI,” in Proc. Int. autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2024, pp. 1–22. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 16000–16009.
[116] V. Ekambaram et al., “Tiny time mixers (TTMS): Fast pre- [142] C. Feichtenhofer et al., “Masked autoencoders as spatiotemporal learntrained models for enhanced zero/few-shot forecasting of multivari- ers,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2022, pp. 35946–35958.
 ate time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, [143] J. Sun, Y. Fan, C.-C. M. Yeh, W. Zhang, and G. Chowdhary, “Revealing
 pp. 74147–74181. the power of masked autoencoders in traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ACM
[117] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 4071–4075.
 in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 6840–6851. [144] Z. Tong, Y. Song, J. Wang, and L. Wang, “VideoMAE: Masked autoen-
[118] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, and C. Zhang, “Graph wavenet for deep coders are data-efficient learners for self-supervised video pre-training,”
 spatial-temporal graph modeling,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., pp. 10078–10093, 2022.
 2019, pp. 1907–1913. [145] Z. Cai et al., “MARLIN: Masked autoencoder for facial video representa-
[119] Q. Zhang, C. Huang, L. Xia, Z. Wang, Z. Li, and S. Yiu, “Automated tion learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
 spatio-temporal graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2023, pp. 1493–1504.
 2023, pp. 295–305. [146] Y. Pang, W. Wang, F. E. Tay, W. Liu, Y. Tian, and L. Yuan, “Masked
[120] Q. Zhang, C. Huang, L. Xia, Z. Wang, S. M. Yiu, and R. Han, “Spatial- autoencoders for point cloud self-supervised learning,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
 temporal graph learning with adversarial contrastive adaptation,” in Proc. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 604–621.
 Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2023, pp. 41151–41163. [147] Y. Fang, J. Xie, Y. Zhao, L. Chen, Y. Gao, and K. Zheng, “Temporal-
[121] Y. Chang, E. Tanin, X. Cao, and J. Qi, “Spatial structure-aware road frequency masked autoencoders for time series anomaly detection,” in
 network embedding via graph contrastive learning,” in Proc. 26th Int. Proc. IEEE 40th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2024, pp. 1228–1241.
 Conf. Extending Database Technol., 2023, pp. 144–156. [148] W. Yu, M. Huang, S. Wu, and Y. Zhang, “Ensembled masked graph
[122] K. Chen et al., “FENGWU: Pushing the skillful global medium-range autoencoders for link anomaly detection in a road network considering
 weather forecast beyond 10 days lead,” 2023, arXiv:2304.02948 . spatiotemporal features,” Inf. Sci., vol. 622, pp. 456–475, 2023.
2060 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

[149] P. Khosla et al., “Supervised contrastive learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [173] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2020, pp. 18661–18673. recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit.,
[150] J. Yang et al., “Vision-language pre-training with triple contrastive learn- 2016, pp. 770–778.
 ing,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, [174] D. Alexey, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
 pp. 15671–15680. recognition at scale,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2021,
[151] A. Diba et al., “Vi2CLR: Video and image for visual contrastive learning pp. 1–22.
 of representation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 1502–1512. [175] D. Tran, H. Wang, L. Torresani, J. Ray, Y. LeCun, and M. Paluri, “A closer
[152] Y. You, T. Chen, Y. Sui, T. Chen, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Graph contrastive look at spatiotemporal convolutions for action recognition,” in Proc.
 learning with augmentations,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 6450–6459.
 Syst., 2020, pp. 5812–5823. [176] H. Qu, Y. Cai, and J. Liu, “LLMs are good action recognizers,”
[153] S. Ding, R. Qian, and H. Xiong, “Dual contrastive learning for spatio- in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2024,
 temporal representation,” in Proc. 30th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2022, pp. 18395–18406.
 pp. 5649–5658. [177] Q. Sun, Y. Fang, L. Wu, X. Wang, and Y. Cao, “EVA-CLIP: Improved
[154] J. Tang, L. Xia, J. Hu, and C. Huang, “Spatio-temporal meta con- training techniques for clip at scale,” 2023, arXiv:2303.15389 .
 trastive learning,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023, [178] P. P. Ray, “ChatGPT: A comprehensive review on background, applicapp. 2412–2421. tions, key challenges, bias, ethics, limitations and future scope,” in Proc.
[155] X. Gao, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Li, J.-G. Yu, and S. Du, “Efficient spatio- Internet Things Cyber- Phys. Syst., pp. 121–154, 2023.
 temporal contrastive learning for skeleton-based 3-d action recognition,” [179] J. Bai et al., “Qwen technical report,” 2023, arXiv:2309.16609 .
 IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 25, pp. 405–417, 2023. [180] T. GLM et al., “ChatGLM: A family of large language models from
[156] Y. Fang, Y. Qin, H. Luo, F. Zhao, and K. Zheng, “STWave+ : A multi- GLM-130b to GLM-4 all tools,” 2024, arXiv:2406.12793 .
 scale efficient spectral graph attention network with long-term trends for [181] Y. Wu, Y. Peng, J. Yu, and R. S. Lee, “MAS4POI: A multi-agents coldisentangled traffic flow forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., laboration system for next POI recommendation,” in Proc. Pacific-Asia
 vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 2671–2685, Jun. 2024. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2025, pp. 356–367.
[157] X. Liu, Y. Liang, C. Huang, Y. Zheng, B. Hooi, and R. Zimmermann, [182] J. Wang et al., “Large language models as urban residents: An LLM agent
 “When do contrastive learning signals help spatio-temporal graph fore- framework for personal mobility generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural
 casting?” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf. Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2022, Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 124547–124574.
 pp. 1–12. [183] L. Zheng et al., “Extracting spatiotemporal data from gradients with large
[158] R. Li, T. Zhong, X. Jiang, G. Trajcevski, J. Wu, and F. Zhou, “Min- language models,” 2024, arXiv:2410.16121 .
 ing spatio-temporal relations via self-paced graph contrastive learning,” [184] A. Q. Jiang et al., “Mixtral of experts,” 2024, arXiv:2401.04088 ,
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2022, [185] X. Yang et al., “A large language model for electronic health records,”
 pp. 936–944. npj Digit. Med., vol. 5, 2022, Art. no. 194.
[159] Y. Chang, J. Qi, Y. Liang, and E. Tanin, “Contrastive trajectory similarity [186] Z. Li, J. Kim, Y.-Y. Chiang, and M. Chen, “SpaBERT: A pretrained
 learning with dual-feature attention,” in Proc. IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data language model from geographic data for geo-entity representation,” in
 Eng., 2023, pp. 2933–2945. Proc. Findings Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2022, pp. 2757–2769.
[160] Y. Yan et al., “UrbanCLIP: Learning text-enhanced urban region profiling [187] Y. Chen, X. Wang, and G. Xu, “GATGPT: A pre-trained large language
 with contrastive language-image pretraining from the web,” in Proc. ACM model with graph attention network for spatiotemporal imputation,”
 Web Conf., 2024, pp. 4006–4017. 2023, arXiv:2311.14332 .
[161] R. Xu et al., “MM-path: Multi-modal, multi-granularity path represen- [188] Y. Ren, Y. Chen, S. Liu, B. Wang, H. Yu, and Z. Cui, “TPLLM: A traffic
 tation learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data prediction framework based on pretrained large language models,” 2024,
 Mining, 2025, pp. 1703–1714. arXiv:2403.02221 .
[162] R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Om- [189] L. Liu, S. Yu, R. Wang, Z. Ma, and Y. Shen, “How can large language
 mer, “High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion mod- models understand spatial-temporal data?” 2024, arXiv:2401.14192 .
 els,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, [190] H. Wang, J. Han, W. Fan, and H. Liu, “Empowering pre-trained language
 pp. 10684–10695. models for spatio-temporal forecasting via decoupling enhanced discrete
[163] W. Peebles and S. Xie, “Scalable diffusion models with transformers,” in reprogramming,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 1–7.
 Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 4195–4205. [191] H. Xue, B. P. Voutharoja, and F. D. Salim, “Leveraging language foun-
[164] X. Xu, Y. Wei, P. Wang, X. Luo, F. Zhou, and G. Trajcevski, “Diffusion dation models for human mobility forecasting,” in Proc. 30th Int. Conf.
 probabilistic modeling for fine-grained urban traffic flow inference with Adv. Geographic Inf. Syst., 2022, pp. 1–9.
 relaxed structural constraint,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech [192] H. Touvron et al., “LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language
 Signal Process., 2023, pp. 1–5. models,” 2023, arXiv:2302.13971 .
[165] S. Rühling Cachay, B. Zhao, H. Joren, and R. Yu, “DYffusion: A [193] C. Liu et al., “Spatial-temporal large language model for traffic predynamics-informed diffusion model for spatiotemporal forecasting,” in diction,” in Proc. 25th IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Data Manage., 2024,
 Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 45259–45287. pp. 31–40.
[166] D. Daiya, M. Yadav, and H. S. Rao, “DiffSTOCK: Probabilistic relational [194] P. Li, M. de Rijke, H. Xue, S. Ao, Y. Song, and F. D. Salim, “Large lanstock market predictions using diffusion models,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. guage models for next point-of-interest recommendation,” in Proc. 47th
 Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2024, pp. 7335–7339. Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. Develop. Inf. Retrieval, 2024, pp. 1463–1472.
[167] Y. Duan et al., “Causal deciphering and inpainting in spatio-temporal [195] M. Chen, Z. Li, W. Huang, Y. Gong, and Y. Yin, “Profiling urban streets:
 dynamics via diffusion model,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. A semi-supervised prediction model based on street view imagery and
 Syst., 2024, pp. 107604–107632. spatial topology,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data
[168] H. Chen, J. Ding, Y. Li, Y. Wang, and X.-P. Zhang, “Social physics Mining, 2024, pp. 319–328.
 informed diffusion model for crowd simulation,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. [196] X. Hao et al., “UrbanVLP: A multi-granularity vision-language pre-
 Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 474–482. trained foundation model for urban indicator prediction,” in Proc. AAAI
[169] Y. Yuan, J. Ding, C. Shao, D. Jin, and Y. Li, “Spatio-temporal diffusion Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025, pp. 1–17.
 point processes,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data [197] P. Gao et al., “LLaMA-Adapter V2: Parameter-efficient visual instruction
 Mining, 2023, pp. 3173–3184. model,” 2023, arXiv:2304.15010 .
[170] M. Liu, H. Huang, H. Feng, L. Sun, B. Du, and Y. Fu, “PriSTI: A [198] Z. Lin et al., “SPHINX: The joint mixing of weights, tasks, and visual
 conditional diffusion framework for spatiotemporal imputation,” in Proc. embeddings for multi-modal large language models,” in Proc. 18th Eur.
 IEEE 39th Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2023, pp. 1927–1939. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2024, pp. 1–24.
[171] S. Zhang, S. Wang, X. Tan, R. Liu, J. Zhang, and J. Wang, “SASDIM: [199] R. Schumann, W. Zhu, W. Feng, T.-J. Fu, S. Riezler, and W. Y. Wang,
 Self-adaptive noise scaling diffusion model for spatial time series impu- “VELMA: Verbalization embodiment of LLM agents for vision and
 tation,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 2561–2569. language navigation in street view,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.,
[172] H. Wang, J. Han, W. Fan, W. Zhang, and H. Liu, “PhyDA: Physics-guided 2024, pp. 18924–18933.
 diffusion models for data assimilation in atmospheric systems,” 2025, [200] L. Giray, “Prompt engineering with ChatGPT: A guide for academic
 arXiv:2505.12882 . writers,” Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 51, pp. 2629–2633, 2023.
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2061

[201] H. Xue and F. D. Salim, “PromptCast: A new prompt-based learning [226] Y. Duan et al., “CaT-GNN: Enhancing credit card fraud detection
 paradigm for time series forecasting,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., via causal temporal graph neural networks,” in Proc. COLING, 2024,
 vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 6851–6864, Nov. 2024. pp. 1–10.
[202] X. Wang, M. Fang, Z. Zeng, and T. Cheng, “Where would I go next? Large [227] B. Hui, Y. Fang, T. Xia, S. Aykent, and W.-S. Ku, “Constrained market
 language models as human mobility predictors,” 2023, arXiv:2308.15197 share maximization by signal-guided optimization,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 . Artif. Intell., 2023, pp. 4330–4338.
[203] X. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Ling, S. Dong, Z. Liu, and Y. Lu, “Harnessing LLMs for [228] J. Luo et al., “Timeseries suppliers allocation risk optimization via
 temporal data-a study on explainable financial time series forecasting,” deep black litterman model,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2025,
 in Proc. Empirical Methods Natural Lang. Process., 2023, pp. 739–753. pp. 1–14.
[204] C. Sun, H. Li, Y. Li, and S. Hong, “TEST: Text prototype aligned [229] Y. Tong, J. She, B. Ding, L. Wang, and L. Chen, “Online mobile microembedding to activate LLM’s ability for time series,” in Proc. Int. Conf. task allocation in spatial crowdsourcing,” in Proc. IEEE 32nd Int. Conf.
 Learn. Representations, 2024, pp. 1–28. Data Eng., 2016, pp. 49–60.
[205] M. Jin et al., “Time-LLM: Time series forecasting by reprogramming [230] Z. Chen, P. Cheng, L. Chen, X. Lin, and C. Shahabi, “Fair task aslarge language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023, signment in spatial crowdsourcing,” Proc. VLDB Endowment„ vol. 13,
 pp. 1–24. pp. 2479–2492, 2020.
[206] X. Liu et al., “Large language models are few-shot health learners,” 2023, [231] M. Grunde-McLaughlin, M. S. Lam, R. Krishna, D. S. Weld, and J. Heer,
 arXiv:2305.15525 . “Designing LLM chains by adapting techniques from crowdsourcing
[207] B. Li, Y. Ge, Y. Chen, Y. Ge, R. Zhang, and Y. Shan, “Seed-bench-2-plus: workflows,” ACM Trans. Comput.- Hum. Interaction, vol. 32, no. 3,
 Benchmarking multimodal large language models with text-rich visual pp. 1–57, 2025.
 comprehension,” 2024, arXiv:2404.16790 . [232] G. I. Yussif, M. Abdelatti, and A. Hendawi, “Harnessing crowdsourced
[208] Z. Chen, L. N. Zheng, C. Lu, J. Yuan, and D. Zhu, “ChatGPT in- mobile data and LLM for dynamic and accessible pedestrian routformed graph neural network for stock movement prediction,” in Proc. ing,” in Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Conf. Mobile Data Manage., 2025,
 ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining RobustFin, 2023, pp. 109–112.
 pp. 1–10. [233] Y. Xu et al., “ProtoMix: Augmenting health status representation learn-
[209] P. Li et al., “RealTCD: Temporal causal discovery from interventional ing via prototype-based mixup,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl.
 data with large language model,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 3633–3644.
 Manage., 2024, pp. 4669–4677. [234] L. Y. Jiang et al., “Health system-scale language models are all-purpose
[210] H. Xu, Y. Gao, Z. Hui, J. Li, and X. Gao, “Language knowledge-assisted prediction engines,” Nature, vol. 619, pp. 357–362, 2023.
 representation learning for skeleton-based action recognition,” 2023, [235] X. Jiang et al., “Hykge: A hypothesis knowledge graph enhanced RAG
 arXiv:2305.12398 . framework for accurate and reliable medical LLMS responses,” in Proc.
[211] L. Da, M. Gao, H. Mei, and H. Wei, “Prompt to transfer: Sim-to-real Assoc. Comput. Linguistics, 2025, pp. 11836–11856.
 transfer for traffic signal control with prompt learning,” in Proc. AAAI [236] S. Lai, Z. Xu, W. Zhang, H. Liu, and H. Xiong, “Large language
 Conf. Artif. Intell., 2024, pp. 82–90. models as traffic signal control agents: Capacity and opportunity,”
[212] Z. Li et al., “Ocean significant wave height estimation with spatio- in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2025,
 temporally aware large language models,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. pp. 1–13.
 Knowl. Manage., 2024, pp. 3892–3896. [237] A. Seff et al., “MotionLM: Multi-agent motion forecasting as language
[213] Y. Liu, C. Kuai, X. Liao, H. Ma, B. Y. He, and J. Ma, “Semantic trajectory modeling,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2023, pp. 8579–8590.
 data mining with LLM-informed POI classification,” in IEEE 27th Int. [238] X. Zheng et al., “Large language models powered context-aware motion
 Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2024, pp. 207–213. prediction in autonomous driving,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
[214] Y. Ning and H. Liu, “UrbanKGent: A unified large language model agent Robots Syst., 2024, pp. 980–985.
 framework for urban knowledge graph construction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. [239] Q. Xu, Y. Shi, J. L. Bamber, C. Ouyang, and X. X. Zhu, “Large-scale
 Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 1–28. flood modeling and forecasting with floodcast,” Water Res., vol. 264,
[215] L. Zhong, L. Wang, X. Yang, and Q. Liao, “Comapoi: A collaborative 2024, Art. no. 122162.
 multi-agent framework for next poi prediction bridging the gap between [240] X. Si, X. Wu, Z. Li, S. Wang, and J. Zhu, “An all-in-one seismic
 trajectory and language,” in Proc. 48th Int. ACM SIGIR Conf. Res. phase picking, location, and association network for multi-task multi-
 Develop. Inf. Retrieva, 2025, pp. 1768–1778. station earthquake monitoring,” Commun. Earth Environ., vol. 5, 2024,
[216] A. Van Den et al., “Neural discrete representation learning,” in Proc. Int. Art. no. 22.
 Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6309–6318. [241] Z. Wu, F. Liu, J. Han, Y. Liang, and H. Liu, “Spatial-temporal mixture-of-
[217] S. T. Piantadosi, “Zipf’s word frequency law in natural language: A graph-experts for multi-type crime prediction,” 2024, arXiv:2409.15764
 critical review and future directions,” Psychon. Bull. Rev., vol. 21, .
 pp. 1112–1130, 2014. [242] Z. Guo, X. Wu, L. Liang, H. Sheng, N. Chen, and Z. Bi, “Cross-domain
[218] D. Kondratyuk et al., “VideoPoet: A large language model for zero- foundation model adaptation: Pioneering computer vision models for
 shot video generation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2024, geophysical data analysis,” J. Geophys. Res., Mach. Learn. Comput.,
 pp. 25105–25124. vol. 2, no. 1, 2025, Art. no. e2025JH000601.
[219] Y. Wei, Y. Lin, H. Gao, R. Xu, S. B. Yang, and J. Hu, “Path- [243] X. Si, X. Wu, H. Sheng, J. Zhu, and Z. Li, “SeisCLIP: A seismology
 LLM: A multi-modal path representation learning by aligning and foundation model pre-trained by multi-modal data for multi-purpose
 fusing with large language models,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2025, seismic feature extraction,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 62,
 pp. 2289–2298. 2024, Art. no. 5903713.
[220] C. Liu et al., “TimeCMA: Towards LLM-empowered time series fore- [244] H. Zhang, F. Zhao, C. Wang, H. Luo, H. Xiong, and Y. Fang, “Knowledge
 casting via cross-modality alignment,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., distillation for travel time estimation,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
 2025, pp. 1–9. vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 9631–9642, Aug. 2024.
[221] Z. Li, W. Zhou, Y.-Y. Chiang, and M. Chen, “GeoLM: Empowering [245] X. Ma, G. Fang, and X. Wang, “LLM-Pruner: On the structural pruning
 language models for geospatially grounded language understanding,” in of large language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 Proc. Conf. Empirical Methods Natural Lang., 2023, pp. 5227–5240. 2023, pp. 21702–21720.
[222] W. Shao, Z. Fang, L. Chen, and Y. Gao, “Towards trajectory anomaly [246] K. Egashira, M. Vero, R. Staab, J. He, and M. Vechev, “Exploiting
 detection: A fine-grained and noise-resilient framework,” in Proc. ACM LLM quantization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024,
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2025, pp. 2490–2501. pp. 1–17.
[223] Y. Fan et al., “Spatio-temporal denoising graph autoencoders with data [247] H. Miao et al., “Less is more: Efficient time series dataset condensation
 augmentation for photovoltaic data imputation,” in Proc. ACM Manage. via two-fold modal matching,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 18, 2025,
 Data, 2023, pp. 1–19. pp. 226–238.
[224] Z. Ma et al., “FusionSF: Fuse heterogeneous modalities in a vector [248] X. Yu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, and K. Qu, “BIGCity: A universal
 quantized framework for robust solar power forecasting,” in Proc. ACM spatiotemporal model for unified trajectory and traffic state data analysis,”
 SIGKDD Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining, 2024, pp. 5532–5543. in Proc. IEEE 41st Int. Conf. Data Eng., 2025, pp. 4455–4469.
[225] L. Deng, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, and K. Zheng, “MILLION: A general multi- [249] X. Qiu et al., “TFB: Towards comprehensive and fair benchmarking of
 objective framework with controllable risk for portfolio management,” time series forecasting methods,” in Proc. VLDB Endowment, vol. 18,
 Proc. VLDB, vol. 18, no. 2, 2025, pp. 1–9, 2025. pp. 226–238, 2024.
2062 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 38, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

 Yuchen Fang is currently working toward the PhD Ximu Zeng (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) redegree with the University of Electronic Science and ceived the bachelor’s degree in data science and Big
 Technology of China. He has authored or coauthored Data technology from the Chongqing University of
 several papers in top journals and conference proceed- Posts and Telecommunications, in 2022. She is curings, such as SIGKDD, ICDE, SIGIR, IEEE Transac- rently working toward the PhD degree with the School
 tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, and IEEE of Computer Science and Technology, University of
 Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. Electronic Science and Technology of China. Her
 His research interests include spatio-temporal data research interests include spatial-temporal data minmining, time series analysis, and urban computing, ing, spatial crowdsourcing, and vector approximate
 with a special focus on traffic forecasting. nearest neighbor search.

 Hao Miao received the PhD degree in computer
 science from Aalborg University, Denmark. He is
 Yuyang Xia received the bachelor’s degree in comcurrently a research assistant professor with the Deputer science and technology from the Chongqing
 partment of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic Uni-
 University of Posts and Telecommunications, in
 versity. His research interests include spatio-temporal
 2021. He is currently working toward the PhD dedata analytics, trajectory computing, and large langree with the University of Electronic Science and
 guage models.
 Technology of China. His research interests include
 autonomous driving and spatio-temporal data mining.

 Yuxuan Liang (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 degree from the School of Computing, National University of Singapore. He is currently an assistant professor with The Hong Kong University of Science and Yan Zhao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the doc-
 Technology (Guangzhou), working on the research, toral degree in computer science from Soochow
 development, and innovation of spatio-temporal data University, China, in 2020. She is currently a promining and urban computing. He has authored or fessor with the Shenzhen Institute for Advanced
 coauthored more than 100 papers in refereed jour- Study, University of Electronic Science and Technolnals and conferences with more than 10,000 cita- ogy of China. Her research interests include spatial
 tions on Google Scholar and was recognized as Stan- databases and trajectory computing.
 ford/Elsevier Top 2% Scientists in 2024. He is an
associate editor for Neurocomputing (IF=6.0) and area chair/senior PC of
prestigious conferences such as KDD, NeurIPS, IJCAI, MM, and ICASSP. He
is the tutorial co-chair of SSTD’25 and workshop co-chair for PAKDD’26. He
was the recipient of ACM SIGSPATIAL China Chapter Rising Star Award, 23 rd
China Patent Excellence Award, and SDSC Dissertation Research Fellowship.

 Torben Bach Pedersen (Senior Member, IEEE)
 Liwei Deng received the PhD degree in computer received the honorary doctorate degree from TU
 science from the University of Electronic Science and Dresden, Dresden, Germany. He is currently a pro-
 Technology of China, China, in 2025. He is currently fessor with the Center for Data-Intensive Systems
 a postdoc of computer science with Aalborg Univer- (Daisy), Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. His
 sity. His research interests include spatio-temporal research interests include predictive, prescriptive, and
 data mining and vector approximate nearest neighbor extreme-scale data analytics with digital energy as the
 search. main application area. He is an ACM distinguished
 scientist, IEEE Computer Society distinguished contributor, member of the Danish Academy of Technical
 Sciences.

 Yue Cui received the bachelor’s degree from the
 University of Electronic Science and Technology of
 China, in 2020. She is currently working toward Christian S. Jensen (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a
 the PhD degree with the Hong Kong University of professor of computer science with Aalborg Univer-
 Science and Technology (HKUST). Her research sity, Denmark. His research interests include data
 interests include the interdisciplinary study of data management and analytics and temporal and spatioscience and social science, including reliability and temporal data. He is a member of Academia Eugovernance and developing responsible and efficient ropaea, Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letsolutions to identify, evaluate, mitigate/control, the ters, and Danish Academy of Technical Sciences. He
 effect of data on societal consequences across its life- is a fellow of ACM.
 cycle, prioritizing aspects such as efficacy, equality,
 equity, and privacy.
FANG et al.: UNRAVELING SPATIO-TEMPORAL FOUNDATION MODELS VIA THE PIPELINE LENS: A COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW 2063

 Xiaofang Zhou (Fellow, IEEE) is currently the Otto Kai Zheng (Senior Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 Poon professor of engineering and chair professor degree in computer science from The University of
 of computer science and engineering with the Hong Queensland, in 2012. He is currently a professor with
 Kong University of Science and Technology. He is the University of Electronic Science and Technolalso the head of the Department of Computer Science ogy of China. His research interest includes spatioand Engineering. His research focuses on finding ef- temporal data management, spatial crowdsourcing,
 fective and efficient solutions to managing integrating intelligent database systems and vector data manageand analyzing very large amounts of complex data. ment.