34 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 VDDFormer: A Variable Dependency
 Discrepancy-Based Transformer for
 Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection
 Bo Liu , Lingling Tao , Xiaodan Chen , and Zhijun Li

 Abstract—The dynamics of multivariate time series (MTS) data
are jointly characterized by its nonlinear temporal dependencies
and complex variable dependencies, making unsupervised time
series anomaly detection a challenging task. Existing methods
primarily rely on prediction or reconstruction errors, neglecting
the valuable information within the variable dependencies. In
this paper, we propose a variable dependency discrepancy-based
Transformer (VDDFormer) for unsupervised MTS anomaly detection. VDDFormer comprises a variable correlation encoder, a
temporal dependency encoder, and a reconstruction decoder. The
variable correlation encoder capitalizes on a variable dependency
attention mechanism, which employs self-attention to learn the
global variable dependencies; meanwhile, the local variable dependencies are captured by the adaptive correlation matrix. The
global and local variable dependencies are then used to compute
the variable dependency discrepancy as a new intrinsic property to
distinguish between normal and abnormal patterns. By integrating
this new discrepancy with the reconstruction error, the model
effectively enhances its anomaly differentiation capability. Extensive experiments on five real-world anomaly detection datasets
demonstrate that VDDFormer effectively and robustly detects
group anomaly patterns by leveraging the variable dependency
discrepancy and achieves state-of-the-art performance on four out
of the five datasets. Fig. 1. Example of anomalies in the SWaT dataset and anomaly scores
 obtained by existing methods. FIT101, LIT101, MV101, P101, and AIT201
 Index Terms—Multivariate time series, anomaly detection, are the five sensors in the SWaT dataset. Moments with higher anomaly scores
variable dependency discrepancy, variable dependency attention. obtained by GDN, Anomaly Transformer (A.T.), MEMTO, and VDDFormer
 (ours) methods are more likely to be identified as anomalies. The red background
 interval in the figure represents the abnormal segment. The red dashed circles
 I. INTRODUCTION enclose events that are incorrectly identified as anomalies.

 HE proliferation of interconnected devices in modern in-
T dustrial systems necessitates the use of numerous sensors
to monitor their health since anomalies are inevitable and can
 series data becomes crucial in modern industrial systems [1], [2],
 [3]. However, anomalies are often rare and hidden by the sheer
incur significant economic losses. The continuously recorded volume of normal data in practice. This makes manual labeling
sensor data forms a vast collection of multivariate time series. To of anomalies very expensive and even impractical, rendering
ensure security and prevent financial repercussions, effectively supervised anomaly detection techniques unsuitable.
detecting abnormal time points within the multivariate time Unsupervised anomaly detection for real-world MTS is challenging due to the intricate temporal and variable dependencies
 Received 10 September 2024; revised 1 August 2025; accepted 11 August inherent in the data. These dependencies are further complicated
2025. Date of publication 19 August 2025; date of current version 14 January by the dynamic variable correlations, where changes in one
2026. This work was supported in part by the Shenzhen College Stability variable can trigger a cascade of corresponding changes in
Support Plan under Grant GXWD20220811173233001, and in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant JCYJ20241202123503005, others. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the sensors FIT101,
Grant ZDSYS20230626091203008, Grant KQTD20240729102154066, and LIT101, MV101, and P101 exhibit intricate correlations and
Grant ZDSYS20210623091809029. Recommended for acceptance by L. Y. Wu. synchronized periodic fluctuations. When FIT101 experiences
(Corresponding authors: Lingling Tao; Zhijun Li.)
 Bo Liu, Xiaodan Chen, and Zhijun Li are with the Harbin Institute an anomaly, similar abnormalities appear in LIT101, MV101,
of Technology, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: 23B936027@stu.hit.edu.cn; and P101, demonstrating a group anomaly pattern character-
21B303004@stu.hit.edu.cn; lizhijun_os@hit.edu.cn). ized by: during anomalies, long-term and short-term abnormal
 Lingling Tao is with the Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 518055,
China (e-mail: taolingling@hit.edu.cn). variable clusters maintain similar dependency patterns (rela-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBDATA.2025.3600004 tively small distribution discrepancy), whereas normal states
 2332-7790 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 35

exhibit stable long-term variable dependencies contrasting with correlation encoder is designed to capture both global and local
dynamic short-term variable interactions (relatively large distri- dependencies, thereby quantifying the variable dependency disbutional contrast). crepancy. The temporal dependency encoder is constructed to
 This discrepancy underscores the necessity of examining model the temporal dependencies of MTS data by embedding
collective behaviors to reveal group anomaly patterns, while observations at each time step as tokens and learning their
individual and local inspections might miss them. self-attention map to capture temporal dependencies. Finally,
 Spurred by its immense practical utility, a plethora of unsuper- the reconstruction decoder is designed to combine the outputs
vised anomaly detection algorithms have been proposed in the of the above two encoders to reconstruct the data. VDDFormer
literature. Among these, classical statistical learning methods is developed based on the characteristic that group anomalies
form a notable category, encompassing principal component exhibit relatively small discrepancies between long-term and
analysis-based techniques [4], [5], one-class learning-based ap- short-term variable dependencies, contrasting with relatively
proaches [6], [7], [8], and density estimation-based methods [9], large distribution discrepancies in normal states. Specifically,
[10]. These statistical methodologies often depend on manu- we embed the entire series of each variable within a long time
ally engineered features and generally fail to account for the window as individual tokens and compute their self-attention
temporal dynamics or intricate relationships between variables. map. This attention map, which can reflect the long-time vari-
As a result, their efficacy in capturing normal patterns within able dependencies, is referred to as global dependency. For
multivariate time series data is compromised. To leverage the short-term variable relationships, the dependency weight mapowerful representation learning ability of deep neural networks, trix at each time step is modeled using the adaptive adjadeep learning-based methods have gained prominence in recent cency matrix approach proposed in [26]. This matrix captures
years. These methods involve the use of specifically designed instantaneous interactive correlations among variables and is
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) [11], [12], [13] that perform termed local dependency. As both global dependency and loself-supervised prediction or reconstruction tasks to discern cal dependency measure the group behavior collectively, they
normal patterns. During the detection phase, reconstruction offer us a new criterion, dubbed variable dependency diserrors are commonly employed as discriminative criteria, where crepancy, to identify group anomaly patterns by quantifying
patterns with substantial reconstruction errors are classified as the discrepancy between global dependency and local depenanomalous. dency. The combination of variable dependency discrepancy
 Despite the advancements in prediction and reconstruction- and reconstruction error establishes the eventual criterion, efbased anomaly detection methods, a critical oversight in these fectively enhancing the performance of group anomaly detecapproaches is the failure to account for the intricate relationships tion. In summary, our main contributions are summarized as
between variables. This oversight can result in sub-optimal per- follows:
formance during reconstruction or prediction, which in turn di- r We propose a new criterion for unsupervised MTS anomaly
minishes the overall effectiveness of the anomaly detection pro- detection, variable dependency discrepancy, which can
cess. To address this shortcoming, several methodologies [14], identify group anomaly patterns that are beyond the de-
[15], [16], [17] have emerged that harness the power of Graph tection capability of existing methods.
Neural Networks (GNNs) or Variational Auto-Encoder net- r We develop a new unsupervised MTS anomaly detecworks (VAEs) to model the dependencies or distributions of tion method—VDDFormer—equipped with the proposed
dependencies among variables. However, these strategies pre- variable dependency discrepancy. VDDFormer consists of
dominantly continue to rely on prediction error or reconstruction a variable correlation encoder with variable dependency
error as the benchmarks for identifying anomalies, a criterion attention, a temporal dependency encoder for modeling
that may not suffice in the presence of complex dependencies, temporal dependencies, and a reconstruction decoder that
as it does not fully exploit the rich information embedded generates reconstruction output.
within variable dependencies. Figure 1 highlights that when r VDDFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on four
faced with complex variable interdependencies, the anomaly out of five public MTS anomaly detection benchmarks,
scores produced by current techniques (such as GDN [14] and which verifies the effectiveness of our proposed variable
MEMTO [18]) may result in erroneous alerts, culminating in dependency discrepancy and anomaly detection method.
the incorrect classification of numerous normal occurrences as The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Secanomalies. Recent developments in Transformer-based models tion II, we briefly review the related work in MTS anomaly
have yielded significant progress in time series prediction [19], detection. The problem statement is presented in Section III. We
[20], [21], [22], [23], [24] and anomaly detection [18], [25], then give the details of the proposed VDDFormer in Section IV
largely owing to their wide receptive field. Despite these strides, and present the experimental results as well as the correspondthese approaches have not fully capitalized on the exploitation ing analysis in Section V. Finally, we conclude the paper in
of variable dependencies, thus constraining their detection ca- Section VI.
pability for group anomalies.
 To address the shortcomings of existing methods, in this paper,
we propose a VDDFormer developed with a new criterion— II. RELATED WORK
variable dependency discrepancy. VDDFormer comprises three Due to the importance of MTS in various fields, unsupervised
components: a variable correlation encoder, a temporal de- MTS anomaly detection is a well-researched area. In this section,
pendency encoder, and a reconstruction decoder. The variable we provide an overview of existing approaches, and then discuss
36 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

the rise of Transformer-based approaches for unsupervised MTS variable dependencies, ensuring more accurate reconstruction
anomaly detection. in MTS.
 To effectively model relationships between variables,
 GNNs [37], [38] have been widely applied to anomaly detection
A. Unsupervised Multivariate Time Series Anomaly Detection tasks. For example, the CoLA algorithm [39] develops a GNN-
 Unsupervised MTS anomaly detection methods can be based contrastive learning framework for anomaly detection in
broadly categorized into two types of algorithms: classical meth- attributed networks. In MTS anomaly detection, GNN-based
ods and deep learning-based methods. methods [14], [15] have also been widely adopted. GReLeN [16]
 Classical methods primarily include one-class learning-based leverages VAE for feature representation and integrates GNN to
methods and density estimation-based methods. One-class model variable dependencies, thereby enhancing the model’s
SVM [6] and SVDD [7] are typical one-class learning-based capability to predict normal patterns and to identify anomalies.
anomaly detection algorithms. Specifically, one-class SVM
learns a separating hyperplane to distinguish normal data from
 B. Transformer-Based Multivariate Time Series Anomaly
anomalies, while SVDD constructs a hypersphere to encapsulate
 Detection
the normal data, both leveraging the concept of support vectors
in their modeling. A typical density-based algorithm is LOF [9], Benefiting from the ability of self-attention to capture longwhich identifies outliers by calculating the local outlier factor. term dependencies, Transformers [40], [41], [42], [43] have
The local outlier factor measures the isolation of an object from achieved remarkable results in MTS analysis. Recently, many
its neighbors. Transformer-based models have achieved significant perfor-
 Deep learning methods detect anomalies in MTS by learn- mance improvements in MTS prediction [19], [20], [21], [22],
ing normal patterns through neural networks. These mod- [23], [24], [44]. PatchTST [45] demonstrates effectiveness in
els primarily identify anomalies by measuring reconstruc- prediction through its patching design of Transformer-based
tion errors (reconstruction-based methods) or prediction errors model. For the task of MTS anomaly detection, Xu et al. [25]
(prediction-based methods). The reconstruction-based method propose the Anomaly Transformer to detect anomalies in MTS.
LSTM-VAE [13] combines Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) This method combines the association discrepancy of tempoand VAE to respectively capture temporal patterns and recon- ral patterns in MTS with the reconstruction error as a detecstruct the expected distribution of normal patterns. Additionally, tion criterion, achieving effective anomaly detection. Song et
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based approaches [27], al. [18] introduce a memory-guided Transformer architecture
[28], [29] employ adversarial regularization to learn temporal employing a reconstruction-based approach to mitigate the overnormal patterns for anomaly detection. In contrast to anomaly generalization problem in the anomaly detection task.
detection based on reconstruction error, autoregressive models Some existing Transformer-based methods [44] embed subdetect anomalies using prediction error. Hundman et al. [11] series of each variable as tokens and apply self-attention to these
employ LSTM networks to learn temporal representations and tokens for time series modeling. While enhancing modeling
perform anomaly detection by leveraging prediction error. Re- capabilities through variable relationships, these methods do not
cently, hybrid methods have been proposed to integrate the adequately explore the discriminative potential of variable correstrengths of different models for enhanced anomaly detection. lations for anomaly differentiation. To address this limitation, we
For example, Deep SVDD [30] uses deep neural networks to propose VDDFormer with a variable dependency attention that
minimize features to separate hyperplanes and identify anoma- simultaneously models global and local dependencies among
lies. DAGMM [31] and MPPCACD [32] combine deep repre- variables, leveraging their distribution discrepancy as a new
sentation methods with Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) to intrinsic criterion (termed variable dependency discrepancy) to
estimate representation density for anomaly detection. Frehner distinguish normal and abnormal patterns. By integrating this
et al. [33] propose an autoencoder-based framework combined discrepancy with the reconstruction error, VDDFormer achieves
with Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) on reconstruction errors robust anomaly detection performance.
to enhance the robustness of time series anomaly detection.
ITAD [34] proposes an anomaly detection method based on
tensor decomposition and clustering. THOC [35] leverages III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
one-class learning with a dilated RNN to capture multi-scale Multivariate Time Series: We define the multivariate time
temporal patterns and employs hierarchical clustering to define series used as input for anomaly detection as X ∈ RT ×N , where
one-class targets for anomaly detection. N variables are observed over T timestamps. The i-th row of
 The aforementioned deep learning methods predominantly X, xi ∈ RN , corresponds to the observations of all variables at
model temporal patterns in MTS but neglect the crucial as- timestamp i. The n-th column of X, denoted as x(n) ∈ RT , repsistance of variable correlations for time series modeling. To resents the observations of the variable n. For a long time series,
address this issue, OmniAnomaly [36] employs a Stochastic Re- we use a sliding window of length T to generate fixed-length
current Neural Network (SRNN) with planar normalization flow inputs. Additionally, we use xi,n to denote the observation of
to model temporal dependencies in latent variables, enhancing the variable n at timestamp i.
the reconstruction of normal patterns. InterFusion [17] adopts Anomaly Detection: The task of multivariate time series
a hierarchical VAE to jointly model temporal dynamics and anomaly detection is to output a binary vector y ∈ RT based on
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 37

Fig. 2. VDDFormer architecture. VDDFormer consists of a temporal dependency encoder, a variable correlation encoder, and a reconstruction decoder.
The temporal dependency encoder learns the temporal dependencies of MTS. Variable correlation encoder utilizes the variable dependency attention to embody
the variable dependency discrepancy, which is the inherent distinguishing property between normal and anomaly based on variable dependency. The reconstruction
decoder combines the outputs of the temporal dependency encoder and variable correlation encoder to obtain the final model’s reconstruction output.

the given input X ∈ RT ×N , where yi ∈ {0, 1}, with 0 indicating this mechanism as the core component. The variable correlation
a normal time point and 1 denoting an abnormal time point. encoder consists of multiple basic modules, each containing a
 variable dependency attention block and a feed-forward layer.
 IV. METHODOLOGY The stacking of multiple modules enables the learning of latent
 variable dependencies at different levels. Assuming the variable
 In this section, we introduce the proposed method
 correlation encoder consists of L modules, with length-T input
VDDFormer. VDDFormer comprises three components: a varitime series denoted as X ∈ RT ×N , the operations of the l-th
able correlation encoder, a temporal dependency encoder, and
 module can be expressed as follows:
a reconstruction decoder. The architecture of VDDFormer is    
shown in Fig. 2. First, we present the variable correlation en- Zvar,l = LN VDA Xvar,l-1 , X + Xvar,l-1
coder. Based on the discovery of variable dependency discrep-    
ancy, we devise a variable dependency attention mechanism Xvar,l = LN FeedFoward Zvar,l + Zvar,l , (1)
that simultaneously models global and local dependencies. By
 where Xvar,l ∈ RN ×dvar , l ∈ {1, · · ·, L} denotes the output of
quantifying the distribution divergence between global and local
 the l-th module in the variable correlation encoder with dvar
dependencies, the variable dependency discrepancy is derived
 channels. The initial input Xvar,0 = VariableEmbedding(X)
and used as a criterion for anomaly detection. In addition,
 represents the embedded raw series, where Xvar,0 ∈ RN ×dvar .
recognizing the importance of modeling temporal dependencies
 Specifically, unlike previous Transformer-based models [18],
in MTS data, we construct the temporal dependency encoder,
 [25] that embed all variables at the same timestamp as a token,
which treats the data corresponding to each time step as tokens
 our VariableEmbedding(·) method embeds the entire series of
and models the temporal dependencies of MTS by computing
 each variable within the sliding window as individual tokens.
self-attention map. Subsequently, to enable the model to better
 LN(·) denotes layer normalization as widely adopted in [46].
capture temporal patterns and variable dependencies in MTS
 Zvar,l ∈ RN ×dvar is the hidden representation of the l-th module.
data, we design a reconstruction decoder that integrates dual
 VDA(·, ·) represents the variable dependency attention, which
encoder representations, generating temporal-variable reconcaptures global and local dependencies to compute the variable
structions of MTS. This dual feature fusion mechanism captures
 dependency discrepancy. We will elaborate on this attention
joint temporal-variable properties, effectively guiding the model
 mechanism in the following content.
to learn normal patterns in MTS data. Finally, for robust anomaly
 Variable Dependency Attention Mechanism: The variable dedetection, the combination of reconstruction error and variable
 pendency attention mechanism is the core component of the
dependency discrepancy is utilized as a new anomaly detection
 variable correlation encoder, whose pipeline is illustrated in
criterion.
 Fig. 3. As aforementioned, the variable dependency discrepancy
 is computed by measuring the distribution distance between
A. Variable Correlation Encoder global and local dependencies. To overcome the limitations of
 The vanilla single-branch self-attention in Transformers [46] vanilla single-branch self-attention, we implement a dual-branch
cannot simultaneously capture global dependency and local attention mechanism that allows for the concurrent extraction
dependency. To address this limitation, we propose a variable of both global and local dependencies. For local dependency,
dependency attention mechanism that concurrently models both the adaptive adjacency matrix method [26] is employed to
global and local dependencies to compute variable dependency obtain the dependency weights among variables at each time
discrepancy. We construct a variable correlation encoder using step, followed by the application of the TopK strategy to prune
38 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 3. Variable dependency attention mechanism (left) and diagram of variable dependency discrepancy (right). Variable dependency attention captures the
local dependency and global dependency simultaneously. The symmetrized KL divergence between local dependency and global dependency offers us a new
criterion, dubbed variable dependency discrepancy: In the right figure, the solid lines depict variable dependencies with color intensity indicating weight strength.
During anomalies, long-term and short-term abnormal variable clusters exhibit similar dependency patterns (relatively small distribution discrepancy), while normal
conditions feature stable long-term dependencies contrasting with dynamic fluctuating short-term dependencies, yielding relatively large distributional contrasts.

negligible weights from the local dependency. Specifically, the where Q, K, V ∈ RN ×dvar denote the query, key, and value of
local dependency is computed as follows: the variable dependency attention, respectively. The parameter
 matrices WQ l
 , WK l
 , WV l
 ∈ Rdvar ×dvar correspond to Q, K, V in
 M = Tanh (αEWe )
 the l-th module. In (3), the discrete weight matrix Gl ∈ RN ×N
      
 Al = TopK Softmax ReLU Tanh α MMT , (2) representing global variable dependency is derived via the
 Softmax(·) operation. Z  var,l ∈ RN ×dvar is the hidden represenwhere E ∈ RT ×N ×T is constructed by expanding the input tation of variable dependency attention in the l-th module of the
series X ∈ RT ×N with a singleton dimension and replicating variable correlation encoder.
it T times to facilitate learning variable dependencies at each In summary, the variable dependency attention mechanism is
timestep. α is a hyperparameter that controls the saturation constructed by integrating the two branches, which essentially
rate of the Tanh(·) activation function. The parameter matrix combines (2) and (3). The function of the mechanism in the l-th
of the linear layer is denoted by We ∈ RT ×de , while the TopK module is formalized as:
operation retains the top K relation values from the local depen-  
  var,l = VDA Xvar,l-1 , X ,
 Al , Gl , Z (4)
dency. The final learned local dependency tensor is represented
as Al ∈ RT ×N ×N .
 In the global dependency branch, the data corresponding to where VDA(·, ·) denotes the overall function of the variable
each variable within the sliding window are embedded as tokens. dependency attention, which takes Xvar,l-1 and X as inputs, and
These tokens are fed into a self-attention mechanism to derive produces Al (local dependency), Gl (global dependency) and
  var,l (hidden representation) as outputs.
 Z
the attention map among variables. The weights in the attention
map represent long-term dependencies among variables, i.e. the In the implementation of the global dependency branch for the
global dependency. The global dependency computation for the variable dependency attention mechanism, we employ a multil-th module of the variable correlation encoder is formulated as head attention version with h heads. Computing the variable
follows: dependency discrepancy at each time step requires adaptively
 generating a global dependency matrix for the corresponding
 Q = Xvar,l-1 WQ
 l time step. To this end, we set the number of attention heads h
 equal to the input series length T . For the m-th head in the
 K = Xvar,l-1 WK
 l
 variable dependency attention, the query, key, and value are
 defined as Qm , Km , Vm ∈ RN × h . After computing multidvar

 V = Xvar,l-1 WVl

   head attention, the attention maps {Glm ∈ RN ×N }1≤m≤h are
 QKT generated. To aggregate information across all heads, these
 G = Softmax √
 l
 dvar maps are stacked along a new dimension to form a new tensor Gl ∈ Rh×N ×N . Since h equals T , Gl ∈ RT ×N ×N . Fur-
  var,l = Gl V,
 Z (3) thermore, the variable dependency attention concatenates the
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 39

outputs {Z  var,l ∈ RN × h }1≤m≤h of all heads to obtain the
 dvar
 multiple basic modules, each composed of a self-attention block
 m
final hidden representation of the attention module, denoted as and a feed-forward layer. Through this hierarchical architecture,
 var,l ∈ RN ×dvar .
Z the encoder further improves the quality of temporal representa-
 Variable Dependency Discrepancy. The local and global tions. Assuming the temporal dependency encoder consists of L
dependencies captured by the variable dependency attention modules, with length-T input time series denoted as X ∈ RT ×N ,
mechanism reflect different concentrations on the variable de- the operations of the l-th module can be expressed as follows:
    
pendency distribution, whereas the prior and series associations Ztemp,l = LN SA Xtemp,l-1 + Xtemp,l-1
captured by Anomaly Transformer [25] reflect different concen-    
trations on the temporal dependency distribution. Inspired by the Xtemp,l = LN SA Ztemp,l + Ztemp,l , (6)
effectiveness of the symmetrized Kullback-Leibler (KL) diverwhere Xtemp,l ∈ RT ×dtemp , l ∈ {1, · · ·, L} denotes the output of
gence in Anomaly Transformer [25] for measuring distribution
 the l-th module in the temporal dependency encoder with dtemp
discrepancy, we adopt it to quantify the discrepancy between
 channels. The initial input Xtemp,0 = TemporalEmbedding (X)
local and global dependencies. To amplify the discriminability
 represents the embedded raw series, where Xtemp,0 ∈ RT ×dtemp .
of the two distributions, we first aggregate and then average the
 Specifically, TemporalEmbedding(·) embeds all variables at
variable dependency discrepancy terms from the L modules of
 the same timestamp as a token. Ztemp,l ∈ RT ×dtemp represents
the variable correlation encoder, yielding a more informative
 the hidden representation of the l-th module of the temporal
metric. The variable dependency discrepancy is computed as:
 dependency encoder. LN(·) denotes layer normalization. SA(·)
  represents the self-attention.
 1   l 
 L
 VarDepDis(A, G) = KL Ai,:,:  Gli,:,:
 L C. Reconstruction Decoder
 l=1

   To enable the model to better learn the temporal patterns
 + KL Gli,:,:  Ali,:,: , (5) and variable dependencies of normal MTS data, we propose the
 i=1,...,T reconstruction decoder that leverages the outputs of the dual enwhere KL(·||·) denotes the KL divergence between two discrete coders to reconstruct MTS. This dual feature fusion mechanism
distributions. The term VarDepDis(A, G) ∈ RT , calculated as captures temporal-variable characteristics, effectively guiding
the average of multiple module variable dependency discrep- the model to learn normal patterns in MTS data. The reconstrucancies, reflects a more informative dissimilarity measure. Each tion output produced by the reconstruction decoder is formalized
element in VarDepDis(A, G) corresponds to a time step in X. as follows:
  
As previously mentioned, global dependencies refer to long-  = Xtemp,L Wtemp + Xvar,L Wvar T ,
 X (7)
term variable relationships that focus on learning stable intervariable correlations in extended temporal contexts, thus typi- where Xtemp,L ∈ RT ×dtemp denotes the output of the L-th module
cally being stable. In normal scenarios, the variable correlations (i.e., the final module) in the temporal dependency encoder.
at individual time steps are influenced by data variations and Xvar,L ∈ RN ×dvar represents the output of the L-th module
periodic fluctuations, generating local dependencies that capture (i.e., the final module) in the variable correlation encoder.
complex relationships. This results in measurable distribution Wtemp ∈ Rdtemp ×N , Wvar ∈ Rdvar ×T denote the parameter madiscrepancies between local and global dependencies under trices. Xtemp,L Wtemp ∈ RT ×N and (Xvar,L Wvar )T ∈ RT ×N are
normal conditions. However, during anomalies, long-term and combined to generate the final model’s reconstruction output
 X ∈ RT ×N .
short-term abnormal variable clusters maintain similar dependency patterns. Consequently, the local dependency distribution
approximates the global one, leading to relatively small variable D. Optimization Strategy and Anomaly Criterion
dependency discrepancies. This inherent property of the variable Optimization Strategy: As an unsupervised anomaly detection
dependency discrepancy is leveraged for anomaly detection. task, we utilize reconstruction loss to optimize the model. To
 enhance the discriminability between normal and abnormal
B. Temporal Dependency Encoder patterns, we introduce the variable dependency discrepancy
 as an auxiliary loss term. This loss term guides the model to
 When modeling MTS data, temporal dependencies are focus more on variable dependencies that facilitate time series
equally critical to consider along with variable dependencies. reconstruction, thus further sparsifying the global dependency.
To capture temporal dependency representations, we develop Consequently, the enlarged distribution discrepancies between
the temporal dependency encoder specifically designed to learn local and global dependencies make normal patterns more distintemporal features in MTS data. The encoder embeds all the guishable from abnormal patterns with relatively small variable
variables observed at each time step into tokens. These tokens are dependency discrepancies. The formula for the loss function is
then fed into a self-attention mechanism to compute an attention as follows:
map, in which the weights represent temporal dependencies
across time steps [25]. Effective learning of temporal depen-  2 −λ
  A, G, λ; X = X − X
 L X, F
dencies plays a critical role in enhancing model performance.
The temporal dependency encoder is constructed by stacking × VarDepDis (A, G) 1 , (8)
40 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

where X  ∈ RT ×N denotes the final output of the model.  · F TABLE I
 DETAILS OF DATASETS
and  · 1 denote the Frobenius-norm and the 1-norm, respectively. λ is a hyperparameter to trade off the two loss terms.
When λ is positive, the optimization process amplifies the
variable dependency discrepancy of normal events during training, thereby better distinguishing normal events from abnormal
events through the enlarged discrepancy.
 Anomaly Criterion: We combine the variable dependency discrepancy with the reconstruction error, using both the temporalvariable representation and the distinguishable variable dependency discrepancy. The final anomaly criterion is shown as
follows:
 AS (X) = Softmax (−VarDepDis(A, G))
  i,: 2
  Xi,: − X , (9)
 2
 i=1,···,T

where AS(X) ∈ RT denotes the anomaly score at each times- internet company. Each server forms a sub-dataset split into
tamp of X. An anomaly is flagged when the score exceeds training and test sets of equal length. The test set labels every
a certain threshold. The operator  represents element-wise timestamp as normal or abnormal. All servers share the same 38
multiplication. Since anomalies exhibit relatively small vari- synchronized metrics.
able dependency discrepancies, this characteristic distinguishes Soil Moisture Active Passive Satellite Dataset (SMAP [11]):
them from normal patterns. By applying the negation operation This dataset originates from telemetry data collected by NASA’s
to the variable dependency discrepancies and performing the Soil Moisture Active Passive satellite. It comprises 55 entities,
Softmax(·) computation, then multiplying the resulting values each characterized by 25 variables. The dataset is partitioned
by reconstruction errors (typically large for abnormal events), into two subsets: an unlabeled training set and a labeled test set.
the anomaly scores become further amplified. Consequently, the Mars Science Laboratory rover Dataset (MSL [11]): This
integration of the reconstruction error with the variable depen- dataset is obtained from telemetry data generated by NASA’s
dency discrepancy enables more discriminative identification of Curiosity Mars rover. The MSL dataset comprises 27 entities,
anomalies, thereby enhancing the model’s anomaly detection each containing 55 variable dimensions. It is split into a training
capability. set and a test set. The training set does not contain labels, while
 Notably, the variable dependency discrepancy captures dif- the test set contains labels.
ferences in variable dependencies between short-term and long- Secure Water Treatment Dataset (SWaT [47]): The SWaT
term contexts to identify anomalies. In contrast, the association dataset originates from experimental data collected on a water
discrepancy in Anomaly Transformer [25] identifies anomalies treatment operation experiment bench. It comprises 51 variables
solely through differences in association scope between normal recorded over 11 days of continuous 24-hour operation. During
and abnormal time points but neglects variable correlations. the first seven days, the system operated under normal condi-
Therefore, the criterion combining reconstruction error with tions, while staged cyber-physical attacks were implemented
variable dependency discrepancy is more discriminative than throughout the remaining four days. Each time step in the
the criterion combining reconstruction error with association final four-day period contains a binary label indicating whether
discrepancy, particularly for detecting group anomalies in MTS. anomalies were present at that specific time point.
 Pooled Server Metric Dataset (PSM [48]): This dataset is
 V. EXPERIMENTS collected by eBay, with data obtained from multiple internal
 nodes of the application servers, and consists of 26 variable
 This section evaluates the effectiveness of VDDFormer using
 dimensions. The following Table I provides information about
five public MTS anomaly detection datasets. First, the benchthe five public datasets.
marks, baselines, experimental setups, and evaluation metrics
are described. Subsequently, the experimental results are presented and analyzed, including performance comparisons with B. Baseline Methods
existing methods and findings from ablation studies. Finally,
 The proposed method is compared with 15 baseline
systematic investigations are conducted to examine the impacts
 methods. The classical statistical learning approaches inof hyperparameters in VDDFormer, followed by an analysis of
 clude OC-SVM [6], Isolation Forest [49] and LOF [9]). The
its computational efficiency.
 deep learning methods include reconstruction-based approaches
 (LSTM-VAE [13], OmniAnomaly [36], InterFusion [17]);
A. Datasets Description
 prediction-based approaches (LSTM [11], GReLeN [16]); hy-
 Server Machine Dataset (SMD [36]): This 5-week MTS brid approaches (Deep SVDD [30], ITAD [34], DAGMM [31],
dataset collects monitoring metrics from 28 servers at a large MPPCACD [32], THOC [35]); and Transformer-based
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 41

methods adhering to the reconstruction paradigm (Anomaly discrepancy. Then, this method combines the association
Transformer [25], MEMTO [18]). discrepancy with the reconstruction error as a detection
 r OC-SVM [6]: One-Class SVM uses normal data to create criterion, achieving effective anomaly detection.
 a hyperplane. This hyperplane then acts as a boundary to r MEMTO [18]: MEMTO uses a memory-guided Transidentify abnormal data points. former based on the reconstruction paradigm to learn
 r IsolationForest [49]: Abnormal data are rare and unique, normal patterns. This approach restricts the encoder from
 making them more likely to be isolated than normal data. capturing anomaly features, making abnormal data harder
 The IsolationForest method employs the isolation forest to reconstruct.
 algorithm to partition the data. After partitioning, nodes
 closer to the root node in the resulting trees are identified C. Experimental Setup
 as anomalies.
 r LOF [9]: LOF determines whether a point is abnormal by Experimental Setup: In our experiments, the model inputs
 are sub-series extracted using non-overlapping sliding windows
 comparing its density with its neighboring points.
 r LSTM-VAE [13]: LSTM-VAE uses LSTM networks for with a fixed length T of 100 across all datasets. A time point
 is identified as anomalous if its anomaly score within a subtemporal representation and VAE to reconstruct the exseries exceeds the threshold δ. Following the threshold selecpected distribution of normal patterns. It detects anomalies
 tion criterion from Anomaly Transformer [25], we set δ based
 through large reconstruction errors caused by the model’s
 on the top-r percent of anomaly scores in the validation set,
 inability to reconstruct anomalies.
 r OmniAnomaly [36]: OmniAnomaly applies stochastic re- specifically r = 0.3% for SWaT and SMD, 0.5% for PSM, and
 1% for the other datasets. Additionally, we use the adjustment
 current neural networks and planar normalization flow
 method widely adopted in anomaly detection [25], [35], [36],
 techniques to capture the temporal dependencies among
 [50] to evaluate the experimental results. Both the temporal
 random variables in space. Then it discriminates anomalies
 dependency encoder and variable correlation encoder consist
 by reconstructing probabilities.
 r InterFusion [17]: InterFusion uses a hierarchical VAE to of three modules. We set the number of hidden channels dtemp
 in the temporal dependency encoder to 512 and configure the
 jointly model temporal patterns and variable dependencies,
 number of attention heads to 8. The hidden channels dvar in the
 ensuring more accurate reconstruction in MTS.
 r Deep SVDD [30]: Deep SVDD uses a neural network variable correlation encoder is set to 800, and the number of
 heads h is set to 100. The output feature dimension de in the
 to minimize the feature space of samples and defines a
 linear layer of (2) is set to 64. The hyperparameter λ in (8) is
 hypersphere. It then uses the distance between sample
 set to 3 to trade off the terms of reconstruction loss and variable
 points and the hypersphere’s center to identify anomalies.
 r ITAD [34]: ITAD first constructs a third-order tensor for the dependency discrepancy. The parameter K in TopK is set to half
 the number of variables. The Adam [51] optimizer is used in the
 entire dataset. It then decomposes the tensor into compoexperiments with an initial learning rate of 10−4 . The batch size
 nent matrices and performs clustering analysis. Anomalies
 in the experiment is set to 128, and the early stopping strategy
 are identified by calculating the distance between each
 is adopted. We implement VDDFormer with PyTorch [52] and
 sample and its cluster centroid.
 r DAGMM [31]: DAGMM combines an autoencoder with conduct all experiments using a single TESLA V100S 32 GB
 GPU.
 a Gaussian Mixture Model to generate low-dimensional
 Evaluation Metrics: In this paper, we utilize 3 commonly used
 representations of data points, and uses the reconstruction
 evaluation metrics for anomaly detection: Precision (P), Recall
 error to identify anomalies.
 r MPPCACD [32]: MPPCACD detects anomalies using a (R), and F1 score (F1). These metrics are used to evaluate the
 performance of the VDDFormer. The formula for calculating
 method based on probabilistic dimensionality reduction
 the F1 score is as follows:
 and clustering.
 r THOC [35]: THOC uses dilated recurrent neural networks P×R
 F1 = 2 × (10)
 to capture multi-scale temporal patterns. It then detects P+R
 anomalies by defining a single-class object through hierarchical clustering. D. Main Results
 r LSTM [11]: The method employs an LSTM network for Following the experimental setup previously introduced, we
 anomaly detection, combined with a complementary non- conduct comparative experiments between VDDFormer and 15
 parametric unsupervised thresholding strategy to deter- baseline models across five public datasets. The experimental
 mine anomaly criterion. results are summarized in Table II. We reproduce the results of
 r GReLeN [16]: GReLeN uses VAE for feature extraction GReLeN, Anomaly Transformer, and MEMTO, while adopting
 and combines GNN with a random graph relation learn- the performance metrics reported in [25] for other baselines.
 ing strategy to capture dependencies between variables, As shown in Table II, we first observe that deep learningenabling effective anomaly detection. based anomaly detection methods exhibit significantly better
 r Anomaly Transformer [25]: Anomaly Transformer ex- performance compared to classical approaches. This discrepploits the inherent distinguishability between normal and ancy arises because classical methods cannot explicitly model
 anomaly in the temporal dimension, termed as association the temporal dependencies and variable correlations inherent
42 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE II
 COMPARISON WITH OTHER BASELINES

in MTS data. Consequently, classical methods do not cap- relative time distances. The series-association branch embeds
ture complex temporal variations and dynamic dependencies multivariate observations at each timestamp into tokens and
among variables, limiting their effectiveness in addressing the learns series dependencies through self-attention. The associintricate patterns of real-world MTS anomalies. Additionally, ation discrepancy is quantified by measuring the symmetrized
deep learning-based approaches that explicitly model variable KL divergence between the attention weight distributions of both
dependencies consistently outperform those neglecting such branches, enabling intrinsic discrimination between normal and
interactions. For instance, methods such as ITAD, DAGMM, abnormal patterns. However, Anomaly Transformer design does
MPPCACD, LSTM, and LSTM-VAE, which disregard variable not explicitly address the intricate variable dependencies inherdependencies, yield suboptimal performance in comparison. ent in MTS. Our VDDFormer employs a variable dependency
These results demonstrate that capturing dependencies among attention mechanism to capture the aforementioned variable
variables is critical for effective time series modeling and should dependency discrepancy for anomaly detection. Inspired by the
not be omitted in anomaly detection frameworks. Anomaly-Attention architecture, the variable dependency atten-
 The results in Table II further demonstrate the advan- tion mechanism comprises two branches: the local dependency
tage of Transformer-based models for MTS anomaly de- branch captures variable dependencies at each timestamp via
tection, such as Anomaly Transformer, MEMTO, and our an adaptive adjacency matrix method; the global dependency
proposed VDDFormer. These methods validate the effective- branch embeds subseries of each variable as tokens to learn
ness of the Transformer architecture in dynamically mod- long-term variable dependencies through self-attention. The
eling temporal patterns and variable dependencies. Notably, variable dependency discrepancy is quantified by computing the
VDDFormer achieves state-of-the-art performance on four statistical distance between global and local dependencies using
benchmark datasets (SMAP, MSL, SWaT, and PSM), while symmetrized KL divergence. MTS encompass both dynamic
maintaining comparable results on SMD. temporal patterns and complex inter-variable relationships, ren-
 To clarify the technical distinctions, we elaborate on the key dering purely temporal modeling prone to misjudgment due to
differences between VDDFormer and Anomaly Transformer. In interference. As illustrated in Fig. 1, Anomaly Transformer genprinciple, Anomaly Transformer focuses on temporal feature erates false alarms during normal periods, while VDDFormer
modeling. It employs an attention divergence termed associ- effectively mitigates this issue through its proposed variable
ation discrepancy to distinguish anomalies, where abnormal dependency discrepancy criterion.
patterns primarily attend to adjacent timestamps while normal
patterns exhibit holistic temporal dependencies. The association E. Ablation Analysis
discrepancy is implemented through a dual-branch Anomaly-
Attention mechanism. The prior-association branch computes Model Architecture and Discriminant Criteria: To impartemporal priors using a learnable Gaussian kernel based on tially evaluate the effectiveness and contributions of both
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 43

 TABLE III F1 score improvement of 1% (93.90%→94.90%) compared to
 ABLATION STUDY ON MODEL ARCHITECTURE AND ANOMALY CRITERION
 the variable correlation encoder. This outcome substantiates the
 effectiveness and necessity of the temporal dependency encoder
 in capturing temporal dependencies within MTS.
 Statistical Distance Methods: To investigate the impact of the
 variable dependency discrepancy computed by diverse statistical distance methods on anomaly detection performance, we
 conducted comparative experiments using the following widely
 adopted statistical approaches:
 r L2 Distance (L2).
 r Cross-Entropy (CE).
 r Jensen-Shannon Divergence (JSD).
 r Symmetrized Kullback-Leibler (KL) Divergence (Ours).
 The experimental results in Table IV demonstrate that the
 symmetrized KL divergence method achieves the best anomaly
 detection performance across all five datasets with an average F1
VDDFormer’s components and its discrimination criteria, com- score of 94.90%. While the L2 distance method (90.19% average
prehensive ablation studies are designed. First, a baseline is F1 score), CE method (92.34%), and JSD method (90.79%)
established by exclusively employing the temporal dependency exhibit comparable performance across the five datasets, they
encoder with reconstruction error as the anomaly criterion. still show a noticeable gap compared to the symmetrized KL
This configuration evaluates anomaly detection capability in divergence method. Based on these experimental results, the
the absence of variable correlation encoder. Then, the temporal symmetrized KL divergence is adopted to quantify variable
dependency encoder is removed while retaining only the variable dependency discrepancies.
correlation encoder. Three distinct criteria are examined: the Multi-Module Quantization: During anomaly detection, we
reconstruction error, the variable dependency discrepancy, and calculate the average of variable dependency discrepancies
the composite anomaly criterion proposed in (9). This setting across all modules and integrate it with the reconstruction error
investigates model performance without temporal dependency to derive the final anomaly score. The multi-module quantifimodeling. Finally, the complete model is evaluated using three cation is validated through comparison with all single-module
distinct criteria: reconstruction error, variable dependency dis- counterparts, where the anomaly criterion is defined by the
crepancy, and the proposed composite anomaly criterion. This integration of each module’s dependency discrepancy and resystematic approach enables thorough validation of the con- construction error. As demonstrated in Table V, the multitributions and effectiveness of both the components and the module approach outperforms all single-module counterparts.
discrimination criteria. The results not only confirm the efficacy of VDDFormer’s
 The ablation study results for the three configurations are multi-module stacking design, but also reveal that multi-module
presented in Table III, yielding the following conclusions. First, quantification captures more informative variable dependency
the proposed composite anomaly discriminant criterion (com- discrepancies.
bining reconstruction error and variable dependency discrepancy) significantly outperforms the conventional reconstruction
 F. Analysis of Hyperparameters and Computational Efficiency
error-based criterion. As evidenced by the variable correlation
encoder and the VDDFormer results, the composite criterion Analysis of Hyperparameters: The hyperparameters of the
improves the average F1 score by 17.34% (76.56%→93.90%) model are experimentally analyzed. First, the effect of the
and 17.84% (77.06%→94.90%), respectively, compared to us- number of modules on detection performance is studied by
ing reconstruction error alone. These improvements demon- varying the module count L from 1 to 4. The derived varistrate the critical role of jointly considering the reconstruction able dependency discrepancies are averaged and integrated with
error and the variable dependency discrepancy for effective the reconstruction error to calculate the anomaly scores for
anomaly detection. Second, the experimental results demon- evaluation. As illustrated in Fig. 4(a), three modules achieve
strate that the temporal dependency encoder achieves an average optimal performance across all datasets, thereby being adopted
F1 score of 76.12%. This reveals the limitations of the model in as the final configuration. Next, the impact of hidden chananomaly detection when it focuses solely on temporal pattern nels dvar is investigated by testing values of 400, 800, 1600,
learning while neglecting variable dependency discrepancies. and 3200. The results in Fig. 4(b) show that a channel num-
Third, when solely utilizing variable dependency discrepancy ber of 800 yields the best overall performance, serving as
as the discrimination criterion, both the variable correlation the default setting. The output feature dimension de in the
encoder and VDDFormer deliver superior performance (93.30% linear layer of (2) is further analyzed, and Fig. 4(c) shows
and 93.74%, respectively), demonstrating the inherent discrim- that it achieves optimal performance when set to 64. These
inative capability of the variable dependency discrepancy to parametric studies reveal limited sensitivity to parameter variadistinguish normal from abnormal patterns. Finally, under the tions, demonstrating the robustness of VDDFormer in practical
composite anomaly criterion, VDDFormer achieves an average applications.
44 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE IV
 MODEL PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT DEFINITIONS OF VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY

 TABLE V
 ANOMALY DETECTION PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT SELECTIONS OF MODULES FOR VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY

Fig. 4. Sensitivity analysis of model hyperparameters. (a) Impact of the number of modules L in VDDFormer on detection performance. (b) Impact of the hidden
channels dvar on detection performance. (c) Impact of the output feature dimension de of the linear layer on detection performance.

Fig. 5. Experimental results of the loss weight λ. (a) Performance of different Fig. 6. Experimental results of the K in the TopK strategy. (a) Performance
loss weight values on the SMD dataset. (b) Performance of different loss weight of different K values in the TopK strategy on the SMD dataset. (b) Performance
values on the PSM dataset. of different K values in the TopK strategy on the PSM dataset. The horizontal
 axis labels (e.g., 0.1N, 0.3N ) indicate the fraction of the total variables N .

 To investigate the impact of loss weight λ and TopK parameter equal to three, as shown in Fig. 5(a) and (b). Deviating from
K on detection results, experiments are conducted on the SMD this value reduces performance, confirming that balanced inteand PSM datasets. The experimental results are presented in gration of reconstruction loss and variable dependency discrep-
Figs. 5 and 6. Optimal detection performance occurs when λ is ancy strengthens normal-abnormal separability for improved
LIU et al.: VDDFORMER: A VARIABLE DEPENDENCY DISCREPANCY-BASED TRANSFORMER FOR MULTIVARIATE 45

detection. Fig. 6(a) and (b) demonstrate that setting K at half the [2] N. Moustafa, J. Slay, and G. Creech, “Novel geometric area analysis
total number of variables achieves superior results. Performance technique for anomaly detection using trapezoidal area estimation on
 large-scale networks,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 481–494,
declines as K decreases, indicating that excessive information Dec. 2019.
loss in local dependency weakens the distinction between nor- [3] C. Yang, Z. Du, X. Meng, X. Zhang, X. Hao, and D. A. Bader, “Anomaly
mal and abnormal patterns, thereby reducing performance. detection in catalog streams,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 1,
 pp. 294–311, Feb. 2023.
 Computational Efficiency. The time complexity of [4] R. Paffenroth, P. Du Toit, R. Nong, L. Scharf, A. P. Jayasumana, and V.
VDDFormer is analyzed by examining its three main Bandara, “Space-time signal processing for distributed pattern detection in
components. The temporal dependency encoder exhibits a time sensor networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 38–49,
 Feb. 2013.
complexity of O(T d2temp ), while the variable correlation encoder [5] H. Hoffmann, “Kernel PCA for novelty detection,” Pattern Recognit.,
has a time complexity of O(N d2var + T 2 N de ). Meanwhile, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 863–874, 2007.
 [6] B. Schölkopf, J. C. Platt, J. Shawe-Taylor, A. J. Smola, and R. C.
the reconstruction decoder exhibits a time complexity of Williamson, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,”
O(T dtemp N + T dvar N ). Under the experimental parameter set- Neural Comput., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1443–1471, 2001.
tings, the inequality (T dtemp N + T dvar N )  T d2temp < N d2var [7] D. M. Tax and R. P. Duin, “Support vector data description,” Mach. Learn.,
 vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 45–66, 2004.
holds. Furthermore, given that T 2 N de equals N d2var (with [8] C. Huang, G. Min, Y. Wu, Y. Ying, K. Pei, and Z. Xiang, “Time series
T = 100, de = 64, dvar = 800), the overall time complexity is anomaly detection for trustworthy services in cloud computing systems,”
O(N d2var ). For comparison, the time complexity of Anomaly IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 60–72, Feb. 2022.
 [9] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander, “LOF: Identifying
Transformer is O(T d2temp ). Under the given parameter density-based local outliers,” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Int. Conf. Manage.
configuration, VDDFormer achieves the same asymptotic order Data, 2000, pp. 93–104.
of time complexity as Anomaly Transformer. Additionally, [10] J. Zhao, F. Deng, J. Zhu, and J. Chen, “Searching density-increasing path
 to local density peaks for unsupervised anomaly detection,” IEEE Trans.
inference time comparisons are performed on the SWaT dataset. Big Data, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1198–1209, Aug. 2023.
For the same 100 samples, VDDFormer achieves an average [11] K. Hundman, V. Constantinou, C. Laporte, I. Colwell, and T. Soderstrom,
inference time of 7.52 ms per sample, compared to 4.26 ms per “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs and nonparametric dynamic thresholding,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov.
sample for Anomaly Transformer. Despite being marginally Data Mining, 2018, pp. 387–395.
slower, VDDFormer maintains computational practicality for [12] C. Zhang et al., “A deep neural network for unsupervised anomaly detecreal-time anomaly detection scenarios. tion and diagnosis in multivariate time series data,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
 Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 1409–1416.
 [13] D. Park, Y. Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector
 for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,”
 VI. CONCLUSION IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018.
 This paper proposes a new criterion for MTS anomaly de- [14] A. Deng and B. Hooi, “Graph neural network-based anomaly detection
 in multivariate time series,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022,
tection, variable dependency discrepancy, which can identify pp. 4027–4035.
group anomaly patterns that are beyond the detection ability of [15] H. Zhao et al., “Multivariate time-series anomaly detection via graph attenexisting methods. Based on the proposed variable dependency tion network,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 841–850.
 [16] W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and F. Tsung, “GRELEN: Multivariate time series
discrepancy, we have developed an unsupervised MTS anomaly anomaly detection from the perspective of graph relational learning,” in
detection method, dubbed VDDFormer. VDDFormer consists of Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2022, pp. 2390–2397.
a variable correlation encoder with variable dependency atten- [17] Z. Li et al., “Multivariate time series anomaly detection and interpretation
 using hierarchical inter-metric and temporal embedding,” in Proc. ACM
tion mechanism, a temporal dependency encoder to model tem- SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021, pp. 3220–3230.
poral dependencies, and a reconstruction decoder that generates [18] S. Junho, K. Keonwoo, O. Jeonglyul, and C. Sungzoon, “MEMTO:
reconstruction output. The integration of reconstruction error Memory-guided transformer for multivariate time series anomaly detection,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2024, pp. 57947–57963.
and variable dependency discrepancy as a joint discriminative [19] H. Wu, J. Xu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “AutoFormer: Decomposition
criterion effectively improves anomaly detection performance. transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting,” in
 The limitation of VDDFormer lies in its dual-encoder design, Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2021, pp. 22 419–22 430.
 [20] H. Zhou et al., “Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence
which increases the complexity of the model. Specifically, the time-series forecasting,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2021, pp. 11
temporal dependency encoder models temporal dependencies, 106–11 115.
while the variable correlation encoder captures both global and [21] T. Zhou, Z. Ma, Q. Wen, X. Wang, L. Sun, and R. Jin, “FedFormer:
 Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forelocal dependencies to quantify variable dependency discrep- casting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2022, pp. 27 268–27 286.
ancies. To address this limitation, future work will focus on [22] S. Li et al., “Enhancing the locality and breaking the memory bottleneck of
developing a unified encoder capable of simultaneously mod- transformer on time series forecasting,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process.
 Syst., 2019, pp. 5244–5254.
eling temporal dependencies, capturing both global and local [23] S. Liu et al., “Pyraformer: Low-complexity pyramidal attention for longdependencies to quantify variable dependency discrepancies. range time series modeling and forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
This unified encoder will simplify the model architecture and Representations, 2022.
 [24] D. Du, B. Su, and Z. Wei, “Preformer: Predictive transformer with multiaccelerate anomaly detection. scale segment-wise correlations for long-term time series forecasting,” in
 Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process., 2023, pp. 1–5.
 [25] J. Xu, H. Wu, J. Wang, and M. Long, “Anomaly transformer: Time series
 REFERENCES anomaly detection with association discrepancy,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn.
 Representations, 2022.
 [1] W. Haider, J. Hu, Y. Xie, X. Yu, and Q. Wu, “Detecting anomalous [26] Z. Wu, S. Pan, G. Long, J. Jiang, X. Chang, and C. Zhang, “Connecting
 behavior in cloud servers by nested-arc hidden SEMI-Markov model with the dots: Multivariate time series forecasting with graph neural networks,”
 state summarization,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 305–316, in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020,
 Sep. 2019. pp. 753–763.
46 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BIG DATA, VOL. 12, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[27] D. Li, D. Chen, B. Jin, L. Shi, J. Goh, and S.-K. Ng, “MAD-GAN: Multi- [49] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. IEEE
 variate anomaly detection for time series data with generative adversarial Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2008, pp. 413–422.
 networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 703–716. [50] H. Xu et al., “Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
[28] B. Zhou, S. Liu, B. Hooi, X. Cheng, and J. Ye, “BeatGAN: Anomalous for seasonal KPIs in web applications,” in Proc. World Wide Web Conf.,
 rhythm detection using adversarially generated time series,” in Proc. Int. 2018, pp. 187–196.
 Joint Conf. Artif. Intell., 2019, pp. 4433–4439. [51] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
[29] J. Audibert, P. Michiardi, F. Guyard, S. Marti, and M. A. Zuluaga, in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2015.
 “USAD: Unsupervised anomaly detection on multivariate time series,” [52] A. Paszke et al., “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2020, learning library,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2019, pp. 8026–
 pp. 3395–3404. 8037.
[30] L. Ruff et al., “Deep one-class classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
 Learn., 2018, pp. 4393–4402.
[31] B. Zong et al., “Deep autoencoding gaussian mixture model for unsupervised anomaly detection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
 2018.
[32] T. Yairi, N. Takeishi, T. Oda, Y. Nakajima, N. Nishimura, and N. Takata,
 “A data-driven health monitoring method for satellite housekeeping data Bo Liu received the MS degree from the School of
 based on probabilistic clustering and dimensionality reduction,” IEEE Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
 Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1384–1401, Jun. 2017. of Technology. He is currently working toward the
[33] R. Frehner, K. Wu, A. Sim, J. Kim, and K. Stockinger, “Detecting anoma- PhD degree with the School of Computer Science
 lies in time series using kernel density approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology. His
 pp. 33420–33439, 2024. current research interest is time series analysis.
[34] Y. Shin et al., “ITAD: Integrative tensor-based anomaly detection system
 for reducing false positives of satellite systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
 Knowl. Manage., 2020, pp. 2733–2740.
[35] L. Shen, Z. Li, and J. Kwok, “Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal
 hierarchical one-class network,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
 2020, pp. 13 016–13 026.
[36] Y. Su, Y. Zhao, C. Niu, R. Liu, W. Sun, and D. Pei, “Robust anomaly
 detection for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural Lingling Tao received the PhD degree from Northnetwork,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, eastern University in 2022. She was a visiting student
 2019, pp. 2828–2837. with the School of Computer Science and Engineer-
[37] K. Ding, Q. Zhou, H. Tong, and H. Liu, “Few-shot network anomaly ing of Nanyang Technological University from 2019
 detection via cross-network meta-learning,” in Proc. Int. World Wide Web to 2020. She currently is a research fellow with the
 Conf., 2021, pp. 2448–2456. School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
[38] M. Mesgaran and A. B. Hamza, “Graph fairing convolutional networks for Institute of Technology, Shenzhen. Her research interanomaly detection,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 145, 2024, Art. no. 109960. ests are time series data mining and optimal decision.
[39] Y. Liu, Z. Li, S. Pan, C. Gong, C. Zhou, and G. Karypis, “Anomaly
 detection on attributed networks via contrastive self-supervised learning,”
 IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 2378–2392,
 Jun. 2022.
[40] Z. Zhang et al., “PromptST: Prompt-enhanced spatio-temporal multiattribute prediction,” in Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Inf. Knowl. Manage., 2023,
 pp. 3195–3205.
[41] Z. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. Miao, C. Zhang, H. Zhao, and J. Zhang, “AutoSTL: Xiaodan Chen received the MS degree from the
 Automated spatio-temporal multi-task learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
 Intell., 2023, pp. 4902–4910. Institute of Technology in 2020. She is currently
[42] H. Yan, X. Ma, and Z. Pu, “Learning dynamic and hierarchical traffic working toward the PhD degree with the School of
 spatiotemporal features with transformer,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute
 Syst., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 22 386–22 399, Nov. 2022. of Technology. Her current research interest is time
[43] G. Zerveas, S. Jayaraman, D. Patel, A. Bhamidipaty, and C. Eickhoff, “A series analysis.
 transformer-based framework for multivariate time series representation
 learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining,
 2021, pp. 2114–2124.
[44] Y. Zhang and J. Yan, “Crossformer: Transformer utilizing cross-dimension
 dependency for multivariate time series forecasting,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
 Learn. Representations, 2023.
[45] Y. Nie, N. H. Nguyen, P. Sinthong, and J. Kalagnanam, “A time series is
 worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers,” in Proc. Int. Zhijun Li received the MS degree in computer sci-
 Conf. Learn. Representations, 2023. ence and technology and the PhD degree in computer
[46] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. science and technology from the Harbin Institute of
 Process. Syst., 2017, pp. 6000–6010. Technology, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is
[47] A. P. Mathur and N. O. Tippenhauer, “SWaT: A water treatment testbed for currently a professor with the School of Computer
 research and training on ICS security,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Cyber-phys. Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Tech-
 Syst. Smart Water Netw., 2016, pp. 31–36. nology. His research focuses on wireless networks,
[48] A. Abdulaal, Z. Liu, and T. Lancewicki, “Practical approach to asyn- Internet of Things, and ubiquitous computing. He was
 chronous multivariate time series anomaly detection and localization,” a recipient of the Mobicom17 Best Paper Award.
 in Proc. ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. Data Mining, 2021,
 pp. 2485–2494.