4480 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 When Pre-Training Meets Contrast Learning:
 Few-Shot Encrypted Traffic Classification
 With Novelty Detection
 Lixin Zhao , Changhao Wu, and Aimin Yu

 Abstract—Encrypted traffic classification plays an important TLS 1.3, VPN, Tor) also allows malware and unauthorized
role on network security and network management. However, services to evade detection, presenting significant challenges
existing methods face two key limitations: they require large to traditional classification methods.
volumes of labeled data and are typically designed under the
 To address the issue of encrypted traffic classification,
closed-world assumption. This paper presents a novel approach
combining pre-training techniques with contrast learning research has shifted from early machine learning (ML) with
to address the challenges of open-world encrypted traffic handcrafted features [4], [31] [32], [33], [42] to deep learning
classification. Our method utilizes a BERT-based pre-training (DL) models that automatically extract patterns from raw
model to learn generic traffic representations from large-scale traffic [26], [38] [39]. While effective, DL models typically
unlabeled encrypted traffic. In this stage, two pre-training require massive labeled datasets, which are difficult to obtain
tasks, the Masked BURST Model (MBM) and BURST Context due to the need for expert knowledge and the rapid evolution
Prediction (BCP), are introduced to capture both structural
and contextual features of the traffic. Following this, a contrast of traffic patterns.
learning strategy is applied on a small labeled dataset to learn In recent years, pre-training techiques have gained great
a discriminative feature space, where traffic from the same success on the fields of natural language processing [8]
category is clustered closely, and traffic from different categories and computer vision [10]. The pre-training based methods
is largely separated. This strong discriminative property enables usually use unlabeled data to learn general knowledge in a
high-accuracy classification of known traffic categories while self-supervised learning way and then fine-tuning on limited
detecting novel ones. Experimental results on five encrypted
traffic classification tasks demonstrate that: 1) under full data amount of labeled data to adapt the specific down-stream
conditions, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods tasks. Some attempts, such as PERT [18], ET-BERT [25], and
with up to an 11.60% improvement in F1 score in both closed- YaTC [51] etc. have been made in traffic classification based
and open-world scenarios; 2) even when working in a few-shot on pre-training techniques. However, these existing works
mode, our method achieves the best performance in three only explore the traffic representation ability provided by preout of five tasks in the closed-world setting and consistently training techniques in closed-world setting, that means all the
outperforms the best methods by up to 9.99% in terms of F1
score in the open-world scenario.
 categories of the downstream tasks are known and fixed. As
 a matter of fact, due to the openness of the real world, new
 Index Terms—Encrypted traffic classification, pre-training, encrypted traffic categories will constantly emerge (e.g. newly
contrast learning, open-world classification. released applications with traffic encryption technology).
 Therefore, in order to accommodate the real-world scenarios,
 I. I NTRODUCTION the encrypted traffic classification system should be (1) built
 on limited labeled traffic data (i.e., few-shot condition) and (2)
N ETWORK traffic classification, which identifies traffic
 types originating from different applications and web
services, serves as a cornerstone for managing and securing
 performs high-precision classification for known traffic categories and (3) has the ability to detect novel traffic categories.
networks. It underpins critical functions such as intrusion Existing works have explored few-shot learning and novel
detection [11], quality of service (QoS) optimization [36], user class detection, such as FC-Net [46] and TrafficGPT [15], but
experience enhancement [9], and overall network visibility address only isolated aspects of network traffic analysis. FC-
[1]. However, the widespread adoption of encryption (e.g., Net targets few-shot classification for intrusion detection in
 closed-world settings, leveraging small samples but failing to
 Received 13 February 2025; revised 14 September 2025 and 15 January handle unseen classes, limiting its applicability to dynamic net-
2026; accepted 12 March 2026; approved by IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON
N ETWORKING Editor S. Magnusson. Date of publication 16 March 2026; date work environments where new applications or threats emerge
of current version 1 April 2026. This work was supported by the Project of frequently. Similarly, TrafficGPT leverages GPT-2 for open-
Cloud Information Security Protection Technology under Grant E4GZ030302. world encrypted traffic classification, demonstrating improved
(Corresponding author: Aimin Yu.)
 Lixin Zhao and Aimin Yu are with the Institute of Information Engigeneralization to unknown traffic types. However, its effectiveneering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China (e-mail: ness depends on large-scale training data and lacks dedicated
zhaolixin@iie.ac.cn; yuaimin@iie.ac.cn). few-shot learning mechanisms. Thus, the primary motivation
 Changhao Wu is with the Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese of our work is to address the dual challenge of classifying
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China, and also with the School of
Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, encrypted traffic with limited labeled data (few-shot) while
China (e-mail: wuchanghao@iie.ac.cn). detecting unseen classes in open-world scenarios, a combina-
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TON.2026.3674624 tion not fully addressed by existing methods.
 2998-4157 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4481

 The core insight of our work is that effective few-shot open- separation, which is theoretically justified to reduce the
world encrypted traffic classification necessitates a protocol- open-world classification risk.
aware hierarchical representation, rather than treating traffic • Theoretical Foundation: We provide a theoretical analas generic byte streams. Unlike prior Transformer-based ysis (Proposition 1) that quantifies how the quality of
approaches that treat traffic as flat token sequences (e.g., the learned embedding space bounds the performance
ET-BERT [25]), we explicitly model the inherent hierarchi- of the nearest mean novelty detector, offering insights
cal structure of network traffic. In protocols such as TLS into the method’s effectiveness.
1.3 or complex tunneling schemes (VPN/Tor), semantically • Extensive Validation: We conduct comprehensive evalmeaningful units (BURSTs, defined as consecutive packets in uations across five encrypted traffic classification tasks.
the same direction) naturally correspond to application-layer Results show that our approach consistently outperforms
request/response transactions. This structural prior acts as a state-of-the-art methods in both closed-world and opencritical inductive bias, enabling robust generalization under world scenarios, particularly under few-shot constraints.
few-shot and open-world conditions.
 To materialize this insight, we introduce a synergistic pretraining framework centered on the BURST concept. Our II. R ELATED W ORK
framework jointly optimizes two complementary objectives:
the Masked BURST Model (MBM) task, which captures intra- A. Encrypted Traffic Classification
BURST syntactic patterns, and the BURST Context Prediction Existing encrypted traffic classification methods can be
(BCP) task, which learns inter-BURST semantic relationships. divided into two main categories: ML-based methods and DL-
This hierarchical modeling strategy yields a robust represen- based methods. Table I provides a summary and comparison
tation foundation that serves as a strong initialization for of existing traffic classification methods, with detailed descripdownstream adaptation. Furthermore, to address the theoret- tions presented in the following section.
ical gap in open-world traffic classification, we refine these ML-based methods. The dominant ML-based methods
representations through a theoretically grounded supervised [4], [31] [32], [33], [42] commonly employ algorithms such
contrastive learning (SCL) stage. As analyzed in Proposition 1, as SVM, KNN, and Naive Bayes to classify encrypted traffic.
this explicitly optimizes the intra-class compactness and inter- They typically rely on manually extracted features, such
class separation in the embedding space, thereby minimizing as packet count, packet size, and packet inter-arrival time
the open-world risk bound. etc. Recent work like [47] employs advanced handcrafted
 We evaluate the performance of our approach on five path signature features for encrypted traffic analysis,
encrypted traffic classification tasks. Experimental results demonstrating the ongoing potential of feature engineering.
demonstrate that: (1) under full data conditions, our approach The performance of these approaches hinges on the ability
outperforms existing methods across all five tasks, achieving to extract discriminative features that effectively capture the
improvements of 11.60%, 0.92%, 8.83%, 5.60% and 2.16% differences among traffic categories. However, this feature
in F1 score in the closed-world scenario, and 11.74%, 6.44%, extraction process is heavily dependent on domain expertise,
8.04%, 15.96% and 13.91% in the open-world scenario; (2) in posing challenges to the scalability and adaptability. Whisper
the few-shot setting, our method achieves the best performance [12] detects malicious traffic, including zero-day attacks, by
on the GEAC, ETCV, and EACT tasks, with only a marginal leveraging frequency domain features. However, from a traffic
gap compared to state-of-the-art methods, which operate under classification perspective, while it can identify novel classes,
full data conditions, on the EMC and EAC-1.3 tasks in its capability is limited to binary classification rather than
the closed-world scenario. Notably, compared to specialized fine-grained multi-class classification. FOSS [23] employs
few-shot traffic classification approaches, our method yields a tree-based framework for fine-grained unknown attack
a maximum improvement of 49.32% across all five tasks. detection in open-world network intrusion scenarios, but it
Furthermore, in the open-world scenario, our approach (i.e., in cannot effectively adapt to few-shot scenarios.
few-shot condition) consistently outperforms the best existing DL-based methods. DL-based methods automatically learn
methods (i.e., in full data condition) by 3.22%, 2.22%, 0.50%, complex feature patterns from the raw traffic and perform
9.99% and 0.69% respectively in F1 score. classification. Multiple deep learning models are adopted by
 In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows: different studies, including CNN-based models [29], [38],
 • Integrated Framework for Open-World Analysis: We [40], RNN-based models [26], [41] and GNN-based models
 explore the synergy between pre-training techniques and [20], [39]. Besides, some works [7], [28], [50] also solve the
 contrast learning to address the dual challenges of few- problem of open-world traffic classification based on deep
 shot classification and novel class detection in encrypted learning techniques. Although DL-based methods eliminate
 traffic. tedious feature engineering, they depend on a large amount of
 • Hierarchical Pre-training Scheme: We design two labeled traffic data for model training to learn valid features.
 domain-specific pre-training tasks to capture intra- However, it is time-consuming and error-prone to perform
 BURST structural patterns and inter-BURST contextual large-scale traffic labeling. It should be noted that some
 logic, respectively. Their joint optimization yields a robust DL-based methods [46], [48], [49] focus on few-shot traffic
 foundation for few-shot adaptation. classification, a scenario that aligns with our focus. However,
 • Optimized Metric Space via SCL: We customize a these studies lack novelty detection ability. In contrast, our
 supervised contrastive learning (SCL) strategy that explic- approach performs open-world traffic classification without
 itly enforces intra-class compactness and inter-class requiring large amounts of labeled data.
4482 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE I
 C OMPARISON OF THE E XISTING N ETWORK T RAFFIC C LASSIFICATION M ETHODS

B. Pre-Training Techniques (e.g. SimCSE [13]), applying it to network traffic remains chal-
 Pre-training, also known as self-supervised pre-training, lenging due to the multi-source heterogeneity and semantic
is an approach that involves training a model on a large ambiguity of raw traffic data. In this paper, we bridge preamount of unlabeled data before fine-tuning it on a specific training with contrast learning to better characterize encrypted
downstream task with labeled data. Pre-trained models, such as traffic. Unlike self-supervised paradigms such as SimCLR or
BERT [8] and its variants [21], [27], [37], have demonstrated MoCo, which rely on data augmentations and lack explicit
a powerful ability to capture generic patterns from large- label guidance, our contrastive learning strategy is based on the
scale unlabeled data, significantly enhancing performance Supervised Contrastive Learning (SCL) framework. Moreover,
in downstream tasks. In the field of traffic classification, existing studies mainly adopt contrastive learning in a heuristic
PERT [18] was the first to adapt ALBERT for the task manner, without offering theoretical guarantees in open-world
of encrypted traffic classification, demonstrating promising settings. This limitation motivates our formulation of SCL
performance. However, it lacks a tailored design for encrypted tailored for encrypted traffic, which explicitly optimizes distraffic representation and pre-training tasks, which constrains criminability under few-shot and novelty-aware constraints.
its generalization to emerging encryption technologies. To
address these limitations, ET-BERT [25] introduces a novel III. M ETHODOLOGY
representation method for encrypted traffic and redesigns two
 A. Model Overview
pre-training tasks. Similarly, TrafficFormer [54] develops a
more fine-grained and complex pre-training task, termed the The overall framework of our approach is shown in Fig. 1,
Same Origin-Direction-Flow (SODF) task. TrafficLLM [6] which consists of two stages: pre-training and contrast learnintroduces a dual-stage tuning framework leveraging LLMs ing. The goal of pre-training is to learn generic patterns for
for network traffic analysis, using traffic-domain tokenization each traffic flow from large-scale unlabeled encrypted traffic,
along with EA-PEFT to enhance detection and generation and the pre-trained model is then used as a feature extractor
tasks. However, all these methods require extensive fine-tuning to obtain high-quality initial feature vector representations to
data and are confined to closed-world assumptions, failing to conduct contrast learning. In the contrast learning stage, given
generalize to novel classes outside the training distribution. For the limited labeled traffic data, it performs similarity learning
open-world scenarios, OWCP [24] synthesizes new classes in under the supervision of a customized contrastive loss function
a spherical space for N+ 1 classification, yet risks overfitting to obtain an embedding space, in where an open-world nearest
due to the complexity of sampling from an infinite class mean classifier is applied.
space. TrafficGPT [15] utilizes GPT-2 [35] combined with the
K-LND [7] distance metric for novelty detection. However, B. Pre-Training Stage
as demonstrated in Section V-E, generic pre-trained features
 In the pre-training stage, the model is trained on a massive
without explicit discriminative constraints often lack suffiunlabeled traffic dataset. The raw traffic data is first converted
cient class separability. Unlike these approaches, we explicitly
 into tokens (tokenization), and then constructed into the input
impose a supervised metric learning objective to enforce a
 for the pre-training tasks. There are two pre-training tasks:
compact and discriminative manifold, which is critical for
 Masked BURST Model (MBM) task and BURST Context
robust few-shot and open-world classification.
 Prediction (BCP) task.
 1) Data Preprocessing: Unlike natural language text which
 contains explicit semantic units, traffic data is a pure byte
C. Contrast Learning stream on the network. In order to effectively leverage the
 Contrast learning is a key approach in self-supervised rep- pre-training technique for generic traffic patterns learning,
resentation learning, aiming to bring similar samples closer in we perform the follow data preprocessing steps: (1) Flow-tofeature space while pushing dissimilar ones apart. While it has BURST, (2) BURST Tokenization, (3) Token Embedding.
achieved significant success in computer vision (e.g. SimCLR (1) Flow-to-BURST: Give the raw traffic data, we first split
[5], MoCo [19], BYOL [17]) and natural language processing out flows with the same 5-tuple (i.e., source IP, source port,
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4483

Fig. 1. Overview of the whole framework.

destination IP, destination port, and protocol), which includes
packets in both directions. Then, each flow is converted into
multiple BURSTs each of which contains a sequence of
consecutive packets transmitted along the same direction [34].
BURST arises from application-layer behavior and underlying
protocol dynamics and it typically represents a distinct logical
unit of data exchange. In modern web services, the interaction
between client and server often involves segmented resource
requests and responses, driven by the need to fetch multiple
objects such as scripts, stylesheets, or media files. These segmented transfers are shaped by the concurrency mechanisms
of application-layer protocols like HTTP/2 and transport-layer
features like TCP’s congestion control management. As a
result, a BURST reflects both the structure of application data
and the temporal characteristics of its transmission, offering
insights into the operational patterns of the specific application.
 (2) BURST Tokenization: In order to transform the BURSTs
into the token representations for pre-training, we draw an
analogy between traffic flows and documents in natural lan-
 Fig. 2. Illustration of the two pre-training tasks for generic traffic feature
guage. From this perspective, BURSTs in flows can be mapped learning.
to sentences in documents. To transform BURSTs into tokenized representations, we decompose each BURST into a
sequence of units analogous to words in natural language. Con- facilitate the BCP task, it is necessary to include supplemensidering that BURST is composed of a string of hexadecimal tary identifiers that encode the BURST segment information.
numbers such as 802b04d732, a 2-gram model is employed These two steps are referred to as positional embedding and
to segment hexadecimal BURST data into units consisting of segment embedding, respectively. Furthermore, the process of
2 adjacent bytes. For the above example, after segmentation, transforming BURSTs into tokenized representations is known
the results are 802b 2b04 04d7 d732. We empirically set the as token embedding. Collectively, these three embedding
size of segment unit to 2 to limit the corpus size, since a large processes–positional, segment, and token embedding consticorpus space will significantly increase computational cost. tute the input representation required for pre-training.
These units are further tokenized using the Byte-Pair Encoding 2) Pre-Training Tasks: As shown in Fig. 2, we design two
tokenizer, with a maximum corpus size constrained to 65536 pre-training tasks, namely MBM task and BCP task, to effectokens. In addition to the BURST units, special tokens such as tively capture the internal relationships between bytes within
[CLS], [SEP], [MASK] and [PAD] are included in the corpus. a single BURST and the interrelations between BURSTs
[CLS] is used for classification tasks. [SEP] is used to separate originating from the same flow or across different flows. The
different BURSTs in the BCP task. [MASK] is used to replace motivation for this two-task design is to learn a comprehensive
the masked tokens in the MBM task. [PAD] is used to pad the representation of traffic flows by capturing both low-level
input to the maximum length. byte patterns within individual protocol data units (BURSTs)
 (3) Token Embedding: We select BERT as the base model and high-level contextual relationships between these units.
for pre-training. Since the encoder of the BERT lacks convo- These two tasks are jointly optimized to enable the model to
lutional or recurrent components, it is essential to incorporate comprehend both intra-BURST structures and inter-BURST
additional information that enables the model to capture the correlations, thus facilitating the learning of more generic
positional relationships within the input data. Additionally, to feature representations for each flow.
4484 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 • MBM TASK. Similar to the Masked Language Modeling containing video data. By learning to distinguish whether two
and the Masked Image Modeling introduced in BERT [8] BURSTs originate from the same flow or from unrelated flows,
and BEiT [2] respectively, the MBM task is utilized to learn the model is encouraged to encode inter-BURST interaction
the internal byte dependencies within BURSTs by predicting patterns, including request-response coupling, protocol handrandomly masked tokens. This task forces the model to shake structure, and transactional rhythms that are invariant
understand the syntactic structure and internal correlations to payload encryption. These flow-level semantics are diffiof a BURST, which is often determined by specific network cult to capture using packet-level or intra-BURST prediction
protocols (e.g., the structure of a TLS handshake record or objectives alone, yet they are critical for representing complex
an HTTP header). For example, in a BURST containing a encrypted tunnels such as TLS 1.3 and Tor traffic.
TLS Client Hello message, the values of certain bytes (e.g., Concretely, the BCP task is formulated as a binary classiversion, cipher suites, extensions) are highly correlated. If the fication problem. As illustrated in the lower part of Fig. 2,
bytes indicating the TLS version are masked, the model must during pre-training, two BURSTs are randomly selected to
infer their value based on the surrounding context bytes that form a BURST pair. These paired BURSTs are labeled as
define the TLS handshake structure. In detail, as shown in the BURST-a and BURST-b through segment embedding. With a
upper part of Fig. 2, we first randomly select tokens to be probability of 50%, BURST-b is sampled from the same flow as
masked in the input BURST. Then, for each of the masked BURST-a; otherwise, it is sampled from a different flow. Given
tokens, one of the following actions is performed: (1) Replace a BURST pair Bi = (BURST-ai , BURST-bi ) and its groundit with the [MASK] token with 80% probability. (2) Replace it truth label yi ∈ {0, 1}, where yi = 1 indicates that the two
with another token with 10% probability. (3) Do nothing with BURSTs originate from the same flow, the loss function of
10% probability. Finally, a BERT-based model is trained to the BCP task is defined as:
predict [MASK] based on the preceding and following bytes n
 X
within the BURST. If there are k tokens are randomly masked LBCP = − log(P(1 − yi |Bi ; θ)) (2)
in the input BURST S , the loss function for the MBM task i=1
L MBM can be defined as:
 In the end, as shown in Equation 3, a weighted sum of L MBM
 k and LBCP is used as the final loss function for pre-training.
 Here, λ is a hyperparameter for balancing the loss values of
 X
 L MBM = − log(P(MAS Ki = tokeni |Ŝ ; θ)) (1)
 i=1 the two tasks.
 L = λ ∗ L MBM + LBCP (3)
where θ is the set of trainable parameters of Transformer
encoder and P is the probability function modeled by θ. Ŝ In essence, the MBM task learns the syntax of traffic (the
is the representation of BURST S after masking and MAS Ki structure of individual BURSTs), while the BCP task learns
is the masked token at the ith position in BURST S . the storyline (how BURSTs logically connect to form a
 • BCP TASK. The MBM task discussed above focuses meaningful flow). Their combination provides a robust and
on learning intra-BURST byte dependencies within individual general-purpose representation for encrypted traffic flows.
traffic units. However, modeling isolated BURSTs alone is
insufficient to capture the generic behavioral patterns of complete traffic flows. To this end, we design the BURST Context C. Contrast Learning Stage
Prediction (BCP) task to learn contextual dependencies across In traditional methods based on pre-training techniques,
BURSTs at the flow level. they usually perform fine-tuning by first initializing with the
 Unlike Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) in natural language parameters of the pre-trained model and then continue to train
processing or the Same-origin Burst Prediction (SBP) task on the data of the specific task. Unlike these methods, we use
adopted in prior work such as ET-BERT [25], our BCP task the trained model as a feature extractor to get robust initial
is explicitly grounded in the structural characteristics of net- feature vector representations for traffic flows and these feature
work traffic. In ET-BERT, segment-level prediction is typically vectors are further used as the input for contrast learning. This
constructed by splitting packet sequences at predefined or decoupled two-stage formulation provides superior scalability
arbitrary boundaries, which is effective for capturing local in practical deployment, because it avoids repeatedly fineco-occurrence patterns but does not explicitly model how tuning the large pre-trained backbone and enables efficient
semantically meaningful transmission units interact over time. updates through retraining only the small contrastive module
In contrast, we adopt the BURST, which naturally delimited when new classes emerge. To be more specific, when the preby changes in packet direction, as the basic semantic unit. A training stage is finished, the parameters are frozen and the raw
BURST often corresponds to a complete request or response traffic data for contrast learning are processed into the same
at the application layer, thereby preserving protocol-level form as the pre-training stage. Through multi-layer nonlinear
transactional integrity. transformation, we obtain the last hidden state as inputs of the
 Based on this formulation, the BCP task aims to cap- contrast learning stage.
ture higher-order, flow-level semantics by modeling whether 1) Contrast Learning Strategy: Based on the feature reptwo BURSTs are contextually related within the same com- resentations output from the pre-trained model, this contrast
munication session. Such relationships are often indicative learning module aims at learning a contrast embedding space
of application behavior. For example, in a video streaming where instances (i.e. traffic flows) have small intra-class scatter
flow, a small request BURST from the client is typically and big inter-class separation. To this end, give each paired
followed by a large response BURST from the server training instances ( x̂i = f (xi ; θ), xˆj = f (x j ; θ)), where xi and
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4485

 dissimilar pair in the training set, we can define the loss
 function for contrast learning as follows:
 X
 LCL = h(1 − yi j (τ − ||g( x̂i ; θ̂) − g( xˆj ; θ̂)||22 )) (8)
 i, j

 where h(x) = max(0, x) is the hinge loss function. It is
 worth noting that, thanks to the generic feature representations
 produced by the pre-trained model, only a small amount of
 instances need to be labeled (i.e. few-shot) for contrast learning to obtain a discriminative feature space which contributes
Fig. 3. Illustration of our proposed contrast learning strategy. (a) original to performing open-world classification.
feature space. (b) contrast embedding space.
 2) Open-World Classification: In traditional pre-training
 based traffic classification methods, a classifier is commonly
x j denote raw traffic flows after preprocessing and f (·; θ) is fine-tuned under a closed-world assumption where the number
a nonlinear mapping modeled by the pre-trained model, the of possible labels associated with instances at evaluation stage
pair-wise feature distance metric of ( x̂i , xˆj ) can be measured is known and fixed. However, in real-world scenarios, this
by computing the Euclidean distance between their feature assumption does not hold. In our problem setting, instances
representations in the contrast embedding space, which can from previously unknown categories may appear after the
be defined as follows: classifier is built. Inspired by the Nearest Mean Classifier
 utilized in [30], we compute a novelty class detection threshold
 D( x̂i , xˆj ) = ||g( x̂i ; θ̂) − g( xˆj ; θ̂)||2 (4)
 T i for each known class i to reject novel class’s instances
where g(·; θ̂) is modeled by a neural network. and classify instances belonging to known classes. Here, to
 In order to obtain more discriminative feature representa- determine the optimum threshold value T i for each class i,
tions in the contrast embedding space, we expect that the we assume that the instances of each class i follow a normal
distances between similar pairs are smaller than those between distribution in the contrast embedding space, characterized
dissimilar pairs and there is a large margin between the similar by a specific mean value µi and variance value σ2i . Through
pairs and dissimilar ones. In our supervised contrast learning applying the average intra-class distance with a narrow range
paradigm, the similar and dissimilar pairs are constructed of float, we obtain the threshold T i for each class i. This can
according to the traffic classes in the downstream tasks. be formulated as:
Specifically, if two instances belong to the same traffic class,
 0 1
they will be considered a similar pair; otherwise, they will be 1 X
 Ti = @ ||g( x̂; θ̂) − µi ||22 A + ησi (9)
considered a dissimilar pair. In addition, to avoid the problem ||Mi ||
 x̂∈Mi
of data imbalance, we downsample dissimilar pairs to match
the number of similar pairs. In this regard, if x̂i and xˆj are where Mi is the training set of class i and ||Mi || denotes the
from the same traffic class, their contrast embedding feature number of instances in Mi . η is a hyperparameter to control
distance D( x̂i , xˆj ) should be smaller than an up-margin τ1 ; if the classification boundary for each known class.
x̂i and xˆj are from different traffic classes, D( x̂i , xˆj ) should be Finally, to predict the label yi for a raw traffic flow xi ,
bigger than a down-margin τ2 . This can be formulated as: we first transform xi through f (·; θ) to get its initial feature
 ( representation x̂i . Then, we further project x̂i to the contrast
 D2 ( x̂i , xˆj ) < τ1 , yi = y j embedding space through g(·; θ̂). In the contrast embedding
 (5)
 D2 ( x̂i , xˆj ) > τ2 , yi , y j space, we compute the distance set D̄ x̂i , j from g( x̂i ; θ̂) to
 the class center of each known class j. Lastly, we select
where τ2 should be bigger than τ1 to enforce the discriminative the minimum distance minD̄ x̂i , j from D̄ x̂i , j and obtain the
feature learning. Furthermore, we introduce an intermediate corresponding class label y j . If minD̄ x̂i , j is less than the
parameter τ to reduce the number of free parameters. Specif- threshold T j , the predicted label for xi is y j . Otherwise, xi
ically, we set τ1 = τ − 1 and τ2 = τ + 1, thus the constraint in will be identified as an instance from novel class. This can be
(5) can be simplified as: formulated as:
 8
 1 − yi j (τ − D2 ( x̂i , xˆj )) < 0 (6) <argminD̄ x̂i , j , if minD̄ x̂i , j < T j
 yi = j=1,2,...,C (10)
where yi j denotes whether the paired instances ( x̂i , xˆj ) come :−1, otherwise
from the same class, which is defined as follows:
 ( where C is the number of known classes and −1 denotes the
 1, yi = y j label of novel class.
 yi j = (7)
 −1, yi , y j
 An intuitive illustration of our proposed contrast learning D. Theoretical Justification
strategy is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that, with the This section provides the analytical foundation for our
constrain in (6), there will be an explicit margin between the methodology, specifically addressing why SCL facilitates novsimilar and dissimilar pairs in the learned contrast embedding elty detection. We formalize the open-world setting and derive
space. Through imposing this constrain on each similar and a generalization bound based on class separation.
4486 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 Setting. Let P1 , . . ., PC be the distributions of the C known The overall statistics and description about the tasks and the
classes, and Pnovel the unknown novel class distribution. S At corresponding datasets are shown in Table II. Before using
training time we observe n labeled instances from Cc=1 Pc these datasets, we remove packets that are irrelevant to actual
only; Pnovel  is revealed only at test  time. Denote by Σin = data transmission, such as packets using ARP protocol and
Ec=1..C E x∼Pc (g(x) − µc )(g(x) − µc )> the intra-class covariance, DHCP protocol. In addition, to avoid model bias caused by
and by Σout = Ec=1..C (µc − µ̄)(µc − µ̄)> the inter-class covari- strong correlation information in each traffic flow, we remove
ance, where µc = E x∼Pc [g(x)] and µ̄ = Ec=1..C [µc ]. the Ethernet header, the IP address from the IP header and the
 protocol port from the TCP/UDP header.
 Proposition 1: Assume Σin  λ̄ Σout with λ̄ < 1. Then the
expected 0-1 risk of the nearest-mean classifier h satisfies
 4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
 
 d log n
  B. Datasets Usage Settings
 ∗
 R(h) ≤ ROW + +O (11)
 τ2 n • Pre-training Dataset. We select approximately 10GB of
 unlabeled traffic data from the ISCX-VPN [14] dataset for prewhere R∗OW is the minimum attainable risk under the above
 training. This dataset provides network traffic captured from
open-world protocol, d the embedding dimension, and τ the
 popular applications, including Skype, YouTube, Facebook,
margin in (8).
 and others. It includes both VPN and non-VPN traffic, offer-
 Proof: For any test sample x drawn from one of the C + 1 ing a balanced representation of encrypted and unencrypted
distributions, define the margin scenarios.
 • Closed-world Settings. To verify the effectiveness of our
 γ(x) = 0 min kg(x) − µc0 k − kg(x) − µc k
 
 (12) approach and compare with other baseline studies in closedc ∈{1,...,C,novel}
 world scenario, each dataset is randomly divided into the
where c is the true class of x. A classification error occurs if
 training set, the validation set and the test set in a ratio of
and only if γ(x) < 0. By Chebyshev’s inequality,
 8: 1: 1. Among them, the training set is used to conduct
 Var(γ) contrast learning and the validation set is used for optimal
 P(γ < 0) ≤ (13)
 (Eγ)2 hyperparameter selection and the test set is used to measure
 the quality of classification results.
Under the covariance assumption Σin  λ̄ Σout we have
 • Open-world Settings. Similarly, to verify the effective-
 Var(γ) ≤ 4 Tr(Σin ) ≤ 4λ̄ Tr(Σout ) (14) ness of various methods in open-world scenario, we make
 the follow settings: for each dataset, 80% of the classes are
The margin loss (8) drives the embedding such that Eγ ≥ τ randomly selected as known classes, while the remaining 20%
in population. With finite
 √ instances we only achieve Eγ ≥ τ − are designated as novel classes. The instances from the known
ε(n), where ε(n) = O d/n is the uniform-deviation bound
 
 classes are further divided into the training set, the validation
yielded by the Rademacher complexity of the d-dimensional set, and the test set in a ratio of 8: 1: 1. The test set of the
linear nearest-mean rule [3]. Inserting this lower bound into known classes combined with all instances from the novel
Chebyshev’s inequality gives classes constitutes the complete test set.
 Var(γ) 4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
 P(γ < 0) ≤ ≤
 (Eγ)2 (τ − ε(n))2
 C. Implementation
 4λ̄ Tr(Σout ) ε(n)
   
 = 1+O We implemented our approach on a server equipped with
 τ2 τ one NVIDIA RTX4090-24G GPU and an AMD 7542 CPU (14
 4λ̄ Tr(Σout )
  
 d log n vCPUs), 112 GB of memory. The main network architecture
 = +O (15)
 τ2 n of pre-training model consists of multiple layers of bidi-
 √ rectional Transformer blocks, each composed of multi-head
where the last step uses ε(n) = O( d/n) and Taylor expansion self-attention layers [44]. In detail, the network is composed of
under ε(n)  τ. Since R(h)−R∗OW ≤ P(γ < 0), the proposition 12 Transformer blocks, with each self-attention layer including
follows.  12 attention heads. We set the dimension of each input token
 Interpretation. The MBM+BCP pre-training furnishes to 128, and the number of input tokens is 512. In the pregeneric and robust initial embeddings in which contrastive training stage, we set the balancing coefficient λ to 1. The
learning can sculpt a highly discriminative space; empirically, batch size is set to 32 and the total steps is set to 500, 000.
this yields intra-class covariance Σin that is markedly smaller The learning rate is 2 × 10−5 , and the warmup ratio is 0.1.
than inter-class covariance Σout . The derived bound confirms A residual network architecture is applied for conducting
that this compactness, which captured by a small λ̄, directly contrast learning. Specifically, the network consists of four
tightens the risk upper-bound for the nearest-mean classifier, residual blocks, where each block contains 2 convolutional
all without requiring any novel class instances during training. layers, followed by a skip connection that allows the input
 to bypass the convolutional operations and be added directly
 IV. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP to the output. In the contrast learning stage, we set the
 batch size to 32, the total epochs to 20 and the learning
A. Datasets and Tasks rate to 0.001. In addition, the margin τ is set to 5, and the
 We conduct five encrypted traffic classification tasks based threshold adjustment coefficient η is set to 2, both of which
on seven public available datasets to evaluate our approach. are determined through optimal hyperparameter search on the
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4487

 TABLE II
 OVERVIEW OF THE TASKS AND DATASETS . T HE D ESCRIPTION OF E ACH TASK I S D ETAILED IN THE D ESCRIPTION C OLUMN

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR D IFFERENT TASKS W ITH VARYING K-S HOTS IN C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

validation set of the EMC task. These values are fixed for all B. K-Shot Classification
subsequent experiments.
 In this section, we demonstrate the performance of our
 approach under different K-shot settings. We verify it on both
 V. E VALUATION closed-world and open-world scenarios. Here, the symbol K
 In this section, we evaluate our approach on five encrypted in K-shot is not the absolute number of instances in each
traffic classification tasks to answer the following questions: class used for training. Instead, K means K% of instances
 • RQ1: How effective is our approach under different are randomly selected from each class of the training set
 k-shot settings? to conduct contrast learning (e.g. 10-shot indicates that we
 • RQ2: How does our approach compare to existing meth- randomly select 10% of instances from each class in training
 ods under both closed-world and open-world settings? set). The results are detailed in Table III and Table IV.
 • RQ3: Is the proposed components effective in enhancing Closed-world: As shown in Table III, when K = 1,
 the overall performance? the performance across all the five tasks is worst because
 • RQ4: Do the two proposed pre-training tasks contribute too few training instances contain limited information about
 to learning generic and robust feature representations, the diversity of encrypted traffic, which leads to the model
 rather than simply benefiting from increased model capac- being in an under-fitting state. As the value of K increases,
 ity? the classification performance is becoming better and better.
 • RQ5: How does our approach perform in terms of time This is not surprising since more information of the training
 overhead and system resource consumption? classes is incorporated into the training phase as K increases.
 Specifically, as K grows to 10, the F1 score improves to
 0.449, 0.831, 0.709, 0.772 and 0.620 respectively on the five
A. Evaluation Metrics tasks. When K reaches 20, the classification performance can
 We assess and compare the performance of the various be close to the optimal results achieved in K = 100, with
methods through four typical metrics, including Accuracy the F1 score gaps only 9.08%, 1.81%, 8.00%, 4.08% and
(AC), Precision (PR), Recall (RC), and F1 score. To avoid 4.69% respectively across the five tasks. This can be attributed
biases caused by data imbalance, we calculate macro average to the generic initial feature representations obtained from
for each metric. Moreover, for the GEAC task, we report the the customized pre-training model for traffic flows. These
macro average results across the Cross-Platform (iOS) and representations enable the subsequent contrast learning task to
Cross-Platform (Android) datasets for brevity. Similarly, for learn discriminative features even with only a few instances.
the ETCV task, we provide the macro average over the ISCX- The classification performance of GEAC task is relatively
VPN (Service) and ISCX-VPN (App) datasets. low (i.e., F1 score is 0.606 when K = 100 and 0.551 when
4488 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE M ETRICS FOR D IFFERENT TASKS W ITH VARYING K-S HOTS IN O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING

K = 20). Apart from the large number of categories of GEAC the entire training set for each task to demonstrate their best
task, we analyze the reasons for the category similarities, performance. For pre-training based approaches, we adhere
which contribute to the task’s difficulty, including: (1) Similar to the dataset selection protocols outlined in their respective
application behaviors—applications of same type (e.g. stream papers. Additionally, we incorporate three recent few-shot
media applications such as Youku, Tencent Video, iQiyi etc. learning methods–FC-Net [46], MetaMRE [48], and FS-MTC
or social media applications such as Wechat, QQ etc.) exhibit [49]–evaluated under a consistent 20-shot condition for fair
overlapping traffic patterns and similar burst characteristics comparison. The experimental results are shown in Table V.
(e.g., frequent, short bursts for messaging), reducing inter-class • GEAC Task. The results for the GEAC task are shown
discriminability. (2) Shared third-party domains—multiple in the leftmost part of Table V, We can observe that the
applications connect to common third-party domains for pre-training based methods are consistently better than both
shared services, such as googleadservices.com for advertising, ML-based and DL-based methods. The reason is that the preappsflyer.com for mobile attribution and marketing analytics, training based methods obtain essential packet or flow features
and googleapis.com for various Google API services, further from large-scale unlabeled traffic data which contributes a
blurring category boundaries. However, although the classi- lot to the built of target classifier. Among all pre-training
fication accuracy is lower compared to other tasks, we still based methods, PERT has the worst performance since it has
achieved the best results compared to other related works, not designed specific task to learn the transmission structure
which is discussed in section V-C. of traffic. ET-BERT and TrafficFormer perform better than
 Open-world: As shown in Table IV, compared to the PERT by respectively introducing well-designed pre-training
closed-world setting, the classification performance has task for traffic feature learning. TrafficLLM, which uses LLMs
slightly decreased in the open-world setting, e.g., 2.64%, for generic traffic representation, achieves competitive results
3.33%, 4.28%, 2.86% and 3.87% decrease in F1 score respec- but underperforms TrafficFormer in this task, with an F1 score
tively across the five tasks when K = 100. This decrease is in of 0.522 compared to 0.543. Our approach surpasses the stateaccordance with expectation because open-world classification of-the-art TrafficFormer by 1.47% in F1 score, highlighting
requires model to obtain more discriminative features and has the efficacy of contrast learning in enhancing feature discrimstronger generalization ability. Specifically, in the closed-world inability across traffic categories. Among few-shot methods,
setting, the training set and test set both come from known FC-Net, MetaMRE, and FS-MTC exhibit poor performance
categories, so the model is easy to learn the characteristics (F1 scores below 0.370, approximately 49.32% lower than
of each category and achieve good results on the test set. In ours), highlighting their limited capacity to learn discrimicomparison, in the open-world scenario, the model should have native features from small datasets when dealing with large,
the ability to adapt to the instances of unknown categories. similar traffic categories.
However, it is worth noting that our approach still achieves • EMC Task. The results for the EMC task are shown in the
high classification performance across the five tasks when second column group of Table V. In this task, the pre-training
K reaches 20 (i.e., F1 scores of 0.545, 0.921, 0.812, 0.903, based methods are also superior to those of ML-based and
0.724) and it achieves the best results with F1 scores of 0.590, DL-based ones. PERT still performs worst in all pre-training
0.959, 0.873, 0.952 and 0.819 when K = 100. To demonstrate methods. TrafficLLM performs strongly, achieving an F1 score
the advantage of our approach for few-shot encrypted traffic of 0.982, close to TrafficFormer’s 0.983, benefiting from its
classification, we will mainly compare the results obtained at LLM-based representation learning for malware traffic pat-
K = 20 with baselines in the following sections. terns. Our approach achieves marginal improvements of 0.10%
 across all metrics compared to ET-BERT but lags behind TrafficFormer by 0.81%, 0.91%, 1.02%, and 0.91% in accuracy,
C. Comparison Under Closed-World Setting precision, recall, and F1 score, respectively. However, with
 For the comparison under the closed-world setting, we 50% of training instances (K = 50) incorporated into our
evaluate a diverse set of baselines, comprising two ML- contrastive model, performance aligns with TrafficFormer, and
based methods: AppScanner [42] and BIND [32], two with 100% incorporation, it exceeds TrafficFormer by 1.12%,
DL-based methods: FS-Net [26] and Deeppacket [29], and 1.02%, 0.91%, and 0.91% in the respective metrics. The
four pre-training based methods: PERT [18], ET-BERT [25], strong performance of baselines may be attributed to unen-
TrafficFormer [54], and TrafficLLM [6]. Since these methods crypted traffic in the malware dataset, providing additional
are not optimized for few-shot learning, we train them on plaintext information. Among few-shot methods, FC-Net and
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4489

 TABLE V
 T HE R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT A PPROACHES ON GEAC, EMC, ETCV, EACT AND EAC-1.3 TASKS U NDER C LOSED -W ORLD S ETTING

MetaMRE achieve performance comparable to ML- and • EAC-1.3 Task. The results for the EAC-1.3 task are
DL-based approaches but remain inferior to pre-training-based shown in the rightmost part in Table V. Our approach performs
methods. FS-MTC, benefiting from preliminary knowledge better than all ML-based and DL-based methods. It improves
derived from auxiliary dataset, achieves a higher F1 score than by 8.12% and 2.65% in F1 score over the best ML-based
FC-Net and MetaMRE, yet still trails our method by 7.74%. method BIND and DL-based method FS-Net respectively.
 • ETCV Task. The results for the ETCV task are shown Among pre-training methods, we surpass PERT and ET-BERT
in the third column group of Table V, from where we can with gains of 8.9% and 2.4% in F1 score, respectively.
see that the classification performance of ML-based methods TrafficLLM (F1 = 0.801) performs competitively but falls
and DL-based methods is comparable and consistently infe- short of TrafficFormer (F1 = 0.834) by 3.3%, while our
rior to that of the pre-training based methods. Among the method narrows this gap, trailing TrafficFormer by 2.2%.
baselines, TrafficLLM achieves F1 = 0.838 and TrafficFormer With full training data (100-shot), our approach further excels,
achieves 0.836, both of which are comparable to our method surpassing TrafficFormer by 2.16% in F1 score. The slight
(F1 = 0.839). Nevertheless, with 100-shot data, the F1 score underperformance under 20-shot conditions is justified by the
of our method rises to 0.912, which surpasses TrafficLLM practical costs of traffic labeling. Among few-shot methods,
and TrafficFormer by 8.83% and 9.09% respectively. Few- they exhibit significant performance gaps. While FS-MTC,
shot methods such as MetaMRE (F1 = 0.703) and FS-MTC benefiting from auxiliary dataset, achieves the best results,
(F1 = 0.661) remain notably below pre-training based methods it still underperforms our method by 24.4%, highlighting
(i.e., 19.34% lower than ours), confirming the importance the inherent limitations of existing few-shot approaches in
of large-scale representation learning for imbalanced datasets handling large volumes of TLS 1.3 traffic–where they struggle
like ETCV task. In addition, our contrast learning strategy to learn sufficiently discriminative features.
further mitigates the problem of class imbalance by emphasizing instance similarity in the embedding space, improving
representation of minority classes. D. Comparison Under Open-World Setting
 • EACT Task. The results for the EACT task, shown in the We select eight baselines for the comparison in open-world
fourth column group of Table V, highlight poor performance setting. Among these baselines, there are three ML-based
across most baselines except TrafficFormer and TrafficLLM, methods: Whisper [12], FOSS [52], ProGraph [23], three
due to Tor’s multi-layer encryption and routing, which obscure DL-based methods: Prototype [50], K-LND [7], Trident [53],
consistent patterns. Traffic features like packet size and timing, and two pre-training based methods: OWCP [24] and Trafrelied upon by ML-based methods, are rendered ineffective. ficGPT [15]. It is worth noting that Whisper [12] does not
TrafficFormer applies a traffic data augmentation method to possess multi-class classification capabilities. However, given
reduce the model’s reliance on irrelevant information and its ability to detect unknown categories, it is still included
enrich the training instances, which contributes a lot to the as a comparative baseline. All evaluation metrics of Whisclassification performance. TrafficLLM excels with an F1 per are reported under the binary classification setting of
score of 0.928, outperforming other baselines, thanks to its known categories versus novel categories. We train all baseline
LLM-driven contextual representation for anonymized traffic. models on the entire training set for each task to show
Our approach achieves 0.940, improving over TrafficFormer their best performance. The experimental results are shown
and TrafficLLM by 3.18% and 1.29% respectively. With in Tables VI. Whisper demonstrates strengths in detecting
100-shot instances, our method further rises to 0.980, which unknown categories with F1 scores ranging from 0.477 to
is 6.95% higher than TrafficFormer and 5.60% higher than 0.903 across tasks, leveraging frequency domain analysis for
TrafficLLM. In contrast, few-shot baselines (e.g., MetaMRE robust realtime detection, but its lack of multi-class support
0.524, FC-Net 0.518) lag significantly, highlighting the advan- limits its applicability in complex open-world scenarios. The
tage of pre-training combined with contrast learning under following analysis will primarily focus on comparisons with
heavy obfuscation conditions. other baselines in the multi-class context.
4490 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

 TABLE VI
 T HE R ESULTS OF D IFFERENT A PPROACHES ON GEAC, EMC, ETCV, EACT AND EAC-1.3 TASKS U NDER O PEN -W ORLD S ETTING

 • GEAC Task (open). The results for the GEAC task our approach effectively mitigates the issue by: (1) capturing
are shown in the leftmost part of Table VI. The pre- byte-level dependencies within BURSTs as well as the corretraining based methods demonstrate better results compared to lations between BURSTs, and (2) learning a similarity metric
ML-based and DL-based methods. This superiority suggests rather than directly searching for class boundaries. While
the necessity of obtaining robust feature representations from our approach records a slightly lower accuracy (−0.12%)
pre-trained models for the open-world classification task. For compared to TrafficGPT, it is important to note that TrafficGPT
the pre-training based methods, our approach improves 7.84%, relies on dataset-specific fine-tuning in a closed-world setting
14.88%, 23.68%, 17.97% in terms of accuracy, precision, to extract features prior to open-world classification. This
recall and F1 score over OWCP. The reason for the poor process is less practical in real-world scenarios. By contrast,
performance of OWCP is that it synthesizes new instances the generic feature representations derived from the pre-trained
that around the boundaries of known classes and use them model in our approach are dataset-independent, making it more
as the training instances from novel class, but these synthe- applicable to real-world situations and better aligned with
sized instances may not conform to the actual novel class practical requirements.
distribution. In contrast, we make no assumptions about the • EACT Task (open). The results for the EACT task
distribution of new classes; instead, we focus on learning are shown in the fourth column group of Table VI. Our
more discriminative features based on the available instances approach achieves consistent improvements across all evalfrom the known classes. Our approach perform better than uation metrics, surpassing the existing best results obtained
TrafficGPT in terms of accuracy (+ 2.48%), recall (+ 8.91%) by OWCP by 6.72%, 9.79%, 11.64%, 9.99% in accuracy,
and F1 score (+ 3.22%) but worse in precision (-2.53%). We precision, recall and F1 score respectively. This demonstrates
attribute this to the insufficient training instances for contrast the effectiveness of our method in addressing the challenges
learning, as when 100% training instances are used (K = 100), posed by multi-layer encrypted traffic. Such traffic introduces
the precision will be 3.03% higher than TrafficGPT. significant difficulties due to the obfuscation and encryption
 • EMC Task (open). The results for the EMC task are mechanisms inherent in the Tor protocol. OWCP tackles
shown in the second column group of Table VI. Our approach this challenge by firstly conducting contrastive pre-training
achieves the best performance across all evaluation metrics, to extract discriminative features and then synthesizing flows
demonstrating its effectiveness in this domain. Specifically, it of novel class in the feature space to enrich the training
outperforms the best-performing DL-based method Trident by instances. In contrast, we design explicit pre-training tasks to
10.69% in F1 score and surpasses the top pre-training based learn robust and generic feature representations that are better
method TrafficGPT by 2.22% in F1 score. These substantial suited for encrypted traffic. These features are further refined
improvements highlight the robustness and adaptability of our and enhanced through a contrastive learning strategy, leadapproach in handling the challenges associated with encrypted ing to improved discriminative capability. This combination
malware classification. The superior performance indicates enables our approach to handle the complexities of encrypted
that our method effectively captures discriminative features, Tor traffic and perform open-world Tor traffic classification
enabling more accurate detection of known and novel malware. effectively.
This underscores the potential of our approach as a valuable • EAC-1.3 Task (open). The results for the EAC-1.3
tool for real-world malware detection tasks. task, presented in the rightmost part of Table VI, reveal
 • ETCV Task (open). The results for the ETCV task that while pre-training methods typically lead, the DL-based
are shown in the third column group of Table VI. In this method Trident surpasses the pre-training method OWCP by
task, pre-training based methods demonstrate superior per- 9.48% in F1 score, benefiting from its decoupled one-class
formance compared to the ML- and DL-based approaches. learning framework for fine-grained detection. Nevertheless,
Specifically, our approach achieves improvements of 31.82%, Trident still trails our approach by 10.03% in F1 score. Our
6.00% and 0.50% in F1 score over the state-of-the-art approach outperforms the best baseline, TrafficGPT, achiev-
ML-based method Prograph, DL-based method Prototype ing improvements of 1.21%, 0.42%, 0.82%, and 0.69% in
and the pre-training based method TrafficGPT respectively. accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score, respectively. These
Addressing the data imbalance challenge inherent to this task, results suggest that our method’s ability to learn generic yet
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4491

Fig. 4. The visualization for traffic flows on EMC task in different feature space.

 TABLE VII our MBM and BCP jointly capture both intra- and inter-
 A BLATION R ESULTS ON EMC TASK BURST relationships. Our method also matches Traffic-
 Former+CL despite TrafficFormer using a more complex
 SODF task, demonstrating that our simpler MBM+BCP design
 is both efficient and effective.
 To provide a more intuitive comparison, we visualize the
 distributions of traffic flows on EMC task by projecting
 them onto a two-dimensional feature space using t-SNE. As
 illustrated in Fig. 4, the plots have instances from 16 known
 classes, indicated from 0 to 15 in different colors, and a set of
 instances from novel class (i.e., the remaining 4 categories of
discriminative features through task-specific pre-training, com- EMC task) indicated in black color. Fig. 4a shows the distribined with contrast learning strategies, allows it to generalize bution of raw traffic. This is achieved by selecting the first 4
better to complex and highly encrypted traffic. Furthermore, packets from each flow and the first 32 bytes from each packet.
the superiority of our approach highlights its practical value for The resulting 4×32-dimensional feature vector is then reduced
handling real-world encrypted application classification tasks, to two dimensions after sanitizing biased fields. Meanwhile,
especially under the constraints posed by modern encryption Fig. 4b illustrates the distribution of traffic flows output by
protocols such as TLS 1.3. NO-CL, Fig. 4c is the output of NO-PT and Fig. 4d displays
 the output of our complete method. Clearly, the instances are
 completely inseparable in the original feature space. After
E. Ablation Study
 through the pre-training model, the instance distribution is
 To address RQ3 and RQ4, we analyze the contributions more dispersed, but the separability is still poor. Directly apply
of pre-training and contrast learning, and further examine the contrast learning strategy on the raw traffic can obtain features
effectiveness of our two pre-training tasks as well as the impact with a certain degree of discriminability compared to Noof model capacity. CL or original input, but the instance clusters from different
 1) Impact of Components: To examine the impact of classes still have a high degree of overlap. In contrast, the
pre-training and contrast learning components, we set up output of our complete method has more distinct groups of
four baselines as follows: (1) NO Pre-Training (NO- instance clusters for different classes compared to both No-CL
PT): raw bytes of the first 4 packets (32 bytes each) and No-PT and instances from novel classes are well separated
after sanitizing biased fields are used for contrast learning. from other clusters containing known class instances. This
(2) No Contrast Learning (NO-CL): applying our open- also indicates that both the pre-training and contrast learning
world classification on features from the pre-trained model. component play crucial roles in our approach and complement
(3) ET-BERT+CL: replacing our pre-training model with each other. In particular, the pre-training component help
ET-BERT. (4) TrafficFormer+CL: replacing our pre-training extract robust initial feature representations and the contrast
model with TrafficFormer. learning component make these feature representations more
 Results on the EMC task (Table VII) show that methods discriminative to adapt to the open-world encrypted traffic
combining both pre-training and contrast learning consis- classification problem.
tently outperform those using only one component, confirming
their complementary roles. NO-CL yields the worst perfor- 2) Effectiveness of Pre-Training Tasks: Furthermore, to
mance, indicating that contrast learning is crucial for obtaining verify the effectiveness of our proposed pre-training tasks
discriminative representations. NO-PT performs better than (MBM and BCP) in learning generic and robust feature
NO-CL but still lags behind other baselines, showing that representations, we perform an ablation study using adversarial
pre-training benefits generic feature extraction and facil- samples generated via the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM)
itates subsequent discriminative learning. Compared with [16]. FGSM introduces controlled perturbations to the original
ET-BERT+CL, our approach improves F1 score by 1.04% traffic representations, mimicking real-world noise such as
and 0.88% in closed- and open-world settings, respectively. packet error or network jitter, thereby enabling an evaluation
ET-BERT only considers intra-BURST correlations, whereas of the learned features’ resilience.
4492 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

Fig. 5. F1 score variation with increasing  on ETCV task.
 Fig. 6. F1 score variation on EMC task.

 Adversarial samples are generated on the test set using the The model capacity increases progressively from Cap. 1
FGSM formulation: to Cap. 5. Fig. 6 depicts the variation in F1 scores across
 these five configurations on the EMC task, where fine-tuning
 x0 = x +  · sign(∇ x L(θ, x, y)) (16)
 is performed using a softmax classifier following pre-training.
where x represents the embedded representation of a The results indicate that the F1 score improvement plateaus
BURST–a sequence of tokenized traffic units derived from from Cap. 2 to Cap. 5. Notably, despite Cap. 3 having a larger
raw flows via our preprocessing pipeline. Here,  controls the model capacity than Cap. 2, its F1 score decreases by 1.82%.
perturbation magnitude (evaluated at 0, 0.01, 0.1, and 0.5), L Furthermore, comparisons between Cap. 2 and Cap. 4, and
is the loss function, and sign denotes the sign function. The between Cap. 4 and Cap. 5, reveal that merely increasing
perturbations are applied to the token embeddings of BURSTs, model width or depth yields marginal gains, with F1 score
which are processed by the BERT-based model. We compare improvements of only 1.68% and 0.31%, respectively. These
three configurations on the ETCV task, where models are fine- findings underscore that simply augmenting model capacity
tuned with a softmax classifier and then tested on the perturbed does not significantly contribute to acquiring generic and
test set. The three configurations are as follows: robust feature representations; rather, such representations are
 • Configuration 1: Pre-training with only MBM, which the result of the synergistic interplay between our pre-training
 reconstructs masked byte sequences within a BURST to tasks MBM and BCP.
 learn generic structural patterns.
 • Configuration 2: Pre-training with only BCP, which F. Overhead Analysis
 predicts contextual relationships between BURSTs to In this section, we first give the model parameter quantity
 enhance robustness. and then perform an overhead analysis of our approach, mea-
 • Configuration 3: Pre-training with both MBM and BCP suring training time (s/100 batches), inference time (ms/flow)
 (our proposed model). and GPU memory usage during both training and testing.
 Fig. 5 illustrates the variation in F1 scores across three con- The pre-training model parameter mainly consists of four
figurations under different perturbation magnitudes . Without parts: token embeddings, positional embeddings, Transformer
perturbation, Configuration 1 exhibits an F1 score 12.3% encoders and output layers. According to our implementation
lower than Configuration 3, and its performance deteriorates settings, the approximate number of parameters is as follows:
sharply with minor perturbation ( = 0.01). Under significant #Param1 ≈ V × D + L̂ × D
perturbation, the F1 score drops to 0.392, suggesting that „ƒ‚… „ƒ‚…
 token emb pos emb
while the MBM task facilitates effective feature learning, features derived solely from MBM lack robustness. Conversely, + N × (12D2 + 13D) + (V + 1) × D
 „ ƒ‚ … „ ƒ‚ …
Configuration 2 yields the lowest F1 score (below 0.543) 12-layer encoder output
even without perturbation, indicating that learning contextual = 65,536 × 128 + 512 × 128
relationships between BURSTs alone does not yield generic
features. In contrast, Configuration 3 shows minimal F1 score + 12 × (12 × 1282 + 13 × 128)
degradation (1.43% drop) with minor perturbation. As  + (65,536 + 1) × 128
increases, the F1 score remains relatively stable, retaining a ≈ 19.3M parameters. (17)
value above 0.780 even at  = 0.5, underscoring the synergistic
role of MBM and BCP pre-training tasks in ensuring the where V denotes the vocabulary size; D denotes the model
acquisition of generic and robust feature representations. dimension; L̂ denotes the maximum sequence length; N
 In addition, to further evaluate whether the generic and denotes the number of Transformer blocks. Similarly, the
robust features stem from increased model capacity, we con- model of contrast learning mainly comes from two parts: the
figure the pre-training model with varying architectures as convolutional layers in the residual blocks (including their
follows: shortcut connections), and the fully connected layers. The
 approximate number of parameters is calculated as follows:
 • Cap. 1: 2 Transformer block with model dimension 32.
 8
 • Cap. 2: 12 Transformer block with model dimension 32. X (i) (i) (i) 
 • Cap. 3: 2 Transformer block with model dimension 128. #Param2 ≈ 3 × Cin Cout + Cout
 • Cap. 4: 12 Transformer block with model dimension 128. i=1
 „ ƒ‚ …
 • Cap. 5: 24 Transformer block with model dimension 256. 1D conv (8 layers)
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4493

 TABLE VIII
 OVERHEAD S TATISTICS OF O UR A PPROACH

 4
 X ( j) ( j) ( j) 
 + 1 × Cin Cout + Cout Fig. 7. Comparison of model update cost during emergence of novel classes
 j=1 on EMC task.
 „ ƒ‚ …
 1×1 shortcut (4 layers)
 3
 X G. Operational Considerations
 D(k) (k) (k) 
 + in · Dout + Dout
 k=1 In this section, we discuss the practical considerations
 „ ƒ‚ … involved in deploying our approach in a production environfully connected layers (fc1−fc3)
 ment. Two primary challenges arise in operational settings:
 = 59, 968 + 6, 656 + 198, 914 i) the computational cost of pre-training, and ii) the ability to
 efficiently update the model when new categories emerge.
 „ ƒ‚ … „ƒ‚… „ ƒ‚ …
 conv layers shortcut layers FC layers
 One-time pre-training cost. The pre-training stage is
 ≈ 265.5K parameters (18) designed to be a one-time offline process that captures
 generalizable patterns across a wide range of traffic types.
 (i) (i)
 Retraining the pre-trained model is typically unnecessary
where Cin and Cout denote the input and output channels of the unless the underlying traffic distribution undergoes substantial
 ( j) ( j)
i-th convolution layer; Cin and Cout denote the input and output and persistent shifts, such as the introduction of new encrypchannels of the j-th shortcut convolution; D(k) (k)
 in and Dout denote tion standards, major application-layer protocol redesigns, or
the input and output dimensions of the k-th fully connected fundamental changes in traffic composition. In such cases,
layer. updating the pre-trained model with newly collected unlabeled
 The overhead statistics based on the above model capacity traffic restores representational relevance while keeping longare shown in Table VIII. To ensure accurate measurements, term maintenance manageable.
we restricted the system such that when a model task was Fast and lightweight model updates. The second operexecuted, it remained the only CPU- and GPU-intensive job ational challenge concerns incremental updates when novel
on the machine. Training time was calculated by recording traffic classes appear. Traditional softmax-based models, such
the total time required to process the entire training set, as ET-BERT, suffer from architectural coupling, where the
dividing by the total number of batches, and then multi- output layer is tied to a fixed number of classes. Consequently,
plying by 100. As we can see from the first column of the emergence of a novel class necessitates a structural mod-
Table VIII, our method takes 5.31s and 2.64s respectively in ification of the classification head followed by a complete
the pre-training and contrast learning stage, totally 7.95s. To fine-tuning of the entire model, a process that is both discalculate the inference time, we recorded the total time taken ruptive and time-consuming (i.e., the update cost is orders
by the model to infer the entire test set and then divided of magnitude higher than ours as shown in Fig. 7). In conby the number of test flows. Our approach takes 1.12 ms trast, our approach utilizes a gradient-isolated update strategy.
and 0.05 ms per flow respectively during the pre-training Since the pre-trained backbone is frozen, only the lightweight
and contrast learning stage, totally 1.17 ms, which are shown contrastive module requires updating. As illustrated in Fig. 7,
in the second column of Table VIII. The last two columns our approach achieves “plug-and-play” adaptation, completing
show the GPU memory usage during both training and testing. the model refresh in less than 15 seconds with a negligible
The pre-training model’s GPU memory consumption during memory footprint (<50 MB), regardless of the number of
training is relatively high (9719MB) due to the need to learn novel classes. These findings confirm that our framework is
attention-based token embedding representations for tokens substantially more scalable in real-world environments where
derived from BURSTs, which involves extensive forward new traffic categories emerge frequently and rapid adaptation
and backward calculations across Transformer blocks and is essential.
generates a large number of intermediate variables. However, Recommended deployment workflow. Based on the above
during testing, the GPU memory usage drops to 3773MB since considerations, our approach may be deployed in practice
gradient calculations and back propagation are not required. following the workflow: i) collect unlabeled traffic data from
In comparison, for contrast learning, the GPU memories the target environment and conduct one-time pre-training;
are low during both training (46MB) and testing (12MB) ii) label a small number of samples for the downstream task
phase, because only the small contrast embedding network and perform contrast learning; iii) carry out online classificarequires gradient computation and parameter updates, which tion using the trained model; iv) maintain a candidate pool of
significantly reduces the memory footprint. traffic instances predicted as novel classes; and v) periodically
4494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORKING, VOL. 34, 2026

label a small subset from the candidate pool to refresh the R EFERENCES
contrastive module.
 [1] G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, and A. Pescapé, “DISTILLER:
 VI. D ISCUSSION Encrypted traffic classification via multimodal multitask deep learning,”
 J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vols. 183–184, Jun. 2021, Art. no. 102985.
 In this section, we discuss some limitations of our approach [2] H. Bao, L. Dong, S. Piao, and F. Wei, “BEiT: BERT pre-training of
and its potential impact on further research in this field. i) image transformers,” 2021, arXiv:2106.08254.
BURST division. Our BURST division employs a primary [3] P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson, “Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 3,
criterion: grouping consecutive packets in the same direction. pp. 463–482, Nov. 2002.
However, we acknowledge that network attributes such as [4] L. Bernaille, R. Teixeira, I. Akodkenou, A. Soule, and K. Salamatian,
inter-packet delays and idle times can influence the logical seg- “Traffic classification on the fly,” ACM SIGCOMM Comput. Commun.
mentation of traffic. Even within the same direction, prolonged Rev., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 23–26, Apr. 2006.
 [5] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
intervals between packets may signify distinct application- for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
layer operations, such as separate resource requests, which Mach. Learn., 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
could justify further segmentation. We note that the BCP task [6] T. Cui et al., “TrafficLLM: Enhancing large language models for
is designed to learn contextual relationships between BURSTs. network traffic analysis with generic traffic representation,” 2025,
 arXiv:2504.04222.
This capability helps mitigate the impact of imperfect seg- [7] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne,
mentation by enabling the model to discern whether BURSTs “Robust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,”
belong to the same flow or represent unrelated operations, Comput. Netw., vol. 236, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109991.
thereby preserving structural characteristics at a higher contex- [8] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
 of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018,
tual level. ii) Flow-level classification. We learn robust feature arXiv:1810.04805.
representation for each flow and perform classification task [9] I. Din, N. A. Saqib, and A. Baig, “Passive analysis of web traffic
at singe-flow level. We have not taken the multi-flow rela- characteristics for estimating quality of experience,” in Proc. IEEE
 Globecom Workshops, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–5.
tions into consideration, which may degrade the performance
 [10] A. Dosovitskiy et al., “An image is worth 16×16 words: Transformers
under multi-flow scenarios (e.g. P2P network usually generate for image recognition at scale,” 2020, arXiv:2010.11929.
multi-flows to transmit files between peers). Meanwhile, we [11] Z. M. Fadlullah, T. Taleb, A. V. Vasilakos, M. Guizani, and
cannot perform fine-grained classification at the packet level N. Kato, “DTRAB: Combating against attacks on encrypted protocols
 through traffic-feature analysis,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 18, no. 4,
as well. iii) Fairness of comparison. Our approach relies pp. 1234–1247, Aug. 2010.
on a pre-training stage, whereas several baselines do not. [12] C. Fu, Q. Li, M. Shen, and K. Xu, “Realtime robust malicious traffic
We acknowledge that this asymmetry may raise concerns detection via frequency domain analysis,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
regarding fairness. However, to the best of our knowledge, Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 3431–3446.
 [13] T. Gao, X. Yao, and D. Chen, “SimCSE: Simple contrastive learning of
no existing method simultaneously supports pre-training, few- sentence embeddings,” 2021, arXiv:2104.08821.
shot learning, and novel class detection. As a result, it is [14] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghordifficult to compare against a single unified baseline that bani, “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related
covers all three capabilities. Instead, we selected multiple rep- features,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016,
 pp. 407–414.
resentative methods, each corresponding to a different subset [15] Y. Ginige, T. Dahanayaka, and S. Seneviratne, “TrafficGPT: An LLM
of these capabilities (pre-training based classifiers, few-shot approach for open-set encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. 19th
learners, and novelty detectors). This design ensures that every Asian Internet Eng. Conf., Aug. 2024, pp. 26–35.
dimension of our method is evaluated against the strongest [16] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing
 adversarial examples,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6572.
available alternatives. Future research may explore unified [17] J.-B. Grill et al., “Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to selfbenchmarks that incorporate pre-training for all candidate supervised learning,” in Proc. 34th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
methods, enabling more strictly controlled comparisons. 2020, pp. 21271–21284.
 [18] H. Y. He, Z. Guo Yang, and X. N. Chen, “PERT: Payload encoding
 VII. C ONCLUSION representation from transformer for encrypted traffic classification,” in
 Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope, Ind.-Driven Digit. Transformation (ITU K),
 In this paper, we propose an efficient open-world encrypted Dec. 2020, pp. 1–8.
traffic classification approach, which achieves few-shot clas- [19] K. He, H. Fan, Y. Wu, S. Xie, and R. Girshick, “Momentum contrast for
 unsupervised visual representation learning,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
sification by combining pre-training techniques with contrast Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020, pp. 9729–9738.
learning. In the pre-training stage, we design two pre-training [20] T.-L. Huoh, Y. Luo, P. Li, and T. Zhang, “Flow-based encrypted network
tasks: MBM task and BCP task, one learns the byte depen- traffic classification with graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
dencies within BURSTs and the other learns the relationships Service Manage., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1224–1237, Jun. 2023.
 [21] Z. Lan, M. Chen, S. Goodman, K. Gimpel, P. Sharma, and R. Soribetween BURSTs, together they guarantee the robust initial cut, “ALBERT: A lite BERT for self-supervised learning of language
feature representations of traffic flows. In the contrast learning representations,” 2019, arXiv:1909.11942.
stage, a discriminative feature space is learned based on the [22] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
customized contrast learning strategy. The characteristic of “Characterization of Tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. 3rd
 Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy (ICISSP), Porto, Portugal, Feb. 2017,
intra-class compactness and inter-class separability within this pp. 253–262.
feature space allows us to employ a distance-based metric for [23] W. Li, X.-Y. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Shi, and Q. Wang, “ProGraph: Robust
classifying known categories and detecting novel ones. We network traffic identification with graph propagation,” IEEE/ACM Trans.
 Netw., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1385–1399, Jun. 2023.
evaluate our approach on five encrypted traffic classification
 [24] X. Li, B. Feng, T. Zang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, and J. Ma, “Facing unknown:
tasks and the results demonstrate that our approach achieves Open-world encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive preconsistently better performance than baseline studies in both training,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC), Jul. 2023,
closed- and open-world settings. pp. 1255–1260.
ZHAO et al.: WHEN PRE-TRAINING MEETS CONTRAST LEARNING: FEW-SHOT ENCRYPTED TRAFFIC CLASSIFICATION 4495

[25] X. Lin, G. Xiong, G. Gou, Z. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yu, “ET-BERT: A [47] S.-J. Xu, G.-G. Geng, X.-B. Jin, D.-J. Liu, and J. Weng, “Seeing traffic
 contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers paths: Encrypted traffic classification with path signature features,” IEEE
 for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., Apr. 2022, Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 2166–2181, 2022.
 pp. 633–642. [48] C. Yang et al., “Few-shot encrypted traffic classification via multi-task
[26] C. Liu, L. He, G. Xiong, Z. Cao, and Z. Li, “FS-Net: A flow sequence representation enhanced meta-learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 228, Jun.
 network for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM 2023, Art. no. 109731.
 Conf. Comput. Commun., Apr. 2019, pp. 1171–1179. [49] X. Zhang et al., “Enhanced few-shot malware traffic classification via
[27] Y. Liu et al., “RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining integrating knowledge transfer with neural architecture search,” IEEE
 approach,” 2019, arXiv:1907.11692. Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 19, pp. 5245–5256, 2024.
[28] Z. Liu, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Towards open world [50] L. Zhao, L. Cai, A. Yu, Z. Xu, and D. Meng, “Prototype-based malware
 traffic classification,” in Proc. Inf. Commun. Security: 23rd Int. Conf., traffic classification with novelty detection,” in Proc. Inf. Commun.
 Chongqing, China, Nov. 2021, pp. 331–347. Security: 21st Int. Conf., Beijing, China, Dec. 2020, pp. 3–17.
[29] M. Lotfollahi, M. J. Siavoshani, R. S. H. Zade, and M. Saberian, “Deep [51] R. Zhao et al., “Yet another traffic classifier: A masked autoencoder
 packet: A novel approach for encrypted traffic classification using deep based traffic transformer with multi-level flow representation,” in Proc.
 learning,” Soft Comput., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1999–2012, Feb. 2020. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., 2023, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 5420–5427.
[30] T. Mitchell et al., “Never-ending learning,” Commun. ACM, vol. 61, [52] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection
 no. 5, pp. 103–115, 2018. against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,”
[31] A. W. Moore and D. Zuev, “Internet traffic classification using Bayesian IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024.
 analysis techniques,” in Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS Int. Conf. Meas. [53] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A univer-
 Model. Comput. Syst., Jun. 2005, pp. 50–60. sal framework for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic
[32] K. Al-Naami et al., “Adaptive encrypted traffic fingerprinting with bi- detection,” in Proc. ACM Web Conf., May 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
 directional dependence,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur. [54] G. Zhou, X. Guo, Z. Liu, T. Li, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “TrafficFormer: An
 Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 177–188. efficient pre-trained model for traffic data,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur.
[33] A. Panchenko et al., “Website fingerprinting at internet scale,” in Proc. Privacy (SP), May 2025, pp. 1844–1860.
 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2016, pp. 1–15.
[34] A. Panchenko, L. Niessen, A. Zinnen, and T. Engel, “Website fingerprinting in onion routing based anonymization networks,” in Proc. 10th
 Annu. ACM workshop Privacy Electron. Soc., Oct. 2011, pp. 103–114.
[35] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, Lixin Zhao received the B.S. degree from Nankai
 “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog, University in 2013 and the Ph.D. degree in computer
 vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019. sciences from the University of Chinese Academy of
[36] M. Roughan, S. Sen, O. Spatscheck, and N. Duffield, “Class-of-service Sciences in 2020. He is currently a Research Assismapping for QoS: A statistical signature-based approach to IP traffic tant with the Institute of Information Engineering,
 classification,” in Proc. 4th ACM SIGCOMM Conf. Internet Meas., Oct. Chinese Academy of Sciences. His research interests
 2004, pp. 135–148. include network security and data security.
[37] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, “DistilBERT, a distilled version of BERT: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” 2019,
 arXiv:1910.01108.
[38] T. Shapira and Y. Shavitt, “FlowPic: Encrypted internet traffic classification is as easy as image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM
 Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2019,
 pp. 680–687.
[39] M. Shen, J. Zhang, L. Zhu, K. Xu, and X. Du, “Accurate decen-
 Changhao Wu received the B.S. degree from
 tralized application identification via encrypted traffic analysis using
 Nankai University in 2022 and the M.S. degree in
 graph neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
 cyberspace security from the Institute of Information
 pp. 2367–2380, 2021.
 Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2025.
[40] P. Sirinam, M. Imani, M. Juarez, and M. Wright, “Deep fingerprinting:
 His research interests include network security and
 Undermining website fingerprinting defenses with deep learning,” in
 intrusion detection.
 Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur. (CCS), Toronto,
 ON, Canada, Oct. 2018, pp. 1928–1943.
[41] Z. Song et al., “I2 RNN: An incremental and interpretable recurrent
 neural network for encrypted traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Depend.
 Secure Comput., early access, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2023.3245411.
[42] V. F. Taylor, R. Spolaor, M. Conti, and I. Martinovic, “Robust smartphone app identification via encrypted network traffic analysis,” IEEE
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 63–78, Jan. 2018.
[43] T. van Ede et al., “FlowPrint: Semi-supervised mobile-app fingerprinting
 Aimin Yu received the B.S. degree from Nankai
 on encrypted network traffic,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
 University and the Ph.D. degree from the Institute
 2020, pp. 1–18.
 of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2011.
[44] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
 He is currently a Professor with the Institute of Infor-
 Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), 2017, pp. 1–11.
 mation Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
[45] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic
 His research interests include system security and
 classification using convolutional neural network for representation
 trust computing.
 learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Netw. (ICOIN), Jan. 2017, pp. 712–717.
[46] C. Xu, J. Shen, and X. Du, “A method of few-shot network intrusion
 detection based on meta-learning framework,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 15, pp. 3540–3552, 2020.