IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026 905

 When Unknown Threat Meets Label Noise: A
 Self-Correcting Framework
 Qianwei Meng , Qingjun Yuan , Jing Tao, Pinghui Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Siqi Lu , Guangsong Li ,
 Yongjuan Wang , and Xiaohong Guan , Life Fellow, IEEE

 Abstract—Network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) are cru- I. INTRODUCTION
cial for network management and security. However, in real-world
 URRENT malicious traffic detection methods, especially
scenarios, NIDS faces two core challenges: (i) label noise, where
mislabeled samples in the training data distort the model’s decision
boundaries; (ii) unknown attack detection, where existing methods
 C the intelligent methods that have been widely used in
 recent years, heavily rely on prior knowledge [1], [2], [3]. As
struggle to identify novel attack patterns in dynamic attack en- attackers’ behaviors become increasingly covert and new attack
vironments. More critically, these two challenges are interlinked,
forming a vicious cycle that continuously degrades the overall
 patterns continue to emerge, obtaining precise prior knowledge
reliability of NIDS. Existing research often addresses these issues in becomes more challenging. Specifically, attackers use techisolation, and no method has yet been proposed to coordinate their niques such as traffic shaping and encrypted payloads to make
antagonistic effects systematically. To tackle this open problem, we malicious traffic highly overlap with normal traffic in terms of
propose AEGIS-Net for the first time—a dual anti-noise framework statistical features [4], [5], [6]. Manual or automated labeling
based on multi-prototype correction and model-agnostic detection.
AEGIS-Net introduces a density-difference-driven multi-prototype
 tools struggle to differentiate such obfuscated traffic, leading to
competition mechanism, which achieves fine-grained noise label the mislabeling of malicious samples as normal or normal traffic
correction through feature space sub-cluster analysis. We also as attacks, thereby introducing label noise in the dataset.
design a distribution-independent k-nearest neighbors detection We summarize the main manifestations of weak prior knowlparadigm, using the corrected compact feature space to determine edge in network intrusion detection (NIDS) into two typical
unknown attacks in open environments. The two modules are collaboratively optimized through a shared encoder, forming a positive
 scenarios: the first is label noise, where some malicious traffic in
cycle of noise suppression and detection enhancement. Extensive the dataset is incorrectly labeled as normal or as other malicious
experiments on real-world datasets validate the effectiveness of behaviors; the second is unknown attacks, where the model
AEGIS-Net in addressing these dual challenges. Notably, under encounters certain attack categories that were not present in
50% asymmetric noise conditions, AEGIS-Net achieves classifica- the training dataset after deployment. Label noise significantly
tion accuracy of 89.02% for known attacks and 98.76% for unknown attack detection on the MAL_TLS2023 dataset. Theoretical
 weakens the model’s generalization performance by causing
proofs and visualization analysis reveal the anti-noise properties of feature space distribution shifts and decision boundary distor-
AEGIS-Net under feature space stability constraints. tion [7], [8], [9]. Experiments show that even in scenarios with
 low noise rates (≤5%), the upper limit of classification accuracy
 Index Terms—Network intrusion detection system, unknown
attack, encrypted traffic. is still suppressed at 89% [10]. The model, lacking labels for
 unknown attacks, is unable to recognize such traffic, leading
 to a sharp increase in false positive rates [11]. Furthermore, if
 Received 29 April 2025; revised 27 August 2025; accepted 15 September NIDS includes these misclassified samples in the training set, it
2025. Date of publication 19 September 2025; date of current version 14 results in new label noise. This misclassification continuously
January 2026. This work was supported in part by The National Key Research pollutes the training set, forming a vicious cycle of ”noise-false
and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB2705000 and in
part by the Natural Science Foundation of Henan under Grant 252300420992. detection-more noise,” causing the overall reliability of NIDS to
(Corresponding author: Qingjun Yuan.) decline.
 Qianwei Meng, Siqi Lu, Guangsong Li, and Yongjuan Wang are with the In real-world scenarios, the challenges of label noise and
Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering University, Zhengzhou 450001, China (e-mail: mengqw20@163.com; unknown attacks, two major weak prior knowledge issues, co-
080lusiqi@sina.com; lgsok@163.com; pinkywyj@163.com). exist, leading to a sharp decline in the detection performance
 Qingjun Yuan is with the MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and Network of malicious behaviors in NIDS. Therefore, NIDS faces two
Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China, also with the Henan
Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering difficult tasks: T1: the accurate classification of known malicious
University, Zhengzhou 450001, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of attacks, and T2: the precise detection of unknown attacks.
Cyberspace Security, Ministry of Education, Beijing 100816, China (e-mail: For T1, existing methods assume that the training data labels
gcxyuan@outlook.com).
 Jing Tao, Pinghui Wang, and Xiaohong Guan are with the MoE Key Lab for are sufficiently accurate and cover the known attack categories.
Intelligent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, This assumption is actually difficult to satisfy, as automated
Shaanxi 710049, China (e-mail: jtao@mail.xjtu.edu.cn; phwang@xjtu.edu.cn; labeling tools may produce mislabels due to protocol parsing
xhguan@xjtu.edu.cn).
 Our code is available at https://github.com/niebikong/AEGIS-Net. errors or feature extraction biases. In contrast, manual labeling
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3611908 is easily limited by the experience level of security analysts [12].

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Especially in the context of the widespread use of encryption
protocols and the upgrading of traffic obfuscation technologies [13], the reliability of traditional rule-based or signaturebased labeling methods continues to decrease. For T2, existing
methods need to construct a highly discriminative latent feature
space to distinguish between known and unknown categories and
also design robust confidence evaluation mechanisms to reject
uncertain samples [14]. Under the premise of label noise, these
current methods do not have effective countermeasures.
 Current NIDS are facing the coupling effect of label noise and
unknown attacks, which fundamentally stems from the depen-
 Fig. 1. Early methods considered CH1 and CH2 in isolation. (a) Decision
dency on the closed-world assumption in supervised learning boundary of a closed-world classifier under noisy labels in an open environment.
and the unreliability of prior knowledge in a dynamic attack (b) Decision boundary of a closed-world classifier under noisy label learning
environment. Therefore, the first challenge of our work is CH1: in an open environment. (c) Decision boundary of AEGIS-Net in an open
 environment.
How to design methods for handling label noise in weak prior
knowledge? The second challenge of our work is CH2: How to
design noise-resistant detection methods for unknown malicious reliance on traffic distribution assumptions. The two modules
traffic? form a bidirectional enhancement mechanism through a shared
 There are two common strategies used to address CH1: loss feature encoding network: the label correction process enhances
correction [15], [16] and sample selection [17], [18]. Loss cor- the feature compactness of known classes. At the same time, the
rection methods directly modify the design of the loss function model-independent k-nearest neighbor detection leverages the
or the assumption of the label distribution, allowing the model corrected feature space to improve the separability of unknown
still to learn the correct feature mapping despite label noise. This attacks, forming a positive feedback loop of noise suppression
method heavily depends on the accurate estimation of the noise and detection enhancement. We prove both theoretically and
distribution, such as the noise transfer matrix. Sample selection experimentally that the detection performance of AEGIS-Net is
methods dynamically identify potential clean samples, using independent of the noise rate under the premise of feature space
only high-confidence samples for training or assigning weights stability. A comparison between our AEGIS-Net and existing
to samples to reduce the impact of noise [19]. Sample selection methods is visualized in Fig. 1.
can explicitly exclude simple noisy samples, but it is prone to To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first intrusion dediscarding difficult clean samples, leading to a fuzzy decision tection model to comprehensively consider both label noise and
boundary for the model. In addressing CH2, whether using unknown attack detection in a weak prior knowledge scenario.
 In summary, this paper provides the following contributions:
discriminative or generative models, the core challenge lies in r To address CH1, we propose a density difference-driven
managing uncertainty in open environments [14], [20]. When
facing the complex scenario of noise-unknown attack coupling, multi-prototype label noise correction mechanism, achievtheoretical shortcomings still exist. ing fine-grained label correction through feature space
 sub-clusters.
 To address CH1, we observe that there is a density difference r To address CH2, we design a model-agnostic paradigm
between clean samples and noisy samples. Additionally, since
network traffic in high-dimensional representation spaces often for unknown traffic detection, eliminating the reliance
contains multiple sub-clusters, we select multiple prototypes on specific distribution assumptions found in traditional
for each category of sample to infer the true label of noisy methods. We theoretically prove that AEGIS-Net exhibits
 noise-resistant properties in open-world scenarios.
samples, achieving precise classification of known malicious r We validated the effectiveness and efficiency of AEGIStraffic. To address CH2, we do not make any assumptions about
the underlying distribution of traffic, and model-independent, Net on four public datasets for both CH1 and CH2. Combased on the distance of the sample to the known class, we pared to the current SOTA, AEGIS-Net achieves optimal
distinguish between known and unknown class traffic. performance. Even in high-noise scenarios, the perfor-
 Considering both CH1 and CH2, we propose a novel in- mance of unknown malicious traffic detection remains
trusion detection system, AEGIS-Net, under the scenario of unaffected by noise rates.
weak prior knowledge. Its innovation lies in two aspects: First, The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
a multi-prototype dynamic correction mechanism based on presents an overview of the related work, followed by a problem
density heterogeneity is constructed. By exploring the multi- statement in Section III. Subsequently, the method design is
subcluster distribution characteristics of known class traffic, detailed in Section IV. The proof of theory is given in Section V.
a dynamic prototype set is established to accurately locate Moreover, our approach is evaluated in Section VI. Finally, we
noise samples and correct their labels, overcoming the lim- conclude the paper in Section VIII.
itations of single-prototype representation in modeling intraclass diversity. Second, a non-parametric detection paradigm II. RELATED WORK
based on the relative distance ratio of K-nearest neighbors In this paper, we only review various classification models
is designed. An adaptive threshold mechanism constructs a related to noise label handling and unknown malicious traffic
distribution-independent open space metric system, eliminating detection. In Table I, we give a summary for each related work.
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 907

 TABLE I
 SUMMARY OF RELATED WORK

A. Noise Label Handling mechanism captures internal relationships within sequences
 Noise label handling methods can be summarized into Loss to distinguish malicious from benign traffic. In the work by
Correction, Sample Selection, Semi-Supervised Learning, and Qing et al. [24], they leverage neural networks to synthesize
Meta-Learning, among others. MCRe [19] balances robust train- unknown traffic, effectively converting the open-world problem
ing and data cleaning, resulting in a cleaner dataset and a more into a closed-world classification challenge. The work in [25]
accurate classification model. UTC [21] employs a consensus introduces Wasserstein DRO into federated learning, leveraging
filtering mechanism with an ensemble of classifiers, using a noisy data by normalizing it into a robust region defined by the
veto strategy to identify and remove strong noise samples. Wasserstein-2 distance, dynamically adjusting the distribution
The introduction of Tolerant Weight adjusts the contribution of of noisy data to align with clean data. RoFi [38] develops a
suspected noisy samples in training, reducing the noise impact. robust traffic representation method that generates a Traffic Ag-
NSTC [22] enhances traffic classification performance under gregation Matrix (TAM) using packet counts and time series to
noisy environments by integrating multiple classifiers to detect fully capture key information features leaked in the traffic. RFGnoise, weighted sample selection, and combining robust clas- HELAD [39] integrates multiple machine learning/deep learnsifiers. Co-teaching [23] uses two neural networks, with the ing models into a single framework using heterogeneous ensemcurrent network passing the samples it considers clean to the ble learning, addressing the coexistence of unknown attacks and
other network for training, thereby avoiding noise accumulation. adversarial attacks in fine-grained attack detection scenarios.
DSDIR [26] proposes a distribution-aware sample selection Yang et al. [43] proposes a lightweight method for detecting
method to re-label samples while addressing both noise label unknown malicious traffic by utilizing a variational autoencoder
and long-tail issues. TRACE [27] utilizes a multi-loss optimiza- and EVT theory to model reconstruction errors, with dynamic
tion mechanism to jointly optimize feature completeness, intra- model updates through model distillation. The authors in [44]
class compactness, and inter-class distinguishability, generating presents RAGN (Robust Adaptive Graph Neural Network) for
noise-resistant traffic representations. detecting unknown malicious traffic and improving resilience to
 adversarial attacks, along with the SPAN (Semantic-Preserving
 Adversarial Node Injection) attack method to evaluate defense
B. Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection capabilities in dynamic environments. HyperVision [45] models
 CBSeq [20] employs channel-level behavior clusters as de- IP addresses as nodes and traffic patterns as edges, reducing
tection units, extracting four types of behavior sequences and graph density through flow aggregation and feature recording
using independent sub-networks for each. The self-attention and employing unsupervised graph learning techniques like
908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

connectivity analysis and key vertex clustering to detect anoma- TABLE II
 SYMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS USED IN THIS PAPER
lous interactions. Kitsune [46] continuously learns the pattern of
normal traffic through an autoencoder. Once behavior deviates
from this normal pattern, it is flagged as anomalous based on
the reconstruction error. However, if attack traffic is mixed into
the deployment environment from the beginning, the model
will incorrectly learn the abnormal behavior and will no longer
classify it as anomalous in the future. This is a limitation of
Kitsune.

C. In Summary
 Existing research has made significant progress in addressing
noisy labels and unknown malicious traffic detection. However,
these two critical challenges are often tackled in isolation, leadinvolves the integration over the open space, which cannot be
ing to suboptimal performance in real-world scenarios where
 computed explicitly.
both issues coexist. To address the above limitations, this pa-
 When there are noisy labels in the training set, the noisy labels
per proposes a collaborative optimization framework for noise
 introduce incorrect supervisory signals, causing the model to
robustness and unknown attack detection. Through dynamic
 learn erroneous feature associations. In this case, the model
label correction and a flexible, generalizable, non-parametric
 may fail to converge effectively, and the empirical risk will
open-world detection paradigm, it achieves accurate detection
 significantly increase. Suppose the model forcibly fits noisy
of unknown malicious traffic in noisy environments.
 labels, such as memory noise samples. In that case, it may result
 in the empirical risk being underestimated on the training set,
 III. PROBLEM STATEMENT but the true generalization ability decreases, and the closed-
 The problem of simultaneously solving CH1 and CH2 can world classification remains worse. Additionally, noisy labels
be defined as follows: distort the distribution of the known classes, leading the model
 Let Ṽ = {xi , yi }N to learn incorrect decision boundaries, making it more likely
 i=1 be the training data of known classes
traffic (possibly containing noise), and notate RO and Rε repre- to misclassify unknown class traffic as known classes, which
sent the unknown risk and empirical risk, respectively. The goal increases the unknown risk. As the noise rate increases, the
of detecting unknown malicious traffic is to find a measurable closed-world classification performance continues to decline,
function f ∈ H, where f (x) > 0 indicates correct identification. and the empirical risk increases overall, which also increases
The following formula determines the function f : the unknown risk, resulting in worse unknown class detection
 performance.
    
 arg min RO (f ) + λr Rε f Ṽ , (1) To minimize the interference of noisy labels, a direct approach
 f ∈H is to detect the noisy samples in the training dataset Ṽ and correct
 the labels of the noisy samples, thereby reducing their impact
where λr is a regularization constant. on the function as much as possible.
 From observing this function, we can derive the following Formally, given a training set Ṽ , where x is a traffic sample and
conclusions: y is its annotated label with y ∈ L = {1, 2, . . . , c}. We denote
 There is a trade-off between empirical risk and unknown risk. the true label of xi as yi∗ . Conventionally, we assume that all
When the empirical risk is large, it indicates poor model fitting on annotated labels of the traffic samples are correct, i.e., yi = yi∗ .
the training set, and the closed-world classification performance Thus, we can use the cross-entropy loss function to optimize the
is suboptimal. In this case, if the model fails to effectively model parameters and achieve an accurate classification of the
distinguish the known classes, its decision boundary may not be traffic. However, the assumption of clean labels is too strict for
clear enough, making it more prone to misclassifying unknown real-world scenarios, and noisy labels are unavoidable in realclasses, thereby increasing the unknown risk and degrading the world datasets. Therefore, our goal is to design a noise-resistant
performance of unknown class detection. When the empirical method for unknown malicious traffic detection. The symbols
risk is small, although the closed-world classification perfor- and definitions used in this paper are shown in Table II.
mance is better, overfitting may occur, resulting in decreased
generalization ability of the model. In this case, the model may
overly rely on the distribution features of the training data, IV. OUR APPROACH
reducing its robustness to unknown classes, which may actually Our system is designed based on a dual strategy: First, by
increase the unknown risk. The goal of (1) is to adjust the analyzing the clustering characteristics of encrypted traffic in a
importance of both risks by the weight λr , but the selection high-dimensional feature space, we dynamically select multiple
of λr during the optimization process is challenging. representative samples as reference benchmarks for each known
 In the case of having only known-class traffic, the unknown traffic class. By measuring the similarity differences between
risk RO cannot be directly computed or optimized because RO samples, we identify and correct mislabeled traffic data, thereby
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 909

Fig. 2. The overview of AEGIS-Net. After the initial training is completed using noisy labels during the training phase, it proceeds to the noisy label correction
phase. The noise label correction phase consists of four steps: I: Calculate the density and similarity metric for each sample, II: Prototype selection, III: Voting
decision, IV: Noise sample label correction. These four steps are alternated and repeated in each epoch.

alleviating the interference of noisy labels on model learning. B. Training Phase
Second, during the unknown attack detection phase, we employ The core objective of the training phase is to optimize the
a model-independent mechanism based on neighboring sample parameters θ of the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) so
distance comparison. By calculating the distance between the
 that the feature extractor E acquires discriminative representatest sample and known categories, we determine whether it tion capabilities. Standard training uses the cross-entropy loss
belongs to an unknown attack type, avoiding any pre-specified function:
assumptions about the data distribution. Both modules share n
a feature encoding network, which enhances the intra-class 1
 L(F (θ, x), y) = − yi log F (xi , θ) , (2)
cohesion of the feature space through noise correction, while n i=1
the optimized compact features improve the ability to distinguish
unknown classes, forming a closed-loop optimization process. where n is the mini-batch size, and yi is the label corresponding
 The overall framework of AEGIS-Net is shown in Fig. 2, to the feature vector xi . Since real-world data may contain
which consists of three modules: the traffic preprocessing mod- label noise (i.e., yi could be incorrect), a dynamic correction
ule, the model training module, and the unknown malicious traf- mechanism is introduced to generate corrected labels ŷ. Based
fic detection module. The traffic preprocessing module extracts on the original and corrected labels, a robust classification loss
statistical features from the raw network flows and transforms function is constructed:
them into feature vectors. The model training module corrects LCla = (1 − α)L(F (x, θ), y) + αL(F (x, θ), ŷ). (3)
the labels of the training data through noise label correction,
thereby obtaining a reliable network representation to assist To enhance the structure of the feature space, a contrastive
downstream tasks. Based on this, the model has learned the learning mechanism is further introduced. The InfoNCE loss
correct decision boundaries. The unknown malicious traffic function [47] is used to improve intra-class compactness and
detection module uses the KNN algorithm to detect unknown inter-class separability:
malicious traffic. n
   
 1 exp qi · ki+/ τ
 LContrast = − log  n , (4)
 n i=1 j=1 exp (qi · kj− /τ )
A. Traffic Preprocessing
 where qi is the encoding vector of the query sample i, ki+ is
 The traffic preprocessing module transforms raw network
 the encoding vector of the positive sample corresponding to
traffic into a one-dimensional feature vector. As shown in Fig. 2,
 query sample i, kj− is the encoding vector of a negative sample
we divide the raw network traffic into bi-directional flows acnot corresponding to query sample i, and τ is the temperature
cording to five tuples. We use CICFlowMeter1 to compute the
 parameter that controls the distribution of similarity scores.
features of each flow. In the experiments, we remove categorical
 Considering the above objectives, the overall loss function is
features such as Flow ID, Src IP, Src Port, Dst IP, Dst Port,
 defined as:
and Timestamp, keeping only numerical features to prevent the
model from memorizing specific information and instead focus Ltotal = LCla + βLContrast
on learning the inherent patterns of attacks.
 = (1−α)L(F (x, θ), y)+αL(F (x, θ), ŷ)+βLContrast ,
 (5)
 where α, β ∈ [0, 1] are balancing weights. The training process
 1 https://github.com/ahlashkari/CICFlowMeter is divided into two stages: 1) Initial Pretraining: For the first
910 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Npre epochs, set α = 0, and only use the original noisy labels y
to train the model. 2) Co-Optimization: Once the model has acquired preliminary representation capabilities, the Noisy Label
Correction module is activated to generate ŷ, and the parameters
θ are jointly optimized using the dual loss.
 In the Noisy Label Correction module, our goal is to obtain
the correct label for each network flow to provide supervisory
information for model training. For label correction, the first
step is to select several class prototypes for each type of traffic.
Inspired by the CFSFDP [36] algorithm, we first extract deep
features of the network flows using the preliminary network Fig. 3. (a) Density ρ of noisy and clean samples in the Mal_TLS2023 dataset.
 (b) Distribution of the density ρ and similarity metric η. Red stars indicate the
trained in the first stage. In the experiment, the model con- samples with the top-6 highest ρ values.
sists of a feature extraction network E and a classification
network h, so F (x, θ) = h · E(x), where h is a fully connected
layer.
 Therefore, we define a similarity metric for each sample:
 To select appropriate class prototypes for the c-th class, we
first extract a set of deep features {E(xi )}ni=1 from the traf- maxj,ρj >ρi Sij , ρi < ρmax
fic samples {xi }ni=1 with the same noisy label c, where n is ηi = , (7)
 minj Sij , ρi = ρmax
the number of samples with the noisy label c. We then use
cosine similarity to calculate the similarity between the deep where ρmax = max{ρ1 , ρ2 , . . . , ρm }. From this definition, it
features of the c-th class samples, constructing a similarity can be seen that for the sample xi with the largest density, the
matrix S ∈ Rn×n , where Sij = cos(E(xi ), E(xj )) ∈ [−1, 1]. similarity metric ηi is the smallest; for the other low-density
Sij represents the similarity between any two samples xi and xj . samples xi , their similarity metric ηi is defined as the similarity
The larger Sij is, the more similar the two samples are. However, between xi and xj with a higher density value than xi . From
the problem arises that as n increases, the computation and the above definition, it can be seen that a smaller similarity
storage of the matrix S will become extremely time-consuming metric ηi indicates that the features of sample xi are not closely
and expensive. Therefore, here, we only randomly sample m related to other high-density samples. Therefore, samples with a
samples from the n samples, with m < n, and thus only need high-density value ρ (higher likelihood of clean labels) and a low
to compute the matrix S m×m to reduce the computational similarity metric η (clean label, but moderately far from other
cost. clean labels) meet our criteria for selecting class prototypes.
 To select appropriate prototypes, we define a density ρi for In Fig. 3(b), the red stars are the samples with the largest
each sample xi based on the similarity matrix S: density ρ. Samples with high density ρ tend to have relatively
 small similarity metric η. In this paper, we select prototypes with
 m
  η < 0.95 from the top-ranked samples. Even if the number of
 ρi = χ (Sij − Sc ) ∈ (−m, m) , (6)
 prototypes that meet the conditions after filtering is less than p,
 j=1
 we will still select the p smallest indices based on the similarity
where Sc is the truncation density, and χ(·) is the sign function. metric η in the engineering implementation to ensure that the
Sc is a constant, which is the value of the element in the matrix S prototype set remains complete. In other words, regardless of
after sorting all elements from small to large and selecting the top the density ρ and the similarity measure η, each category will
40%. Experiments show that the value of Sc has no significant ultimately have p prototypes.
impact on the experimental results. After selecting the prototype sets
 From the above definition of density ρ, it can be observed
that the larger the density of a sample, the more its surrounding {E(xi1,i2 )}i1=1,2,...,c;i2=1,2,...,p , (8)
samples are. Samples with correct labels should be close to each for each known class, where c is the number of known traffic
other, while samples with noisy labels usually form clusters that classes, and {E(xi1 ), E(xi2 ), . . . , E(xip )} represents the proare far from their corresponding noisy label samples. In Fig. 3(a), totype set for the i-th known traffic class. Given an unlabeled
the density of noisy label samples and correctly labeled samples sample x, we first obtain its embedding representation E(x), and
is shown. It can be seen that noisy label samples generally have then calculate the similarity between E(x) and the prototype sets
a smaller density, while correctly labeled samples tend to have of different classes:
a larger density. In other words, samples with higher density are
 p
often clean samples from which we can select prototypes for 1
 σc = cos (E(x), E(xil )) , i = 1, 2, . . . , c. (9)
the class. If p prototypes are needed, the samples with the top p p
 l=1
largest density values are considered class prototypes. However,
this introduces a problem: if these p prototypes are all in the Here, we use the average similarity over the p prototypes. This
same sub-cluster, these p prototypes are essentially the same voting decision method prevents the misclassification of some
prototype and do not serve the purpose of representing multiple hard samples that have nearly identical high similarities into
sub-clusters within a class. different classes. We can then obtain the corrected label ŷ ∈
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 911

 Algorithm 1: The Training Process of AEGIS-Net. Algorithm 2: Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection.
 Input: Noisy labeled dataset Ṽ , hyperparameters α, β, p, Input: Test sample xtest , training features
 m Θ = {z1 , . . ., zn }, k, λ
 Output: Trained model F = h · E with robust feature Output: Detection result D ∈ {Known, Unknown}
 representation 1: Extract penultimate layer feature: ztest = E(xtest ).
 1: Initialize neural network parameters θ for E and h 2: Normalize feature: ztest ← ztest /ztest 2 .
 2: Split Ṽ into mini-batches {B1 , B2 , . . ., BT } 3: Calculate distance set Δ ← {ztest − zi 2 | zi ∈ Θ}.
 3: for epoch = 1 to Ntotal do 4: Sort Δ in ascending order to get {d(1) , . . ., d(n) }.
 4: if epoch ≤ Npre thenPre-training with noisy labels 5: Retrieve k-th smallest distance: d(k) ← Δ[k].
 5: for each mini-batch Bt do 6: if d(k) < λ then
 6: Calculate classification loss Lpre using (5), 7: D ← Known
 where α = 0. 8: else
 7: θt+1 ← θt − ξ∇θt Lpre 9: D ← Unknown
 8: end for 10: end if
 9: else Noise label correction 11: return D
 10: for each class c ∈ {1, . . ., c} do
 11: Extract deep features {E(xi )} for samples with
 noisy label c. space. This decision-making method can be represented by the
 12: Randomly sample m features {z1 , . . ., zm }. following formula:
 13: Calculate similarity matrix S ∈ Rm×m .
 14: Calculate density ρi using (6). Known, if S (xtest ) ≤ λ
 D(xtest ) = , (11)
 15: Calculate similarity metric ηi using (7). Unknown, if S (xtest ) > λ
 16: Select p prototypes.
 17: end for where S(x) is the score function, and a larger value of S(x)
 18: for each mini-batch Bt do indicates a higher probability that the test sample is classified as
 19: Obtain corrected labels ŷ using (10). an unknown class. λ is the threshold.
 20: Calculate classification loss LCla using (3). Specifically, we use the normalized penultimate layer fea-
 21: Calculate contrastive loss LContrast using (4). tures z = E(x)/E(x) for detecting unknown malicious traf-
 22: Total loss Ltotal = LCla + βLContrast . fic. Assuming the training set is represented in the embedding
 23: θt+1 ← θt − ξ∇θt Ltotal space as Θ = {z1 , z2 , . . . , zn }. During the detection phase, the
 24: end for normalized representation ztest is first calculated. Then, for
 25: end if each training sample in Θ, the distance di = ztest − zi  is
 26: end for computed, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n. The distance values di are then
 arranged in ascending order to form the reordered distance vector Δ = {d(1) , d(2) , . . . , d(n) }, where ∀i < j, d(i) < d(j) . The
{1, 2, . . . , c}, where decision function can be represented as:
 ŷ = arg max σi , i = 1, 2, . . . , c. (10)
 i Known, if N Nk (ztest ) ≥ λ
 S(ztest , k) = , (12)
 Unknown, if N Nk (ztest ) < λ
 After obtaining the corrected label data, we use it as supplementary supervisory signals to train the neural network F during
the training phase. The training process of our model is shown where N Nk (ztest ) = d(k) represents the distance to the k-th
in Algorithm 1. nearest neighbor of ztest . The threshold λ is usually chosen to
 ensure a high proportion of known class samples (e.g., 95%)
 are correctly classified. At this point, the threshold λ does not
C. Unknown Traffic Detection depend on the unknown malicious traffic class because unknown
 After completing the training process, the model F has cor- malicious traffic is invisible. We summarize our unknown malirected noisy labels and learned deep representations of traffic, cious traffic method in Algorithm 2.
achieving intra-class compactness and inter-class separation The advantage of KNN is its simplicity and ease of underin the representation space. Many unknown malicious traffic standing, and it does not require training. However, its disadvandetection methods constrain each known class to a specific dis- tage is the high computational cost, especially on large datasets,
tribution in the representation space [31], [43], but this approach as it requires calculating the distance between the test sample and
is difficult to achieve. Our method makes no assumptions about all samples in the dataset. We choose to use the Approximate
the underlying feature space and detects unknown malicious Nearest Neighbor (ANN) algorithm for vector retrieval [48].
traffic based on distance or density. Unlike KNN, ANN does not always return the exact nearest
 The KNN-based detection method calculates the distance neighbors, but returns approximate nearest neighbors within a
between each test sample and training sample in the embedding certain error margin, trading off retrieval speed for accuracy.
912 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 V. THEORETICAL JUSTIFICATION TABLE III
 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP FOR KNOWN AND UNKNOWN CLASSES OF TRAFFIC IN
 In this section, we provide proof that AEGIS-Net uses KNN PUBLIC DATASETS
for unknown malicious traffic detection and that the results of
unknown malicious traffic detection are independent of noise.
 Definition 1. (Feature Space Stability): Let the feature extractor be E ∗ in the noise-free case, and E be the feature extractor
obtained after label correction and contrastive learning in the
noisy case. The feature distribution shift is defined as:
 ΔE = Ex∼D [E(x) − E ∗ (x)2 ] , (13)
where D is the distribution of the known class training sample.
It is assumed that after label correction and contrastive loss VI. EVALUATION
optimization, ΔE < ε, where ε is a small constant.
 In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness and effi-
 Definition 2. (Non-parametric Detection Mechanism): The
 ciency of AEGIS-Net in addressing CH1 and CH2 by presenting
unknown malicious traffic detection phase uses the KNN algoexperimental results and analyses under different experimental
rithm. For a test sample xtest , define its KNN distance to the
 conditions.
training set Ṽ as N Nk (xtest ) = d(k) . The threshold λ is determined by the γ-quantile of the known class distance distribution:
 A. Datasets
   We use three benchmark datasets for network intrusion detec-
 λ = inf t | Px∼D d(k) (x) ≤ t ≥ γ . (14) tion: Mal_TLS2023 [49], CICIDS2017, and CICIDS2018 [50].
 Lemma 1. (Proof in Appendix-A): According to the Fea- In the CICIDS2017 dataset, we use all 14 types of malicious
ture Space Stability assumption, for any sample x, E(x) − traffic samples. In the CICIDS2018 dataset, we select the traffic
E ∗ (x)2 ≤ ε. Therefore, for any two samples xi and xj , their from the two days of 3.2 and 2.16 and choose three kinds
feature distance shift satisfies: of malicious traffic among them: DoS attacks, DoS attacks-
 SlowHTTPTest, and Bot, to form the attack samples, and the rest
 E(xi ) − E(xj )2 + E ∗ (xi ) − E ∗ (xj )2 ≤ 2ε. (15) of the benign traffic as the normal samples. In the unknown traffic
 Lemma 2. (Proof in Appendix-B): For the test sample xtest , detection phase, we select the CICDarknet2020 [51] dataset
the difference in its KNN distance between the noisy and noise- as the unknown class traffic, which includes eight types of
free cases satisfies: darknet traffic such as Audio-Stream, Browsing, Chat, Email,
 P2P, Transfer, Video-Stream, and VOIP. These darknet traffic
 d(k) (xtest ) − d(k) (xtest ) ≤ 2ε. (16) types actually come from the Tor and VPN traffic in the ISCX-
 Tor2016 [52] and ISCXVPN2016 [53] datasets. As shown in
 Theorem 1. (Proof in Appendix-C): Given that the γ-quantile Table III, these datasets provide sufficient benign traffic and a
λ of the class distance distribution satisfies P (d(k) (x) ≤ λ) ≥ γ wide range of attack traffic categories, such as DDoS attacks,
when the feature distribution shift ΔE < ε, the cumulative brute force, scanning attacks, etc. These four representative
distribution function (CDF) shift of the distance distribution datasets allow us to evaluate the proposed method comprehensatisfies: sively.
 2ε
 |Fr (t) − F0 (t)| ≤ , (17)
 σ B. Implementation Details
where σ is the standard deviation of the distance distribution 1) Traffic Preprocessing: For the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, we
(assuming σ ε). Therefore, the change in threshold satisfies: use the preprocessed dataset provided by the author. Each net-
 |λ(r) − λ(0)| ≤ 2ε, (18) work flow in this dataset has a feature vector of 117 dimensions,
 which includes common statistical features as well as additional
where r ∈ [0, 1) is the noise rate. features specific to TLS traffic, such as cipher suite, cipher suite
 The premise of Theorem 1 is the feature space stability, length, and certificate length. The dataset contains a total of 23
i.e., ΔE < ε, where ε is a small constant. In experiments on classes and 92,034 TLS malicious network flows. This dataset
public datasets, we computed the mean value of ΔE as 1.210 is class-balanced. The CICIDS2017 dataset contains 2,829,385
with a standard deviation of std = 0.06 on the Mal_TLS2023 network flows, including 2,272,688 benign flows and 556,697
dataset. This shows that AEGIS-Net satisfies the feature space malicious flows across 14 classes, such as Bot, DDoS, DoS
stability. Furthermore, the conclusion of Theorem 1 is that GoldenEye, SSH-Patator, and Infiltration. The CICIDS2018
the threshold variation |λ(r) − λ(0)| ≤ 2ε. Fig. 4 shows the contains 1,364,431 network flows, which include 1,074,342
detection thresholds of AEGIS-Net on different datasets. In the benign flows with 290,089 malicious flows, which consist of
case of symmetric noise, λ(0) on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset is three different kinds of malicious flows, which we uniformly
0.0099, λ(0.1) = 0.0264, and λ(0.5) = 0.0527, which satisfies consider as malicious flows in the experiments of this paper.
the conclusion of Theorem 1. Since these two datasets are class-imbalanced, particularly with
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 913

regard to benign traffic, we use an undersampling technique r Trident [41] trains a one-class classifier for each known
to reduce the number of samples from the majority classes. class, enabling it to handle both sample and class incre-
The CICDarknet2020 dataset contains 119,562 malicious traffic ments. It facilitates fine-grained unknown traffic detection
flows, covering diverse types of darknet traffic. These datasets and model incremental updates.
were split into training and test sets at a 7:3 ratio. r RFG-HELAD [39] combines a DNN with contrastive learn-
 2) Noise Settings: We have designed symmetric and asym- ing to create a K-classification model and employs a
metric label noise types to test our model based on real-world distance-based out-of-distribution detection algorithm for
scenarios. In the symmetric noise scenario, the sample labels identifying unknown attacks.
are randomly shuffled to other classes with a fixed probability.
In the asymmetric noise scenario, we simulate labeling errors of
easily confused categories in real network traffic. For example, in C. Known Attack Classification Experiments (To CH1)
the CICIDS2017 dataset, since infiltration attacks often use port Deep networks have powerful memory capabilities, allowing
scanning as a precursor, a fixed proportion of PortScan traffic them to achieve high accuracy on the training set even in the
is randomly labeled as Infiltration. DoS Slowhttptest and DoS presence of a high proportion of noisy labels by memorizing
slowloris are both variants of DoS attacks with similar traffic the random noise in the training data. However, the generalizapatterns, and a fixed proportion of DoS Slowhttptest traffic is tion performance on the test set significantly drops. Therefore,
randomly labeled as DoS slowloris. designing a noise label handling module is crucial in complex
 3) Training Details: The network uses a deep residual neural scenarios such as encrypted malicious traffic classification. For
network whose core architecture consists of a cascade of mul- CH1, we set up different experimental environments to valitiple residual blocks, each containing a double convolution op- date the effectiveness of the AEGIS-Net noise label correction
eration. The four-level residual block constructs a feature pyra- module.
mid through a progressive channel expansion strategy, which Tables IV, V, and VI show the performance of AEGIS-Net
allows the network to gradually capture abstract features at the in classifying known class traffic across three public datasets.
deeper level while retaining fine-grained detail information. The From these results, we can draw the following conclusions:
global adaptive average pooling layer compresses each channel 1) AEGIS-Net has stronger robustness to noise: In symmetresponse into a scalar and finally generates a 1024-dimensional ric noise scenarios, under low noise conditions, AEGIS-Net
discriminative feature vector. maintains high classification accuracy, similar to comparative
 All experiments are performed on an Ubuntu 20.04 system methods like MCRe and Co-teaching. For example, in the
equipped with an Intel Xeon Gold 5218R CPU@2.10 GHz Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1,
80 GB RAM and a Tesla V100 32 GB GPU. Python 3.10.13 AEGIS-Net achieves a classification accuracy of 96.69% and
and Pytorch 2.1.1 are used to build our model. We use the SGD an F1-score of 96.37%. In high-noise scenarios, most methods,
optimizer for model training, with an initial learning rate of such as Co-teaching and RoFi, see a significant performance
0.001, 50 epochs, 20 pre-training epochs, a batch size of 128, α drop, with classification accuracy falling below 70%. However,
= 0.1, and β = 0.5. In the unknown malicious traffic detection AEGIS-Net still maintains a high level of performance. In
phase, the KNN algorithm is set with k = 50. asymmetric noise scenarios, asymmetric noise has a greater
 4) Baselines: We have selected several state-of-the-art noise impact on models. In the Asym-50% scenario, Co-teaching’s
label handling methods and unknown malicious traffic detection F1-score on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset drops to 64.98%, while
methods to compare with AEGIS-Net in this paper: AEGIS-Net’s F1-score remains stable above 89%, indicating its
 i) Noise Label Handling Methods: better adaptability to complex noise.
 r Co-teaching [23] uses two neural networks, with the cur- 2) AEGIS-Net has the strongest cross-dataset performance
 rent network passing the samples it considers clean to the consistency: On datasets that focus more on malicious TLS
 other network for training. traffic classification, AEGIS-Net’s F1-score in the Asym-50%
 r MCRe [19] balances robust training and data cleaning, noise scenario significantly outperforms comparative methresulting in a cleaner dataset and a more accurate clas- ods, such as RAPIER’s 83.56% versus AEGIS-Net’s 89.87%,
 sification model. demonstrating its precise capture of encrypted traffic features.
 r RAPIER [24] leverages the characteristic that normal traf- On the CICIDS2017/2018 dataset, which contains diverse atfic distribution is compact and malicious traffic distribu- tack types, methods like Trident, RoFi, and RFG-HELAD,
 tion is dispersed. It estimates the distribution and cor- which lack noise label processing modules, show large perrects sample labels using an autoregressive generative formance fluctuations under high noise. In contrast, AEGISmodel. Net’s accuracy and F1-score decline only slightly, indicating
 ii) Unknown Malicious Traffic Detection Methods: its superior ability to generalize across heterogeneous attack
 r RoFi [38] enhances robustness to packet direction and patterns.
 timing by using a traffic aggregation matrix, provid- 3) AEGIS-Net demonstrates the best label noise handling
 ing a more robust representation of traffic than ex- capability: Looking across each row of the tables, whether for
 isting website fingerprinting defense strategies. RoFi multi-class or binary classification tasks, under various noise
 outperforms existing WF attacks in two open-world conditions, MCRe outperforms Co-teaching and RAPIER in
 scenarios. label noise handling, as MCRe is a model compatible with both
914 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE IV
 THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET

 TABLE V
 THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE CICIDS2017 DATASET

 TABLE VI
 THE CLOSED-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON THE CICIDS2018 DATASET

data cleaning and robust training. However, as the noise rate Table VII presents a comparison of AEGIS-Net’s known class
increases, AEGIS-Net outperforms these three models. This is traffic classification performance and theoretical performance
due to AEGIS-Net’s excellent label noise handling capability, under different noise rates, as well as the proportion of pure
where it selects multiple prototypes for each class and accurately data after label correction. From this, it can be observed that
corrects noisy labels based on the distance of samples from the the theoretical accuracy of the classifier significantly decreases
prototypes. as the noise rate increases. For example, on the Mal_TLS2023
 Chen et al. [54] proves the theoretical upper bound for the dataset, the theoretical accuracy is 26.14% when the symmetric
classification accuracy of models trained on datasets with label noise rate is 50%. However, due to the presence of the label
noise. For symmetric noise rate r, the upper bound for test correction module, the model’s actual performance far exceeds
accuracy is: the theoretical value.
 Data cleaning is a core method for improving model perforr2
 P (y f = y) = (1 − r)2 + , (19) mance under noisy labels, and the quality of the cleaned data
 c−1 directly impacts the classification results. From the performance
where y f denotes the predicted label by neural network f , and c on the three datasets, data cleaning significantly reduced the
is the number of classes. For asymmetric noise rate r, the upper actual training noise rate, resulting in a higher proportion of pure
bound for test accuracy is: data, which helps mitigate the impact of label noise on model
 performance. In the absence of label noise, AEGIS-Net achieves
 P (y f = y) = (1 − r)2 + r2 . (20) classification accuracies of 96.86%, 98.23%, and 99.83% on
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 915

 TABLE VII
THE PERFORMANCE OF AEGIS-NET IN CLASSIFYING KNOWN CLASSES OF TRAFFIC UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE SCENARIOS UNDER THREE DATASETS, WITH THE
 PERCENTAGE OF PURE DATA AFTER LABEL CORRECTION

 TABLE VIII
 THE OPEN-WORLD PERFORMANCE OF ALL METHODS UNDER DIFFERENT NOISE RATIOS ON MAL_TLS2023, CICIDS2017, AND CICIDS2018 DATASET

the three datasets, respectively. Even when the asymmetric efficiency of AEGIS-Net for unknown attack traffic detection in
noise rate reaches 50%, AEGIS-Net’s classification accuracies three different experimental environments.
on the three datasets are still 89.02%, 81.32%, and 99.73%, Table VIII shows a comparison of AEGIS-Net with other
showing improvements of 39.02%, 31.32%, and 49.73%, re- methods in the open world. The following conclusions can be
spectively, compared to the theoretical accuracy. This demon- drawn:
strates that AEGIS-Net has excellent label noise correction 1) AEGIS-Net exhibits significantly better noise robustness
capabilities. compared to baseline methods: In both symmetric and asymmetric high-noise scenarios, AEGIS-Net’s detection accuracy
 and AUC values are close to or reach 100%. For example,
D. Unknown Attack Detection Experiments (To CH2) on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, AEGIS-Net achieves an accuracy of 98.76% under Sym-50% noise, while RoFi, Trident,
 Noisy label samples form pseudo-class clusters in the feature and RFG-HELAD only achieve 74.19%, 55.18%, and 62.59%,
space, occupying the open region that should belong to unknown respectively. This indicates that AEGIS-Net’s label correction
attacks. This causes the unknown attack detection performance mechanism effectively suppresses noise interference in the
of NIDS to be inevitably affected by noisy labels. Therefore, feature space, whereas traditional methods experience a signifdesigning a noise-resistant method for unknown attack detection icant drop in performance under noise.
is crucial. For CH2, we set the CICDarknet2020 dataset as the 2) AEGIS-Net has a stronger ability to distinguish unknown
unknown class attack traffic and validate the effectiveness and attacks: The AUC value reflects the model’s ability to differenti-
916 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 4. The score distribution of known and unknown samples of AEGIS-Net on different datasets, with the green vertical line representing the threshold calculated
based on the training set.

ate between known and unknown categories. AEGIS-Net’s AUC known and unknown class samples. Furthermore, almost 100%
is higher than that of baseline methods in all scenarios, and it of the anomaly scores for known class samples are below 0.1,
reaches 100% under multiple noise conditions. For instance, in while the anomaly scores for unknown class traffic are widely
the Asym-50% scenario of the CICIDS2017 dataset, AEGIS-Net distributed. For example, in the Mal_TLS2023-Asym10% sceachieves an AUC of 98.60%, while RFG-HELAD only achieves nario, the anomaly scores for unknown class traffic range from
55.45%. This demonstrates that AEGIS-Net constructs a com- [0.05, 0.8], in sharp contrast to the scores of known class
pact known class feature distribution through multi-prototype samples. Nearly 100% of the unknown class samples have
contrastive learning, significantly improving the clarity of the anomaly scores greater than the threshold, enabling a clear
unknown class boundary. distinction between known and unknown class traffic. This
 3) AEGIS-Net shows excellent cross-dataset generalization: explains the excellent performance of AEGIS-Net as shown in
In three heterogeneous datasets, the standard deviations of Table VIII.
AEGIS-Net’s accuracy and AUC are less than 0.5% and 0.3%, As shown in Fig. 5, from the visualization results of the penulrespectively. In contrast, baseline methods like Trident show timate layer features of different datasets, it can be observed that
an accuracy fluctuation of 34.81% in the Sym-50% scenario of the penultimate layer features from different datasets exhibit
CICIDS2018, dropping from 84.26% to 62.45%. This indicates a significant multi-cluster structure in the embedding space.
that AEGIS-Net’s model-agnostic detection paradigm is insen- This phenomenon directly validates the rationality of selecting
sitive to traffic feature distribution differences, showing stronger multiple prototypes for each class.
adaptability to different scenarios. For example, in the CICIDS2018 dataset, although the train-
 From Table VIII, it can be seen that AEGIS-Net’s perfor- ing set contains only two major categories, benign and malicious
mance in detecting unknown malicious traffic is independent of traffic, benign traffic includes various network behaviors such
the noise rate. This is because AEGIS-Net’s detection model is as normal web browsing, sending and receiving emails, and
non-parametric, and the detection module does not participate in file transfers. This can be corroborated by the visualization
model training. Although the model’s closed-world performance results showing multiple sub-clusters within the benign traffic.
is strongly correlated with different noise rates, the detection of If only a single prototype were used, it would fail to capture
unknown traffic remains unaffected. This is actually desirable. the intra-class diversity, leading to blurred feature representa-
If open-world detection performance depended on closed-world tions. In contrast, multiple prototypes can accurately represent
detection performance, the model’s closed-world performance the intra-class structure. In the CICIDS2017 dataset, focusing
would inevitably degrade as the noise rate increases, leading to specifically on DDoS attacks, there are various attack types,
a deterioration in open-world detection performance. However, such as Flood Attacks, Amplification Attacks, Layer 7 Attacks,
in this study, although AEGIS-Net’s closed-world performance and Hybrid Attacks, each with significant differences in traffic
slightly decreases as the noise rate increases, it has little effect patterns, such as packet frequency, protocol types, and load
on open-world detection performance. distribution. This results in a clear separation of sub-clusters in
 Fig. 4 shows the anomaly scores for different samples, where the feature space. A single prototype cannot distinguish between
the green line represents the classification threshold determined attack types, whereas multiple prototypes can model different
based on the known class samples. Samples exceeding this attack patterns separately, improving classification and detection
threshold are classified as unknown malicious traffic. From accuracy.
this, it can be observed that, regardless of the noise rate or the Furthermore, the high separation between different classes
dataset used, there is almost no overlap between the scores of indicates that the model has learned discriminative features
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 917

Fig. 5. Penultimate layer feature space visualization, where orange dots indicate unknown malicious traffic.

 does not notably improve classification performance and may
 even introduce redundancy. Therefore, increasing the number of
 prototypes is not necessary to enhance performance. In the case
 of high noise, if each class only has one prototype, the model’s
 classification accuracy drops to 56%. As the value of p increases, the model’s classification accuracy gradually improves.
 However, when p exceeds 16, the model’s accuracy begins to
 decline. Under 50% noise, a single prototype may be severely
 contaminated by noisy samples, such as label errors causing
 prototype shifts, which prevent it from effectively representing
 the true class center. In low-noise scenarios, a small number
 of prototypes can adequately represent the class without redundancy. In high noise scenarios, more prototypes are required to
Fig. 6. In the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, the impact of the number of prototypes p cover intra-class diversity and correct for noise. Therefore, in
on the closed-world classification performance of AEGIS-Net under symmetric
noise scenarios. our experiment, we choose p = 14 to balance robustness across
 different noise levels.
 2) Effect of k: Table IX shows the impact of the hyperparameter k on the performance of unknown malicious traffic detection
to distinguish between various attack types. The contrastive
 and the corresponding detection time. When the value of k is
loss further strengthens this separation, making the decision
 small, ranging from 10 to 1000, the detection accuracy remains
boundaries clearer. The orange scatter in the figure indicates
 high, indicating that smaller k values effectively capture the
the location of unknown malicious traffic, indicating that unlocal features of the data, making them suitable for detecting
known malicious traffic exhibits high randomness and diversity
 unknown malicious traffic. However, when k exceeds 2000, the
in the feature space. These orange scatter overlap with other
 accuracy drops sharply to about 23.59% due to underfitting, as
colored points (representing known traffic) but mostly lie on the
 more neighbors may include samples from different categories,
boundary of known traffic, suggesting that darknet traffic shares
 thus affecting the classification results. In extreme cases, such as
some feature similarities with known traffic. However, darknet
 when k equals the number of training samples, the output clastraffic has unique encryption methods, communication patterns,
 sification will be the most frequent class, rendering the distance
or load characteristics, causing it to be separated from known
 irrelevant. Moreover, as the value of k increases, the average
traffic in the feature space.
 detection time per flow also increases, but the overall difference
 is not significant. When k = 50 , the average time spent on each
E. Sensitivity Analysis flow in the KNN algorithm is 0.0353 ms. Considering both the
 In this subsection, we perform sensitivity analysis on the detection accuracy for unknown classes and the time cost, we
critical hyperparameter in AEGIS-Net. choose k = 50 in this paper.
 1) Effect of p: From Fig. 6, it can be observed that when 3) Effect of m: As shown in Table X, the closed-world
the noise level is low, the model’s classification performance classification accuracy is not significantly affected by differis not significantly affected by different values of p, with the ent sample sizes m. This is because m is used to reduce the
classification accuracy remaining around 95%. Under low noise, computational and storage overhead of the similarity matrix S,
the feature distributions of samples within the same class are which has a size of n × n, where n is the number of samples
concentrated, and a small number of prototypes can cover the in the training set. When n is large, computing and storing S
intra-class diversity. Increasing the number of prototypes (p) becomes time-consuming and expensive. By randomly sampling
918 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE IX
 IN THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET, THE EFFECT OF THE PARAMETER k IN THE KNN ALGORITHM ON THE DETECTION PERFORMANCE OF UNKNOWN MALICIOUS
 TRAFFIC UNDER SYMMETRIC NOISE OF 0.1

 TABLE X
IN THE MAL_TLS2023 DATASET, THE EFFECT OF THE SAMPLE SIZE m ON THE
CLASSIFICATION OF KNOWN CLASS TRAFFIC UNDER SYMMETRIC NOISE OF 0.1

Fig. 7. The impact of the percentile Sc on model performance in the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a noise rate of 0.1.
 Fig. 8. Accuracy heatmap for hyperparameters α and β of AEGIS-Net on
 Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1.

m samples (where m < n), the size of the similarity matrix
is reduced to m × m, significantly reducing the complexity of
computation and storage. Although the sample size m reduces
the number of samples, the randomly sampled samples still
effectively represent the distribution of the entire training set.
Therefore, the similarity matrix S computed based on these
sampled samples can still reflect the similarity relationships
between samples in the training set. In this paper, we choose
m = 1280 for the experiments.
 4) Effect of Sc : As shown in Fig. 7, within the range of
percentiles Sc from 0.1 to 0.9, the performance fluctuation
of AEGIS-Net under both symmetric and asymmetric noise
scenarios is less than ±1.5%. This stability arises from the core
property of the density calculation ρi in (6): when Sc varies
within the effective range, only the absolute density values of the Fig. 9. Effect of different thresholds λ on AEGIS-Net performance on the
samples are adjusted, while the relative density ranking between Mal_TLS2023 dataset with a symmetric noise rate of 0.1.
samples remains highly consistent. Therefore, the prototype
selection remains unchanged, and the final performance is not
significantly affected.
 5) Effect of α, β: The weight factors α, β ∈ [0, 1] are used 6) Effect of Different Threshold λ: As shown in Fig. 9, the
to balance the loss function in (5). We perform hyperparameter AUC remains stable across all values of λ, demonstrating that
tuning within the range of 0.1 to 0.9. Under the condition of the model’s ability to capture unknown threats is completely
symmetric noise rate of 0.1 on the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, the unaffected by the threshold. Although lowering the threshold
classification accuracy is shown in Fig. 8. The optimal perfor- gradually improves performance, with the detection accuracy
mance of AEGIS-Net is achieved when α = 0.1 and β = 0.5, increasing from 98.759% to 99.752%, we believe that in pracreaching 96.69%. Therefore, we set α = 0.1 and β = 0.5 as the tical applications, ensuring a 95% pass rate for known class
final values. traffic and achieving an accuracy of 98.759% is sufficient. The
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 919

 TABLE XI
 ABLATION STUDY OF AEGIS-NET ON MAL_TLS2023 DATASET WITH A
 SYMMETRIC NOISE RATE OF 0.1, WHERE ACCURACY AND F1-SCORE
 REPRESENT THE DETECTION METRICS FOR KNOWN TRAFFIC

Fig. 10. The impact of contrastive loss on model performance in the
Mal_TLS2023 dataset.

 Fig. 11. In the Mal_TLS2023 dataset, clean sample rate over training epochs
 (Symmetric Noise). The pretraining phase consists of the first 20 epochs.

1% performance improvement from fine-tuning the threshold
seems negligible. enhances the robustness of classification for known classes under
 noisy labels.
 2) Effect of Pretraining and Label Correction: As shown in
F. Ablation Study
 Table XI, we investigate the effectiveness of the pretraining
 1) Effect of Contrastive Loss: The top and bottom figures in procedure and the label correction module proposed in this
Fig. 10 illustrate the impact of contrastive loss on AEGIS-Net paper. Without pretraining, the model’s performance drops sigunder symmetric and asymmetric noise scenarios, respectively. nificantly, and under the Sym-50% condition, the model almost
It can be observed that, regardless of the presence of contrastive completely fails. This indicates that pretraining the model before
loss, the detection accuracy for unknown malicious traffic re- the label correction module begins to operate is crucial, as it
mains identical under both noise conditions, at 98.76%. This helps the encoder E learn good representational capabilities.
indicates that the detection of unknown malicious traffic is not After removing encoder E, the model’s performance shows a
significantly affected by different noise conditions. Contrastive significant decline in different noise environments. Specifically,
loss, however, significantly improves the robustness of classi- in the 10% symmetric noise environment, the classification
fication for known classes, especially under asymmetric noise accuracy drops from 96.69% to 84.02%, a decrease of 12.67%;
conditions, where the performance gap expands as the noise level in the 50% symmetric noise environment, the accuracy falls from
increases. For instance, at a 40% noise level, the gap reaches 95.84% to 80.67%, a decrease of 15.17%. The F1 score exhibits a
5.06%. similar trend, indicating a noticeable reduction in the overall dis-
 Specifically, while the contrastive loss optimizes the feature criminative ability of the model. This outcome demonstrates that
space to improve the compactness of the known classes, the encoder E, as the core component of feature extraction, plays
unknown class samples naturally move away from the known a crucial role in the model’s robustness under noisy conditions.
class clusters due to distribution differences. As a result, the Its effective representation capability is an essential foundation
detection performance mainly depends on the geometric struc- for AEGIS-Net to maintain high performance.
ture of the feature space rather than the classifier parameters, so In the absence of the label correction module, a convolutional
there is no negative impact on the detection of unknown classes. neural network trained using only cross-entropy and contrastive
Contrastive loss, based on the relationships between samples loss, while having some classification ability, performs poorly
(positive/negative pairs) rather than individual labels, reduces and falls far short of practical usability. As shown in Fig. 11,
direct reliance on incorrect labels. Optimizing the intra-class during the first 20 epochs, although the label correction modand inter-class relationships in the feature space significantly ule is not active, the neural network still exhibits some label
920 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE XII corrected training set. MLP, RF, and XGBoost also exhibit
 AVERAGE TESTING TIMES OF DIFFERENT METHODS
 good classification performance, while the LSTM model performs relatively weaker. The results indicate that the proposed
 label correction module not only effectively improves model
 performance but also possesses strong versatility, serving as
 a plug-and-play preprocessing component that can be flexibly
 integrated with other models and play a positive role.
 The unknown traffic detection module employs a modelagnostic K-nearest neighbor paradigm, which provides it with
 high versatility and integrability. Specifically, this module relies
 solely on the normalized feature vector of the input sample and
 a threshold λ that is adaptively determined based on the distance
 distribution of known class samples. Due to its non-parametric
 nature, this module does not depend on any specific classification
 architecture or parameter training phase; it makes decisions
 based directly on relative distances within the feature space.
 As a result, the module can function as an independent component that seamlessly integrates with different NIDS through
 a standardized interface, significantly enhancing the system’s
Fig. 12. Performance evaluation of various models under symmetric noise ability to detect unknown threats without affecting the existing
with label-corrected Mal_TLS2023 dataset. detection processes.

correction capability, leading to a gradual increase in the clean VII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
sample ratio in the training set. After 20 epochs, when the label Our work has a few limitations. First, when the features of
correction module becomes active, the clean sample ratio in the benign traffic change over time, our method may fail. In our
training set improves further. Under the Symmetric noise of 0.5, improvement plan, detecting concept drift in traffic samples
the final clean sample ratio reaches 94%, indicating that the should be considered. Second, when facing adversarial traffic
proposed label correction module is effective. samples with incorrect labels, these samples are closer in distribution to the incorrect class, which could interfere with the noise
G. Evaluation on Time Cost label correction process. Future work will explore customized
 solutions, which will be a promising research direction. Lastly,
 We divide the complexity of the model into two aspects:
 as part of future work, we will investigate which components
feature extraction time and classifier prediction time [55], [56],
 can run in parallel to maximize efficiency.
[57]. FET stands for Feature Extraction Time, which refers to
the time required for converting the raw traffic into a feature
vector. The prediction time refers to the time spent in detecting VIII. CONCLUSION
each flow, while the total time is the sum of feature extraction
 In the dynamic network environment, network intrusion detime and classifier prediction time.
 tection systems face the dual challenges of label noise and
 Table XII presents the feature extraction time and the avunknown attack detection. This paper proposes a novel antierage detection time per network flow for different methods.
 noise detection framework, AEGIS-Net. AEGIS-Net dynami-
AEGIS-Net requires an average of 0.20 ms per network flow,
 cally selects multiple prototypes for each class through a multiwhich is better than RFG-HELAD’s 1.18 ms, achieves the
 prototype strategy to achieve accurate noise label correction.
fastest speed. Trident maintains multiple single-class one-class
 It also designs a model-agnostic k-nearest neighbors distance
learners, which results in slightly lower detection efficiency.
 detection paradigm, which determines unknown attacks by cal-
Overall, AEGIS-Net does not have a significant disadvantage
 culating the relative distance ratio between the test sample and
in detection efficiency compared to the current methods.
 known classes, eliminating the dependence on traffic distribution
 assumptions common in traditional methods. This makes the
H. Scalability Analysis model more flexible and versatile. We prove, through the feature
 Based on the corrected training set from AEGIS-Net, we space stability hypothesis, that the detection threshold is indetrained and evaluated six models, including AEGIS-Net (the pendent of the noise rate, mathematically verifying the anti-noise
CNN model), MLP, LSTM, and three machine learning models property of unknown attack detection. Additionally, a series
(RF, SVM, and XGBoost). For the three deep neural networks— of experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of AEGIS-Net
AEGIS-Net, MLP, and LSTM—we adopted a training strategy in known attack classification, unknown attack detection, and
that combines cross-entropy loss with InfoNCE contrastive loss. cross-scenario generalization ability. Moreover, we show per-
As shown in Fig. 12, under different noise rates, the proposed formance improvement compared to the state-of-the-art baseline
AEGIS-Net model demonstrates the best performance on the methods.
MENG et al.: WHEN UNKNOWN THREAT MEETS LABEL NOISE: A SELF-CORRECTING FRAMEWORK 921

 REFERENCES [25] S. Shi, Y. Guo, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, and Z. Han, “Distributionally robust
 federated learning for network traffic classification with noisy labels,”
 [1] Y. Chen, Z. Li, J. Shi, G. Gou, C. Liu, and G. Xiong, “Not afraid of the IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 6212–6226, May 2024.
 unseen: A siamese network based scheme for unknown traffic discovery,” [26] G. Li, R. Zhang, Z. Sun, L. Xing, and Y. Zhang, “DSDIR: A two-stage
 in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 1–7. method for addressing noisy long-tailed problems in malicious traffic
 [2] X. Han, S. Liu, J. Liu, B. Jiang, Z. Lu, and B. Liu, “ECNet: Robust detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2025,
 malicious network traffic detection with multi-view feature and confidence pp. 1–5.
 mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 6871–6885, [27] Y. Cai, C. Peng, S. Li, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, and B. Fang, “TRACE: A robust
 2024. framework for malicious traffic detection with noisy labels,” in Proc. IEEE
 [3] Z. Zhao et al., “FOSS: Towards fine-grained unknown class detection Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., 2025, pp. 1–5.
 against the open-set attack spectrum with variable legitimate traffic,” [28] J. Zhang, F. Li, F. Ye, and H. Wu, “Autonomous unknown-application
 IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3945–3960, Oct. 2024. filtering and labeling for DL-based traffic classifier update,” in Proc. IEEE
 [4] J. Li, X. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Tao, P. Wang, and X. Guan, “Mining repeating Conf. Comput. Commun., 2020, pp. 397–405.
 pattern in packet arrivals: Metrics, models, and applications,” Inf. Sci., [29] L. Yang, A. Moubayed, and A. Shami, “MTH-IDS: A multitiered hybrid
 vol. 408, pp. 1–22, 2017. intrusion detection system for Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things
 [5] X. Wang et al., “Entropy-regulated cross-modal generative fusion for J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 616–632, Jan. 2022.
 multimodal network intrusion detection,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 126, 2025, [30] Z. Liu, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Towards open world traffic
 Art. no. 103581. classification,” in Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Secur., Chongqing,
 [6] Q. Yuan et al., “Multi-agent for network security monitoring and warning: China, Springer, 2021, pp. 331–347.
 A generative ai solution,” IEEE Netw., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 114–121, [31] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Chen, X. Jiang, and X. Tan, “Conditional variational
 Sep. 2025. auto-encoder and extreme value theory aided two-stage learning approach
 [7] B. Van Rooyen and R. C. Williamson, “A theory of learning with corrupted for intelligent fine-grained known/unknown intrusion detection,” IEEE
 labels,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 18, no. 228, pp. 1–50, 2018. Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp. 3538–3553, 2021.
 [8] B. Han et al., “A survey of label-noise representation learning: Past, present [32] Y. Gu, Y. Lai, and Y. Wang, “Zen-tor: A zero knowledge known-unknown
 and future,” 2020, arXiv: 2011.04406. traffic classification method,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf., 2022,
 [9] X. Xia et al., “Extended T : Learning with mixed closed-set and open-set pp. 885–890.
 noisy labels,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 45, no. 3, [33] H. He, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, S. Le, and Z. Zhao, “A data skew-based unknown
 pp. 3047–3058, Mar. 2023. traffic classification approach for TLS applications,” Future Gener. Com-
[10] B. Anderson and D. McGrew, “Machine learning for encrypted malware put. Syst., vol. 138, pp. 1–12, 2023.
 traffic classification: Accounting for noisy labels and non-stationarity,” in [34] X. Li, B. Feng, T. Zang, X. Xu, S. Zhao, and J. Ma, “Facing unknown:
 Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discov. data Mining, 2017, Open-world encrypted traffic classification based on contrastive prepp. 1723–1732. training,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun., 2023, pp. 1255–1260.
[11] Q. Meng et al., “Beyond known threats: A novel strategy for isolating and [35] C. Sheng, Y. Yao, W. Li, W. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Unknown attack traffic clasdetecting unknown malicious traffic,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 89, 2025, sification in SCADA network using heuristic clustering technique,” IEEE
 Art. no. 103920. Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2625–2638, Sep. 2023.
[12] J. L. Guerra, C. Catania, and E. Veas, “Datasets are not enough: Chal- [36] A. Rodriguez and A. Laio, “Clustering by fast search and find of density
 lenges in labeling network traffic,” Comput. Secur., vol. 120, 2022, peaks,” Science, vol. 344, no. 6191, pp. 1492–1496, 2014.
 Art. no. 102810. [37] T. Dahanayaka, Y. Ginige, Y. Huang, G. Jourjon, and S. Seneviratne, “Ro-
[13] D. Barradas, C. Novo, B. Portela, S. Romeiro, and N. Santos, “Extending bust open-set classification for encrypted traffic fingerprinting,” Comput.
 C2 traffic detection methodologies: From TLS 1.2 TO TLS 1.3-enabled Netw., vol. 236, 2023, Art. no. 109991.
 malware,” in Proc. 27th Int. Symp. Res. Attacks, Intrusions Defenses, 2024, [38] M. Shen, K. Ji, Z. Gao, Q. Li, L. Zhu, and K. Xu, “Subverting website
 pp. 181–196. fingerprinting defenses with robust traffic representation,” in Proc. 32nd
[14] S. Le, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, and H. He, “An adaptive classification and updating USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 607–624.
 method for unknown network traffic in open environments,” Comput. [39] Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, X. Shi, J. Yang, and K. Li, “RFG-HELAD: A robust
 Netw., vol. 238, 2024, Art. no. 110114. fine-grained network traffic anomaly detection model based on hetero-
[15] E. Arazo, D. Ortego, P. Albert, N. O’Connor, and K. McGuinness, “Un- geneous ensemble learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19,
 supervised label noise modeling and loss correction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. pp. 5895–5910, 2024.
 Mach. Learn., PMLR, 2019, pp. 312–321. [40] Z. Gao, J. Li, L. Wang, Y. He, and P. Yuan, “CM-UTC: A cost-sensitive ma-
[16] G. Patrini, A. Rozza, A. Krishna Menon, R. Nock, and L. Qu, “Making trix based method for unknown encrypted traffic classification,” Comput.
 deep neural networks robust to label noise: A loss correction approach,” in J., vol. 67, 2024, Art. no. bxa e017.
 Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 1944–1952. [41] Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Z. Song, W. Li, and F. Zhang, “Trident: A universal frame-
[17] Z. Sun et al., “PNP: Robust learning from noisy labels by probabilistic work for fine-grained and class-incremental unknown traffic detection,” in
 noise prediction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog- Proc. ACM Web Conf., 2024, pp. 1608–1619.
 nit., 2022, pp. 5311–5320. [42] R. Chen, L. Luo, X. Wang, B. Ren, D. Guo, and S. Zhu, “Knowing
[18] Y. Li, H. Han, S. Shan, and X. Chen, “DISC: Learning from noisy labels via the unknowns: Network traffic detection with open-set semi-supervised
 dynamic instance-specific selection and correction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF learning,” Comput. Netw., vol. 251, 2024, Art. no. 110630.
 Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 24070–24079. [43] X. Yang, F. Tong, F. Jiang, and G. Cheng, “A lightweight
[19] Q. Yuan, G. Gou, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhu, G. Xiong, and Y. Wang, “MCRe: A and dynamic open-set intrusion detection for industrial Internet of
 unified framework for handling malicious traffic with noise labels based Things,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 20, pp. 2930–2943,
 on multidimensional constraint representation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics 2025.
 Secur., vol. 19, pp. 133–147, 2024. [44] E. Akpaku, J. Chen, M. Ahmed, F. K. Agbenyegah, and W. L. Brown-
[20] S. Cui, C. Dong, M. Shen, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, and Z. Lu, “CBSeq: A channel- Acquaye, “RAGN: Detecting unknown malicious network traffic using a
 level behavior sequence for encrypted malware traffic detection,” IEEE robust adaptive graph neural network,” Comput. Netw., vol. 262, 2025,
 Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 18, pp. 5011–5025, 2023. Art. no. 111184.
[21] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Luo, and D. Xia, “Robust traffic [45] C. Fu, Q. Li, and K. Xu, “Flow interaction graph analysis: Unknown
 classification with mislabelled training samples,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. encrypted malicious traffic detection,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 32,
 Conf. Parallel Distrib. Syst., 2015, pp. 328–335. no. 4, pp. 2972–2987, Aug. 2024.
[22] B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Pan, Y. Xiang, and D. Xia, “Noise- [46] Y. Mirsky, T. Doitshman, Y. Elovici, and A. Shabtai, “Kitsune: An ensemresistant statistical traffic classification,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 5, ble of autoencoders for online network intrusion detection,” 2018, arXiv:
 no. 4, pp. 454–466, Dec. 2019. 1802.09089.
[23] B. Han et al., “Co-teaching: Robust training of deep neural networks with [47] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
 extremely noisy labels,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2018, contrastive predictive coding,” 2018, arXiv: 1807.03748.
 pp. 8536–8546. [48] S. Arya, D. M. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, R. Silverman, and A. Y. Wu,
[24] Y. Qing et al., “Low-quality training data only? a robust framework for “An optimal algorithm for approximate nearest neighbor searching fixed
 detecting encrypted malicious network traffic,” 2023, arXiv:2309.04798. dimensions,” J. ACM, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 891–923, 1998.
922 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 1, JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2026

[49] Q. Yuan et al., “BoAu: Malicious traffic detection with noise labels Pinghui Wang (Senior Member, IEEE) is currently
 based on boundary augmentation,” Comput. Secur., vol. 131, 2023, a professor with the MOE Key Laboratory for Intelli-
 Art. no. 103300. gent Networks and Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong
[50] I. Sharafaldin et al., “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset University, Xi’an, China, and also with the Shenzhen
 and intrusion traffic characterization,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Research Institute, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Shen-
 Secur. Privacy, 2018, pp. 108–116. zhen, China. His research interests include internet
[51] A. Habibi Lashkari, G. Kaur, and A. Rahali, “DIDarkNet: A contemporary traffic measurement and modeling, traffic classificaapproach to detect and characterize the darknet traffic using deep image tion, abnormal detection, and online social network
 learning,” in Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Commun. Netw. Secur., 2020, pp. 1–13. measurement.
[52] A. H. Lashkari, G. D. Gil, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Characterization of tor traffic using time based features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf.
 Syst. Secur. Privacy, SciTePress, 2017, pp. 253–262.
[53] G. Draper-Gil, A. H. Lashkari, M. S. I. Mamun, and A. A. Ghorbani,
 “Characterization of encrypted and VPN traffic using time-related,” in
 Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. Inf. Syst. Secur. Privacy, 2016, pp. 407–414.
[54] P. Chen, B. B. Liao, G. Chen, and S. Zhang, “Understanding and utilizing
 deep neural networks trained with noisy labels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Siqi Lu received the PhD degree from the Henan Key
 Learn., PMLR, 2019, pp. 1062–1070. Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology.
[55] M. Di Mauro, G. Galatro, and A. Liotta, “Experimental review of neural- He is a lecturer with the Henan Key Laboratory of
 based approaches for network intrusion management,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Network Cryptography Technology. His research in-
 Service Manag., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2480–2495, Dec. 2020. terests include blockchain security, formal methods,
[56] S. Dong, Y. Xia, and T. Peng, “Network abnormal traffic detection model security protocol, and Big Data security.
 based on semi-supervised deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Netw.
 Service Manag., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 4197–4212, Dec. 2021.
[57] M. T. Jahangir, M. Wakeel, H. Asif, and A. Ateeq, “Systematic approach
 to analyze the avast IoT-23 challenge dataset for malware detection using machine learning,” in Proc. 18th Int. Conf. Emerg. Technol., 2023,
 pp. 234–239.

 Guangsong Li received the PhD degree from the
 Qianwei Meng is currently working toward the PhD Henan Key Laboratory of Network Cryptography
 degree with the Henan Key Laboratory of Network Technology. He is a professor with the Henan Key
 Cryptography Technology, Information Engineering Laboratory of Network Cryptography Technology.
 University. His research interests include network His research interests include blockchain security,
 security and unknown traffic detection. security protocol, information security and formal
 methods.

 Yongjuan Wang received the PhD degree from In-
 Qingjun Yuan is currently a postdoctoral researcher formation Engineering University, in 2009. She is
 with MoE Key Lab for Intelligent Networks and currently working with the Henan Key Laboratory
 Network Security, Xi’an Jiaotong University, and of Network Cryptography Technology. Her main realso a lecturer with the Henan Key Laboratory of search interests include cryptographic analysis and
 Network Cryptography Technology, Information En- cyberspace security.
 gineering University. His research interests include
 side-channel analysis and encrypted traffic analytics.

 Xiaohong Guan (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the
 PhD degree in electrical engineering from the University of Connecticut, Storrs, in 1993. Since 1995,
 Jing Tao received the BS and MS degrees in auto- he has been with the Department of Automation,
 matic control from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Sci-
 China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. He is cur- ence and Technology, and the Center for Intelligent
 rently working toward the PhD degree with the Sys- and Networked Systems, Tsinghua University. He is
 tems Engineering Institute. He is currently a teacher currently with the MOE Key Laboratory for Intelwith Xi’an Jiaotong University. His research interests ligent Networks and Network Security, Faculty of
 include Internet traffic measurement and modeling, Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotraffic classification, abnormal detection, and botnet. tong University, Xi’an, China, where he is also the
 dean with the Faculty of Electronic and Information Engineering. He is an
 Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.