IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026 2185

 XAI-EdgeSFL: Explainable Edge Intelligence
 With Adaptive Intrusion-Resilient Split
 Federated Learning for Consumer
 Healthcare Ecosystems
 Yue Zhao , Farhan Ullah , Khalid Mahmood , Senior Member, IEEE, Saqib Saeed , Senior Member, IEEE,
 Nazeeruddin Mohammad , Senior Member, IEEE, and Umar Raza , Senior Member, IEEE

 Abstract—The fast growth of consumer electronics, partic- Index Terms—Explainable artificial intelligence, split federated
ularly Internet of Things (IoT) devices and wearables, has learning, edge intelligence, adaptive intrusion detection, consignificantly changed healthcare systems by enabling real-time sumer healthcare systems, security & privacy.
monitoring and customized medical treatment. Edge computing
is changing healthcare by enabling the secure and distributed
processing of data on consumer devices. However, this integration I. I NTRODUCTION
presents substantial security issues, raising significant concerns
regarding AI-driven decision-making, model understandability,
and privacy protection. This paper introduces XAI- EdgeSFL,
a novel framework that integrates Explainable Artificial Intelli-
 T HE rapid digital transformation in healthcare, driven by
 IoT, has allowed for continuous patient monitoring and
 highly personalized care. The development of interconnected
gence (XAI) with an Adaptive Intrusion-Resilient Split Federated ecosystems that generate a continuous stream of healthcare
Learning (SFL) architecture to provide reliable and transparent data has been facilitated by the extensive adoption of conedge health monitoring. The SFL loop computes important sumer electronics, including smartwatches, fitness monitors,
features of sensitive health data using a lightweight Temporal and medical IoT devices [1]. Decentralized health surveillance
Convolutional Network (TCN) on edge devices and a more complex classifier on a global server. This method enhances privacy has the potential to substantially improve clinical outcomes
by retaining raw data on the device. In addition, we present by using real-time data analysis and proactive intervention
an adaptive aggregation approach that dynamically weights strategies.
client model updates to evaluate intrinsic resilience against The concept of edge computing has become a leading
emerging cyberthreats. SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), paradigm for facilitating efficient, privacy-preserving, dis-
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations (LIME), and
Integrated Gradient (IG) are a multi-modal XAI suite that offers tributed data processing near consumer devices. It reduces
feature-level explanations for clinical trust. The proposed method latency and saves bandwidth by allowing local analysis, which
performs well across all datasets, achieving 86.15% accuracy helps to solve privacy concerns that arise when sensitive medand 86.01% F1-score on CICIoMT2024, 93.73% accuracy and ical information is frequently transmitted to centralized cloud
93.65% F1-score on N-BaIoT, and 99.46% accuracy and 99.47% systems. However, the decentralized and broad presence of
F1-score on CICIDS2017. The results show that XAI-EdgeSFL
improves security, privacy, and transparency for AI-driven con- healthcare ecosystems makes them vulnerable to cyberattacks
sumer healthcare systems. [2]. An effective intrusion may compromise or modify important health alarms, which may directly harm patient safety.
 It, therefore, becomes imperative to prioritize the security of
 Received 17 October 2025; revised 23 December 2025; accepted 10 January such systems. The centralized structure of traditional Intrusion
2026. Date of publication 21 January 2026; date of current version 25 March Detection Systems (IDS) may have difficulties adapting to this
2026. (Corresponding author: Farhan Ullah.)
 Yue Zhao is with the Department of Computer Science, College of Science, environment. These systems face two main challenges [3].
Mathematics and Technology, Wenzhou-Kean University, Wenzhou 325060, First, they need to handle distributed data without violating
China (e-mail: yuezhao@kean.edu). the key privacy principles of edge computing. Second, the
 Farhan Ullah is with the Cybersecurity Center, Prince Mohammad Bin Fahd
University, Khobar 31952, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: fullah@pmu.edu.sa). low explainability of modern AI-based models often leads to
 Khalid Mahmood is with the Graduate School of Intelligent Data Science, closed system decision-making, which provides little under-
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu, Yunlin 64002, standing of the rationale behind specific activities, which are
Taiwan (e-mail: khalidm.research@gmail.com).
 Saqib Saeed is with the Department of Computer Information Systems, labeled malicious.
Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam 31451, Saudi Arabia Federated Learning (FL), which supports the joint training
(e-mail: sbsaed@iau.edu.sa). of models across devices and protects raw data, is a way of
 Nazeeruddin Mohammad is with the School of Computer and Mathematical
Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia (e-mail: addressing data privacy issues. Nevertheless, traditional FL
nazeer.mohammad@adelaide.edu.au). methods may be computationally heavy to run on edge devices
 Umar Raza is with the Faculty of Science and Engineering, Department with limited resources, which makes them susceptible to model
of Engineering, Manchester Metropolitan University, M15 6BX Manchester,
U.K. (e-mail: u.raza@mmu.ac.uk). poisoning attacks by malicious agents [4]. SFL presents a
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2026.3656201 distinct benefit of dividing the model into client and server
 1558-4127 © 2026 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and
 similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
 See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
2186 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

parts. This approach reduces the computing risks on edge edge-based FL approaches. This progression solves major
devices and avoids the transmission of harmful activities to shortcomings of centralized approaches, notably with regard
final layers [5] [6] [7]. In spite of these advantages, even to data privacy and the computational restrictions of consumer
globally aggregated models that are trained on non-IID (non- medical devices [2], [6], [9]. The following subsections critiindependent, identically distributed) data do not generally cally evaluate several security measures, focusing on the shift
have interpretable outputs. The obscurity of such AI-based from cloud-based to distributed intelligence employing edge
systems in the clinical environment impedes the capacity of computing, FL, and SFL.
healthcare professionals to trust and respond to the automated
security warnings. XAI aims to increase trust by enhancing A. Edge Computing
model interpretability and accountability [8]. XAI developments have been focused on centralized learning frameworks, Lin et al. [10] examine the allocation of resources in
leaving distributed systems such as SFL largely unexplored. edge computing and the architecture of IDS. The proposed
XAI-EdgeSFL handles these issues directly by merging adap- system effectively optimizes the allocation and sharing of
tive, intrusion-resistant SFL with multi-modal XAI. Data is heterogeneous resources. A single-layer dominant and maxhandled locally using lightweight TCNs for edge efficiency, min fair (SDMMF) allocation technique ensures hierarchical
with adaptive aggregation and trust scoring to resist model fairness within a broad edge-based IDS. Allocation of multiple
poisoning. For clinical transparency, feature-level explanations resources across layers is handled using a method called
are provided using SHAP, LIME, and integrated gradients. Multilayer Dominant and Max-Min Fair (MDMMF). Cui et al.
 The proposed XAI-EdgeSFL framework enhances secu- [11] improve edge computing intrusion detection using grarity, privacy, and transparency in healthcare edge systems. dient boosting decision trees by addressing data imbalance,
It distributes tasks between local TCN models and a central high dimensionality, and inefficient parameter tuning. The
server for efficiency. The design improves resistance to model offered approach uses Margin SMOTE to introduce balanced
poisoning and uses XAI tools like SHAP for interpretability, data generation and a recursive feature removal hierarchy to
increasing clinical trust. The following are the main research select features. Also, a grid search method is optimized to a
contributions. customized one to optimize the efficiency of the parameters.
 Edge computing technology brings significant time improve-
 1) We present XAI-EdgeSFL, an innovative architecture
 ments to a real-time environment and occupies less bandwidth.
 for consumer healthcare devices with limited resources,
 Singh et al. [12] suggest the creation of a smart healthcare
 which integrates XAI with adaptive intrusion-resilient
 system based on an edge computing paradigm. The solution
 SFL. The security and transparency challenges in
 proposes an intermediate edge layer that minimizes the netdistributed healthcare systems are addressed by this
 work latency, and patient data privacy is guaranteed by using
 integrated approach.
 privacy-preserving searchable encryption and an access control
 2) We develop a lightweight TCN for deployment on
 system to validate illegal access to data. Eskandari et al. [13]
 resource-constrained edge devices. This design enables
 introduce a smart edge-based intrusion detection system that
 effective temporal feature extraction from sequential
 aims at protecting IoT edge devices directly attached to it.
 network traffic while retaining raw data on the client
 The system applies to low-cost IoT gateways that assume edge
 device, thereby protecting user privacy and reducing the
 computing to detect vulnerabilities that are close to the data
 computational burden on consumer devices.
 sources. It identifies a large number of threats, such as port
 3) We present an adaptive aggregation method for SFL
 scanning, HTTP and SSH brute force, and SYN flood, with
 that adjusts the weights of client contributions according
 high accuracy and a low rate of false positives. Yao et al. [14]
 to performance measures in real-time. This method
 proposed an edge-based anomaly detection system to detect
 effectively mitigates model cyberattacks by limiting
 malicious attacks. A wrapper-based feature selection method
 the impact of suspicious clients while improving coneliminates irrelevant and duplicate features, thus improving
 vergence through prioritized learning from trustworthy
 detection capabilities, and four types of attackers are distinclients.
 guished based on their capabilities. Ensemble learning is used
 4) We develop an extensive multi-modal XAI suite that
 to increase levels of detection, and a lightweight algorithm is
 includes SHAP, LIME, and Integrated Gradients. This
 also used to minimize latency by running it at the same time
 method addresses interpretability issues in distributed
 on edge nodes.
 learning systems and enhances clinical trust in AI-driven
 security decisions by providing feature-level explanations for model predictions. B. Federated Learning
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows: Several research studies [15], [16] used FL approaches
Section II explains the related work, and Section III describes in the healthcare domain. Mothukuri et al. [4] implemented
the proposed method. Section IV presents the experimental an anomaly detection methodology that is based on FL and
results, and Section V concludes the work. proactively detects IoT-based intrusions by analyzing data
 from each device. This system utilizes FL cycles with GRUs,
 II. R ELATED W ORK preserves local data, and exclusively transmits learned weights
 Traditional machine learning-based methods of threat detec- to the global server. The results show that decentralized
tion in healthcare devices are rapidly being substituted by solutions perform better in terms of accuracy and privacy
ZHAO et al.: EXPLAINABLE EDGE INTELLIGENCE WITH ADAPTIVE INTRUSION-RESILIENT SFL 2187

preservation. Alamleh et al. [17] standardize and benchmark TABLE I
machine learning–based IDS in FL for healthcare applications C LASS D ISTRIBUTION ACROSS DATASETS
using a multicriteria decision-making framework. A decision
matrix is generated by utilizing a dataset of 125,973 records
and 41 attributes, and the fuzzy Delphi technique is employed
to standardize evaluation criteria. Borda voting is used to
assign weights and choose the best solution. Hallaji et al. [18]
investigate the various forms of dangers and adversaries that
decentralized FL encounters, as well as its security mechanisms, dependability, and authenticity. FL is recognized for
its privacy-preserving features, but sharing model updates can
compromise model performance and data privacy. Decentralized FL aims to minimize server-related risks by leveraging
blockchain technology; however, this raises additional privacy
concerns. Santos et al. [19] introduce an FL model for a reliable network-based IDS with high-confidence model updates
over time. Unsupervised classification reliability evaluation in
a federated architecture eliminates probable misclassifications consumption. This framework contains numerous vulnerabiliwhile lowering model update costs. Using the MAWIFlow ties that enable attackers to reconstruct clients’ private training
dataset, experiments reduced false-positive and false-negative data, according to the research. A compromised or hostile
rates by up to 12% and 9.6%, respectively. They also improved server can modify distributed learning, exposing client data
false-positive reduction and reduced update costs. Pedro et al. in a vulnerable model state. Several datasets are used to test
[20] evaluate the efficiency of differential privacy approaches different attack variations under realistic threat scenarios. The
in training an FL-based IDS for industrial IoT. The ToN IoT CPU capacity of edge devices, such as IoT devices, is insuffidataset’s non-IID data is used to compare privacy levels and cient to manage large machine learning models with millions
aggregation methods, including FedAvg and Fed+. The results of parameters. Client-server confidentiality during training and
show that Fed+ maintains similar precision even when noise testing is also critical. SL addressed these concerns by dividing
is introduced during federated training. the model between clients and the server, allowing each to train
 its own section without communicating data or models [25].
 SFL integrates the privacy and model-splitting benefits of SL
C. Split Federated Learning with the speed of FL.
 This paper introduces XAI-EdgeSFL, a secure and trans-
 Thapa et al. [21] introduce SFL, a hybrid of FL and Split
 parent edge healthcare architecture that integrates adaptive
Learning (SL) that combines their advantages while mitigatintrusion-resilient SFL and XAI. A lightweight TCN on edge
ing their limitations. Relay-based client coordination slows
 devices extracts local features while a global server performs
training in SL, but it provides better model privacy and suits
 complex classification tasks, saving raw data on the devices
resource-constrained scenarios. However, SFL considerably
 for data privacy. An adaptive aggregation technique enhances
reduces computing time per global epoch for multiple clients
 resilience to cyberattacks, while a multi-modal XAI suite
while retaining accuracy and communication efficiency. Data
 presents interpretability for clinical trust. The experimental
privacy and model robustness are enhanced by differential
 results show that XAI-EdgeSFL enhances privacy, security,
privacy and PixelDP. Experiments show that SFL scales adeand transparency in AI-powered healthcare systems.
quately with client count and works well in privacy-preserving
scenarios [6]. Otoum et al. [22] suggest that the SL approach
is effective in achieving a higher detection rate, accuracy, III. P ROPOSED M ETHOD : XAI-E DGE SFL F RAMEWORK
and classification performance for an IDS. The prospective Figure 1 illustrates that XAI-EdgeSFL is a secure edge
security concerns have been addressed by employing the health monitoring solution that integrates adaptive, intrusion-
SL-based IDS for advanced transportation systems. The pro- resilient SFL with XAI. TCN extracts features on clients,
posed model has been analyzed and compared to other models, thereby preserving the confidentiality, while the classifier is
including FL and transfer learning solutions. Compared to executed on the global server. Adaptive aggregation improves
FL and transfer learning, the suggested SL achieves a 2–5% resilience, whereas SHAP, LIME, and integrated gradients
improvement in accuracy and a 5% improvement in detection provide feature-level explanations. The method architecture is
rates, respectively. Turina et al. [23] propose SFL, a hybrid of discussed in the following subsections.
federated and SL that incorporates their privacy and efficiency
advantages. SFL has a superior accuracy-privacy tradeoff than
parallel SL, allows for concurrent processing, and minimizes A. Dataset Preparation
client processing requirements. Additionally, it maintains high The proposed approach was evaluated using three realistic
accuracy on imbalanced data. Pasquini et al. [24] examine the datasets. CICIoMT20241 [26] targets healthcare IoT devices,
security implications of SL, a collaborative machine learning
approach that aims for high performance and low resource 1 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/iomt-dataset-2024.html
2188 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

Fig. 1. XAI-EdgeSFL: Proposed system illustrating the integration of XAI with Adaptive Intrusion-Resilient SFL for consumer healthcare ecosystems.

simulating attacks on 40 devices (25 real, 15 virtual) communi- where k = min(5, nminority − 1) is the adaptive parameter
cating via Wi-Fi, MQTT, and Bluetooth. It includes five attack setting, xi is an instance of the minority class, x j is one of
types: DDoS, DoS, reconnaissance, MQTT-based attacks, its k-nearest neighbors, and λ ∼ U(0, 1). The application of
and spoofing. Traffic was captured through a network tap, SMOTE is appropriate due to its simplicity, computational
generating a dataset by replaying real-time packets between efficiency, broad adoption within the research community, and
the switch and IoMT devices. N-BaIoT2 [27] was created its capability to address class imbalance in feature-based learnin a laboratory by infecting nine commercial IoT devices ing environments. The TCN architecture suggested processing
with Mirai botnet traffic, enabling evaluation of the method’s fixed-length sequential segments separately and concentrates
ability to detect malicious communications from compromised on local patterns rather than long-term components. SMOTE
devices. Finally, CICIDS20173 [28] solves the constraints of provides an effective and realistic approach to balancing data
synthetic IDS datasets by presenting legitimate benign traffic without compromising detection accuracy. Following class
alongside recent attacks. The B-Profile system imitates user balancing, equation 2 is used to apply feature standardization.
actions across many protocols. It generates labeled PCAPs
 xi − µ
and flow-based CSV files, which are then used for accurate x̃i ← (2)
attack evaluation. Table I shows the class distribution for σ
the CICIoMT2024, N-BaIoT, and CICIDS2017 datasets. It where µ and σ represent the mean and standard deviation
illustrates the class imbalance in the datasets by showing the of each feature dimension, respectively. This transformation
quantity and proportion of samples for each attack and benign assures E[ x̃] = 0 and Var[ x̃] = 1, allowing for enhanced
class. For instance, CICIoMT2024 is primarily composed of model convergence during training. The data is converted
DDoS and DoS attacks, N-BaIoT primarily consists of UDP into a sequential format using a sequence length L during
traffic, and CICIDS2017 has a higher proportion of benign and the preprocessing procedure, which is critical for identifybrute-force samples. ing network traffic behaviors during the temporal analysis.
 The preprocessing stage involves data segmentation using an
B. Data Preprocessing and Feature Engineering 80-20 stratified split, followed by client distribution using
 equations 3 and 4.
 The data preprocessing pipeline starts by loading the dataset
D = {(xi , yi )}i=1
 M
 , where yi indicates class labels and xi ∈ Rd Dtrain , Dtest ← TrainTestSplit(Dbalanced ) (3)
indicates feature vectors. To maintain data integrity, the system N
 {Dk }k=1 ← IIDPartition(Dtrain , N) (4)
cleans all rows with missing or infinite values using Dclean ←
RemoveNaN(D). The framework employs SMOTE (Synthetic
 This distribution strategy maintains statistical properties
Minority Over-sampling Technique) to mitigate the significant
 across clients, supporting robust FL performance. It is critical
problem of imbalanced class proportions in intrusion detecto clarify the experimental design regarding data distribution.
tion datasets. This technique generates synthetic samples for
 The TCN architecture and adaptive aggregation, which are
minority classes to generate Dbalanced ← SMOTE(Dclean ) [29],
 essential processes in the XAI-EdgeSFL system, are inves-
[30]. This method generates new instances by interpolation
 tigated in the context of an IID partition. This is a controlled
using equation 1.
 baseline that allows for easy separation of model perforx̂ = xi + λ · (x j − xi ) (1) mance and the confounding variable of data heterogeneity.
 Sections I and V explore the significance of our adaptive
 2 https://ieee-dataport.org/documents/n-baiot aggregation technique in addressing non-IID data challenges
 3 https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/ids-2017.html in real-world federated healthcare implementation.
ZHAO et al.: EXPLAINABLE EDGE INTELLIGENCE WITH ADAPTIVE INTRUSION-RESILIENT SFL 2189

Algorithm 1 Multi-Head TCN Client Update TABLE II
 TCN A RCHITECTURE H YPERPARAMETERS

 where Conv1Dd is dilated convolution, BN is batch normalization, and Proj is a 1 × 1 convolution (linear projection) that
 matches dimensions for the residual connection when input
 and output channel counts differ. The architecture follows
 standard TCN designs with optimizations for edge computing
 constraints. The network initiates with input reshaping, as
 indicated by the expression Xb0 ← reshape(Xb ). Subsequently,
 an input projection layer is implemented using equation 6.

 Z ← Wproj Xb0 (6)

 The adaptable projection matrix, which converts the input
 features into a representation suitable for temporal processing,
 is denoted by Wproj . The main innovation is the multi-head
 TCN design that uses H parallel temporal blocks with 2h−1
 dilation rates that increase exponentially from h = 1 to H
 [32]. Equation 7 is employed by each head to analyze the
 estimated input Z through temporal blocks.

 T h ← TemporalBlock(Z, dilationh ) (7)

 Subsequently, the global average pooling hh ←
 GlobalAvgPool(T h ) is carried out to obtain concise temporal
 representations. The multi-head outputs are accumulated
 in H ← H ∪ {hh } and subsequently integrated through an
 attention procedure that employs equation 8.
C. Client-Side: Lightweight Temporal Features Extraction α ← softmax(W2 tanh(W1 Hconcat )) (8)
 The client-side processing is implemented using a
lightweight TCN architecture that is optimized for resource- Here, Hconcat ← concat(H) and α indicate dynamic attention
constrained edge devices, as illustrated in Figure 2. Sequential weights for distinct temporal scales. Equation 9 provides the
network traffic data is processed by the TCN in batches, as final client representation.
illustrated in Algorithm 1. Each batch consists of sequences H
(Xb , yb ), with Xb representing input characteristics and yb
 X
 hfinal ← αh · hh (9)
the matching labels [31]. The TCN employs dilated causal h=1
convolutions where output at time t depends only on inputs
 This design efficiently extracts features while ensuring priat times t0 ≤ t, with dilation factors increasing exponentially
 vacy by processing raw data locally and sending just the
across layers. The TemporalBlock implements residual conconcise representation hfinal to the global server for attack
nections using dilated causal convolutional layers as shown in
 classification. For reproducibility, Table II presents the TCN
equation 5. It provides the complete architectural specification
 architecture hyperparameters. These parameters are selected
for reproducibility, with edge optimizations including multito balance model capacity with the computational constraints
head design and parameter efficiency.
 of edge healthcare devices. To ensure statistical reliability,
 the experimental results are based on multiple independent
 H1 = ReLU(BN(Conv1Dd (X)))
 runs using different random seeds. The selected sequence
 H2 = ReLU(BN(Conv1Dd (H1 ))) length balanced the temporal pattern capture and processing
 Output = ReLU(H2 + Proj(X)) (5) performance for the edge deployment across all three datasets.
2190 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

D. Server-Side: Global Deep Neural Network Algorithm 2 XAI-EdgeSFL: Multi-Head TCN With Adaptive
 Split Federated Learning
 A Deep Neural Network (DNN) classifier is implemented
on the server-side architecture to analyze the concise temporal
features that obtain from client devices. The classification
is performed by the server using the global model f s (·; Θ s )
after receiving the client representation hfinal ∈ RB×256 [33]).
Equation 10 is used to perform the transformation in the
server-side classifier, which is constructed as a DNN with
hidden dimensions.

 ŷb ← f s (hfinal ; Θ(k)
 s ) (10)

 The class probabilities for batch Xb are represented by ŷb .
The network employs a sequential design that incorporates
batch normalization and dropout after each hidden layer to
enhance the stability of the training process and improve
generalization. Equation 11 is employed to determine the
forward propagation through the server network.

 Layer1 = BatchNorm(ReLU(W1 hfinal + b1 ))
 Layer2 = BatchNorm(ReLU(W2 Layer1 + b2 ))
 Layer3 = BatchNorm(ReLU(W3 Layer2 + b3 ))
 ŷb = W4 Layer3 + b4 (11)

where the learnable biases and weights of the server model
Θ s are denoted as bi and Wi , respectively. We optimize
it by applying the cross-entropy loss function with the L2
regularization equation 12. Equation 13 updates the server
model parameters using gradient descent.

 L ← CrossEntropy(ŷb , yb ) + λkΘk22 (12)
 s ← Θ s − η∇Θ(k)
 Θ(k) (k)
 s
 L (13)

 The server-side architecture ensures that only intermediate
features are transferred, rather than sensitive healthcare data,
preserving the privacy-protecting characteristic of the split
learning framework. This method enables effective classification while maintaining patient confidentiality throughout the
FL process.

E. Adaptive Split Federated Learning Framework
 SFL divides the neural network among devices of the
network and a central server, thus maintaining data privacy
and avoiding computational load on the local devices. The
federated learning hyperparameters are formally stated as
T= 50 communication rounds, where each round follows 1) Federated Learning Optimization and Client Selection:
E= 1 local training round, and a client participation rate The framework coordinates distributed training among N
p = 1.0 to ensure full client participation. They have been clients over T federated rounds while protecting data privacy
chosen strategically to provide a consistent and repeatable through selective client involvement, as described in Algobasis of the evaluation of the core contributions. In addition rithm 2. Equation 14 determines which clients are active in
to the adaptive aggregation technique and split architecture each round t.
based on TCNs, the hyperparameters are based on FL concepts
designed to handle client drift. All local client updates are St ⊂ {1, . . ., N} with |St | = bpNc (14)
performed using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of
0.001 and batch size 32. This arrangement generated consistent Here, p represents the client participation rate. Each client
and high-quality results across all three cybersecurity datasets k ∈ St begins with the global model parameters (Θ(t−1)
 c , Θ(t−1)
 s )
examined in our experiments. and optimizes its personal dataset Dk using the client TCN
ZHAO et al.: EXPLAINABLE EDGE INTELLIGENCE WITH ADAPTIVE INTRUSION-RESILIENT SFL 2191

update process defined in equation 15.

 c , Θs
 Θ(t,k) (t,k)
 ← ClientTCNUpdate(k, Θ(t−1)
 c , Θ(t−1)
 s ) (15)
 2) Privacy-Preserving Split Architecture: The framework
implements a sophisticated split learning methodology that
physically distributes the processing workload between the
central server and client devices [5], [6]. A multi-head TCN
model, as shown in equation 16, is employed to perform
processing on the client side.
 fc (·; Θc ) ← ClientSideTCN(din , H, L) (16)
 This design transforms the initial input data into useful
intermediate patterns, while the classification process is carried
out by the global server according to equation 17.
 f s (·; Θ s ) ← ServerSideClassifier(H × dhidden ) (17)
 This architectural separation ensures sensitive healthcare
data remains exclusively on client devices, with only privacypreserving features being transmitted to the server [21].
 3) Performance-Based Aggregation Mechanism: A
dynamic aggregation mechanism is introduced, which is Fig. 2. Client-side TCN for feature extraction in SFL using dilated convolutions to capture temporal patterns in network traffic.
influenced by client performance metrics. Equation 18 is used
to calculate aggregation weights when each client evaluates
its model as Ak ← Evaluate(Θ(t,k) (t,k)
 c , Θ s , Dk ). Ak represents standard datasets: CICIoMT2024, N-BaIoT, and CICIDS2017.
the local model accuracy of client k. We evaluated performance by utilizing precision, recall,
 exp(Ak /τ) F-measure, and accuracy, respectively. These measures are
 w(t)
 k = (18) derived from True Positive (TP), False Positive (FP),
 j∈St exp(A j /τ)
 P
 True Negative (TN), and False Negative (FN) values.
where τ = 0.1 denotes the temperature parameter that deter- Equation 21- 24 provides performance measurements.
mines the sharpness of the softmax function. A smaller τ value
 TP
emphasizes variations in client accuracies, providing higher- Precision = (21)
performing clients proportionally significant weights in the T P + FP
 TP
aggregate. This selective weighting helps the model converge Recall = (22)
faster while making it more resistant to clients that are either T P + FN
 2 × TP
underperforming or acting maliciously. The global model then F-measure = (23)
gets updated using a weighted average (Equation 19). We then 2 × T P + FP + FN
 TP + TN
run a full performance evaluation (Equation 20) to assess the Accuracy = (24)
results. T P + T N + FP + FN
 X (t) X (t)
 Θ(t)
 c ← wk Θ(t,k)
 c , Θ(t)
 s ← wk Θ(t,k)
 s (19) B. Performance Analysis and Comparisons
 k∈St k∈St
 Figure 3 shows client accuracy rising from roughly
 L(t) , A(t) , F1(t) ← Test(Θ(t)
 c , Θ s , Dtest )
 (t)
 (20) 20% to over 92% for CICIoMT2024 and to 92–99% for
 This method aggregates model updates in a way that N-BaIoT. The global models achieved 86.15% and 93.73%,
improves robustness and speeds up convergence. It works respectively, demonstrating effective privacy-preserving learnby assigning higher importance to clients with strong perfor- ing. Figure 4 confirms substantial gains; client accuracy
mance, enabling the system to dynamically select the most improved to 71–93% on CICIoMT2024 and to 85–97%
dependable contributions each round. This steadily improves on CICIDS2017, with global models reaching 79.15% and
accuracy and stability. Together, split learning, adaptive client 92.37%. This highlights strong multi-client collaboration for
selection, and this performance-based approach make collab- security tasks. Figure 5 shows adaptive aggregation weights for
orative training secure and fast, even in highly distributed or three clients using CICIDS2017. Weights fluctuated between
remote scenarios. 0.24 and 0.41, with a maximum of 0.4020, indicating the
 framework rebalances the global model to prioritize higherquality updates. Convergence is shown as weights stabilize,
 IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
 achieving global accuracies of 86.15%, 93.73%, and 99.46%
A. Performance Metrics while maintaining fairness. Figure 6 presents weights for
 We chose a variety of network traffic-based datasets and 8 clients using CICIoMT2024.
several clients to thoroughly test the proposed method. Table III shows the proposed approach on CICIoMT2024,
The suggested method is tested with three publicly available with three clients achieved strong performance. F1-scores
2192 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 Fig. 5. Adaptive aggregated weights under the 3-client configuration using
 CICIDS2017 dataset.

Fig. 3. Accuracy curves of individual clients and the aggregated global
model under the 3-client configuration using CICIoMT2024, N-BaIoT, and
CICIDS2017.

 Fig. 6. Adaptive aggregated weights under the 8-client configuration using
 IoMT dataset.

 TABLE III
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS U SING CICI O MT2024
 DATASET W ITH 3 C LIENTS

 TABLE IV
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS U SING CICI O MT2024
 DATASET W ITH 5 C LIENTS

Fig. 4. Accuracy curves of individual clients and the aggregated global
model under the 8-client configuration using CICIoMT2024, N-BaIoT, and Benign and Spoofing classes scored 0.91 and 0.92, demon-
CICIDS2017.
 strating reliable detection in a larger client setup.
 Table V shows the model’s performance on the N-BaIoT
 dataset with three clients. High classification accuracy was
reached 0.97 for MQTT, 0.96 for Recon, and 0.92 for Spoofing achieved for all attacks, with Scan and Syn classes obtaining
attacks. While DDoS had a high recall at 0.98 with a lower F1-scores of 1.00 and 0.99, respectively, and UDP and UDP
precision of 0.60, detection was consistent overall. Similarly, Plain classes scoring 0.96 and 0.89. The Ack class had a
Table IV for five clients shows maintained robustness. MQTT slightly lower F1-score of 0.82, yet the model remained
and Recon achieved F1-scores of 0.97 and 0.94, while the robust across attack types. Table VI for five clients shows
ZHAO et al.: EXPLAINABLE EDGE INTELLIGENCE WITH ADAPTIVE INTRUSION-RESILIENT SFL 2193

 TABLE V findings show that, despite the increased client setup, the
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON N-BA I OT DATASET W ITH 3 C LIENTS model retained high detection capacity across all classes.
 Brute Force and XSS achieved F1-scores of 0.98 and 0.94,
 while Benign and SQL Injection obtained 0.89. Table X
 evaluates the performance across various client settings using
 the CICIDS2017 dataset. A decline in global accuracy from
 99.46% to 88.01% and an increase in global loss are observed
 as the number of clients increases from 3 to 10. As client
 heterogeneity rises in FL, model divergence in non-IID envi-
 TABLE VI
 ronments emerges. Heterogeneous data distributions across
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON N-BA I OT DATASET W ITH 5 C LIENTS
 IoT devices cause local model updates to conflict, making
 global convergence challenging. XAI-EdgeSFL is resilient to
 decreases, maintaining competitive accuracy (88.01% with
 10 clients) using adaptive aggregation that dynamically
 weights client contributions based on trust scores, minimizing divergence effects. The performance comparison between
 various existing FL-based research and the proposed XAI-
 TABLE VII EdgeSFL approach is shown in Table XI. XAI-EdgeSFL
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON CICIDS2017 DATASET W ITH 3 C LIENTS improves performance with a lightweight multi-head TCN
 for edge feature extraction, adaptive aggregation to prioritize
 reliable clients, and a multi-modal XAI suite for transparency
 and refinement.
 The main performance trade-offs that are presented by the
 proposed architecture are shown in Table XII. The results
 show that privacy preservation incurs a major overhead of
 TABLE VIII 6,360KB/round on communication and incurs inference time
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON CICIDS2017 DATASET W ITH 5 C LIENTS and client training time of 35.6 ms and 148 ms, respectively.
 This system has a steady round completion time of 0.63 seconds and an effective bandwidth utilization of 10,021 KB/Sec.
 This performance balance is appropriate in edge healthcare
 implementations, whereby privacy promotes better communication. The proposed XAI-EdgeSFL achieves 99.46%accuracy,
 supports local data processing to ensure privacy, integrates
 TABLE IX XAI tools to make the model explainable, and uses adaptive
 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ON CICIDS2017 DATASET W ITH 8 C LIENTS client weighting, demonstrated in Table R1P1. Centralized
 training has the best accuracy of 99.84%, although it requires
 the raw data to be aggregated, which may not be useful with
 distributed IoT, thus compromising data privacy. Compared
 to federated solutions, XAI-EdgeSFL is 10.31% better than
 the standard FL and 8.10% better than the traditional SFL.
 The unique combination of explainability and adaptability
consistent performance, with Scan and Syn classes achieving makes XAI-EdgeSFL the most compatible approach for secure
0.99 F1-scores, UDP and UDP Plain at 0.89 and 0.88, and and intelligible intrusion detection. The lightweight TCN
Ack at 0.76. Table VII shows that the suggested detection is effective in edge deployments as shown by Table XIV.
system demonstrates a very promising performance on the Compared to a typical TCN, the model achieves a higher
CICIDS2017 data set when the assessment is conducted on accuracy (+ 0.34) and F1 score (+ 0.38) with only around
three client nodes. Specifically, the Brute-force and XSS attack 82% fewer parameters. It also provides approximately 75%
groups scored the highest possible F1-score of 1.00, with faster inference with 35.6ms and less memory requirements
the Benign traffic and the SQL-Injection category scoring an of about 80% lower.
F1-score of 0.99. Table VIII shows the assessment of five
clients using the given dataset. In line with the previous obser- C. Multi-Modal Explainable AI Framework
vations, the model has a high degree of detection accuracy for We use a multi-modal XAI suite that includes SHAP, LIME,
all classes. In particular, the F1-score of the benign and SQL- and IG because of their combined strengths in addressing the
injection attacks was 0.96 and 0.97, respectively, whereas the interpretability of our SFL architecture. IG provides reliable
brute-force and XSS attacks were again correctly identified gradient-based attributions for deep TCN and DNN models,
with F1-scores of 1.00. allowing for an effective understanding of feature contribu-
 Table IX shows the performance analysis of the proposed tions. SHAP generates consistent global feature importance
model on the CICIDS2017 dataset with eight clients. The values using cooperative game theory, allowing analysts to find
2194 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

 TABLE X
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ACROSS D IFFERENT C LIENT C ONFIGURATIONS U SING CICIDS2017 DATASET

 TABLE XI
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON W ITH R ELATED P UBLISHED S TUDIES

 TABLE XII
 P ERFORMANCE T RADE - OFF M EASUREMENTS FOR XAI-E DGE SFL

 TABLE XIII
 P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON ON CIC-IDS2017 DATASET
 Fig. 7. Global features immportance from CICIoMT2024 dataset.

 feature contributions across many attack categories [36], [37].
 The framework uses a multi-modal XAI suite, started as
 X ← XAIAnalyzer( fc , f s , F, C). This incorporates the feature
 TABLE XIV extractor fc and the classifier f s on the client side, as well
 E FFICIENCY C OMPARISON : L IGHTWEIGHT V S . S TANDARD TCN as the feature labels F and the class labels C. The system
 produces complementary explanations for each test sample
 sample
 (x, y) ∈ Dtest using several strategies as indicated in equations 25 and 26.

 φ(x) ← X .integrated gradients analysis(x) (25)
 E(x) ← {φIG , φS HAP , φLI ME } (26)
the most significant network indicators across the federated
model. LIME provides locally interpretable, model-agnostic The global feature importance for IDS is identified by
explanations for individual predictions. This feature is vital the XAI analysis from our secure adaptive SFL framefor analyzing specific instances of attacks, which helps build work, as illustrated in Figure 7. The model trained over
trust in medical professionals working with edge networks. 50 federation rounds and identified Net Feature 10 (1.241),
Integrated Gradients and SHAP, which are designed for Net Feature 15 (1.206), and Net Feature 43 (1.168) as
split-learning architectures, give more complex explanation the most critical indications of malicious conduct. This feamethods than LIME, which delivers instance-level insights ture hierarchy, which includes secondary contributors like
without internal model access. Cybersecurity specialists can Net Feature 7 (1.087) and Net Feature 14 (0.969), shows
utilize these tools to confirm the reasoning underlying threat a distributed set of critical network characteristics for distindetection and norm compliance criteria, as well as to design guishing between benign and malicious traffic. The analysis
more intelligible algorithms that improve system confidence. gives practical insights for protecting privacy and optimizing
These approaches are especially useful for identifying large security monitoring and feature selection in FL.
ZHAO et al.: EXPLAINABLE EDGE INTELLIGENCE WITH ADAPTIVE INTRUSION-RESILIENT SFL 2195

Fig. 8. LIME explanations for attack predictions, demonstrating feature contributions across attack classes. Each subplot shows the top attributes influencing
the model’s decision, with positive (blue) and negative (red) contributions indicating their relevance. Net Feature X labels identify network traffic aspects
such as flow timing, packet size, and protocol characteristics based on their position in the preprocessed dataset.

Fig. 9. IG-based feature attribution analysis showing network traffic feature relevance across attack classes with positive (blue) and negative (red) bars.
Net Feature X feature indices from the processed dataset represent flow time, packet statistics, and protocol anomalies that influence model decisions.

 Figure 8 shows LIME explanations for spoofing and syn healthcare. The methodology provides effective feature extracattacks. For the spoofing attack, low values of features like tion and classification, and the sensitive data are stored
Net Feature 21, 13, 18, and 19 are shown as blue bars, locally by the implementation of lightweight TCN on conincreasing the prediction probability, while red bars decrease sumer devices and more advanced classifiers on a global
it. For the Syn attack, low values of Net Feature 27, 89, 70, server. The adaptive aggregation scheme provides even deeper
and 67 appear as red bars, lowering its probability, while fea- resilience to changing cyber threats, and the multimodal XAI
tures like Net Feature 20 and 41 appear as blue bars, raising framework, such as SHAP, LIME, and integrated gradients,
it. A similar analysis applies to XSS attacks on CICIDS2017. provides understandable information enabling the building
These color-coded visualizations clarify feature contributions, of clinical trust. The suggested method provides a strong
enabling analysts to verify model reliability, identify biases, protection against zero-day attacks based on a multimodal
and enhance detection accuracy. XAI package of SHAP, LIME, and Integrated Gradients.
 Figure 9 shows the feature attributions of XAI of the spoof- The suite may enable security professionals to query lowing and Syn attacks. In the case of the spoofing, there are red confidence predictions and identify abnormal traffic patterns,
bars that depict features Net Feature 10, 9, 39, 38, and 36, such as unknown types of attacks. The explainability-oriented,
which influence the model prediction negatively. In contrast, human-in-the-loop paradigm provides powerful investigation
the blue bars of Net Feature 40, 32, and 0 show a contribut- speed without the need to retrain the models. The resulting
ing effect that is positive and increases confidence. The same federated retraining cycle to implement a new class of attacks
trend can be seen with Syn attack, with Net Feature 30, 58, may be simplified in the future through lightweight continual
21, 44, 3, and 68 being red, which reduces the probability learning methods. The cryptographic mechanisms can also be
of the prediction, and Net Feature 18, 11, and 77 being included in future research to protect the model updates and
blue, which enhances it. The visualization can help an analyst aggregation in the process of SF to contribute to privacy and
confirm the reliability of the model, detect possible biases, and trust. Potential study areas include homomorphic encryption,
improve the detection capabilities in spoofing, Syn, and SQL- secure multi-party computation, and differential privacy. Such
injection attacks. Server-side XAI analysis is conducted in the methods can be integrated to protect important updates from
aggregation model globally during inference, thus eliminating being intercepted or altered.
computational overhead. Edge clients do not need to provide
SHAP, LIME, or IG explanations during training or inference,
which optimizes resource-limited edge devices to do real-time R EFERENCES
feature extraction and, at the same time, allows transparency
 [1] M. Wazid, J. Singh, A. K. Das, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “An ensembleand validation by the XAI suite. based machine learning-envisioned intrusion detection in Industry 5.0-
 driven healthcare applications,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 70,
 V. C ONCLUSION no. 1, pp. 1903–1912, Feb. 2024.
 [2] P. Liu et al., “Two-in-one solution: Simultaneously enhancing secu-
 The paper introduces a novel framework known as XAI- rity and privacy for data-driven models in mobile edge computing,”
EdgeSFL of XAI and Adaptive Intrusion-Resilient SFL to IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 6539–6547,
promote security, privacy, and transparency in edge-based May 2025.
2196 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 72, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2026

[3] P. Ranaweera, A. D. Jurcut, and M. Liyanage, “Survey on multi-access [21] C. Thapa, P. C. M. Arachchige, S. Camtepe, and L. Sun, “SplitFed:
 edge computing security and privacy,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., When federated learning meets split learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif.
 vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 1078–1124, 2nd Quart., 2021. Intell., 2022, pp. 8485–8493.
[4] V. Mothukuri, P. Khare, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, [22] S. Otoum, N. Guizani, and H. Mouftah, “On the feasibility of split
 and G. Srivastava, “Federated-learning-based anomaly detection for IoT learning, transfer learning and federated learning for preserving security
 security attacks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 2545–2554, in ITS systems,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 24, no. 7,
 Feb. 2022. pp. 7462–7470, Jul. 2023.
[5] L. U. Khan, M. Guizani, S. Muhaidat, and M. Ayyash, “QoS-enabled [23] V. Turina, Z. Zhang, F. Esposito, and I. Matta, “Federated or split? A
 wireless split federated learning: A reinforcement learning and opti- performance and privacy analysis of hybrid split and federated learning
 mization approach,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 3, architectures,” in Proc. IEEE 14th Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. (CLOUD),
 pp. 8968–8978, Aug. 2025. Sep. 2021, pp. 250–260.
[6] J. Shen et al., “RingSFL: An adaptive split federated learning towards [24] D. Pasquini, G. Ateniese, and M. Bernaschi, “Unleashing the tiger:
 taming client heterogeneity,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., vol. 23, Inference attacks on split learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf.
 no. 5, pp. 5462–5478, May 2024. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2021, pp. 2113–2129.
[7] X. Liu, Y. Deng, and T. Mahmoodi, “Wireless distributed learning: A [25] C. Thapa, M. A. P. Chamikara, and S. A. Camtepe, “Advancements
 new hybrid split and federated learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Wireless of federated learning towards privacy preservation: From feder-
 Commun., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2650–2665, Apr. 2023. ated learning to split learning,” in Federated Learning Systems:
[8] R. Dwivedi et al., “Explainable AI (XAI): Core ideas, techniques, and Towards Next-Generation AI. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021,
 solutions,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 1–33, Sep. 2023. pp. 79–109.
[9] F. Ullah, L. Mostarda, D. Cacciagrano, M. J. F. Alenazi, C.-M. Chen, [26] S. Dadkhah et al., “CICIoMT2024: Attack vectors in healthcare
 and S. Kumari, “Federated edge intelligence for enhanced security in devices—A multi-protocol dataset for assessing IoMT device security,”
 consumer intermittent healthcare devices using adversarial examples,” Tech. Rep., 2024.
 IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 4574–4585, May [27] Y. Meidan et al., “N-BaIoT—Network-based detection of IoT botnet
 2025. attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Comput., vol. 17,
[10] F. Lin, Y. Zhou, X. An, I. You, and K.-K.-R. Choo, “Fair resource no. 3, pp. 12–22, Jul. 2018.
 allocation in an intrusion-detection system for edge computing: Ensuring [28] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating
 the security of Internet of Things devices,” IEEE Consum. Electron. a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,”
 Mag., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 45–50, Nov. 2018. ICISSp, vol. 1, pp. 108–116, Mar. 2018.
[11] J.-F. Cui, H. Xia, R. Zhang, B.-X. Hu, and X.-G. Cheng, “Optimization [29] F. Ullah, S. Ullah, G. Srivastava, and J. C.-W. Lin, “IDS-INT: Intruscheme for intrusion detection scheme GBDT in edge computing sion detection system using transformer-based transfer learning for
 center,” Comput. Commun., vol. 168, pp. 136–145, Feb. 2021. imbalanced network traffic,” Digit. Commun. Netw., vol. 10, no. 1,
[12] A. Singh and K. Chatterjee, “Securing smart healthcare system with edge pp. 190–204, Feb. 2024.
 computing,” Comput. Secur., vol. 108, Sep. 2021, Art. no. 102353. [30] A. Roy, R. M. O. Cruz, R. Sabourin, and G. D. C. Cavalcanti,
[13] M. Eskandari, Z. H. Janjua, M. Vecchio, and F. Antonelli, “Passban IDS: “A study on combining dynamic selection and data preprocess-
 An intelligent anomaly-based intrusion detection system for IoT edge ing for imbalance learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 286, pp. 179–192,
 devices,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 6882–6897, Aug. Apr. 2018.
 2020. [31] P. F. De Araujo-Filho, M. Naili, G. Kaddoum, E. T. Fapi, and Z. Zhu,
[14] W. Yao, K. Zhang, C. Yu, and H. Zhao, “Exploiting ensemble learning “Unsupervised GAN-based intrusion detection system using temporal
 for edge-assisted anomaly detection scheme in e-healthcare system,” in convolutional networks and self-attention,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service
 Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021, pp. 1–7. Manage., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 4951–4963, Dec. 2023.
[15] R. Kumari, D. K. Sah, S. Gupta, K. Cengiz, and N. Ivković, “Advancing [32] L. Zhao et al., “T-GCN: A temporal graph convolutional network for
 medical recommendations with federated learning on decentralized traffic prediction,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 21, no. 9,
 data: A roadmap for implementation,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., pp. 3848–3858, Sep. 2020.
 vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 2666–2674, Feb. 2024. [33] D. Akgun, S. Hizal, and U. Cavusoglu, “A new DDoS attacks intrusion
[16] M. Akter, N. Moustafa, T. Lynar, and I. Razzak, “Edge intelligence: detection model based on deep learning for cybersecurity,” Comput.
 Federated learning-based privacy protection framework for smart health- Secur., vol. 118, Jul. 2022, Art. no. 102748.
 care systems,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 26, no. 12, [34] S. Latif et al., “Mitigating model poisoning and tampering in
 pp. 5805–5816, Dec. 2022. consumer IoT with HMAC in split federated learning,” IEEE
[17] A. Alamleh et al., “Federated learning for IoMT applications: A Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 12312–12322,
 standardization and benchmarking framework of intrusion detec- Nov. 2025.
 tion systems,” IEEE J. Biomed. Health Informat., vol. 27, no. 2, [35] J. Cui et al., “Collaborative intrusion detection system for SDVN: A
 pp. 878–887, Feb. 2023. fairness federated deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
[18] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha, Syst., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2512–2528, Sep. 2023.
 and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated [36] A. Nascita, G. Aceto, D. Ciuonzo, A. Montieri, V. Persico,
 learning,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 115, pp. 619–640, Oct. and A. Pescapé, “A survey on explainable artificial intelligence
 2020. for Internet traffic classification and prediction, and intrusion
[19] R. R. dos Santos, E. K. Viegas, A. O. Santin, and P. Tedeschi, detection,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 3165–3198,
 “Federated learning for reliable model updates in network-based intru- 5th Quart., 2025.
 sion detection,” Comput. Secur., vol. 133, Oct. 2023, Art. no. 103413. [37] B. Sharma, L. Sharma, C. Lal, and S. Roy, “Explainable artificial
[20] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar et al., “Intrusion detection based on privacy- intelligence for intrusion detection in IoT networks: A deep learning
 preserving federated learning for the industrial IoT,” IEEE Trans. Ind. based approach,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 238, Mar. 2024, Art. no.
 Informat., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, Feb. 2023. 121751.