IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026 4893

ZOOMER: An APT TTP Recognition System via Deep
 & Wide Provenance Graph Learning
 Xuebo Qiu , Mingqi Lv , Tieming Chen , Tiantian Zhu , Member, IEEE, Qijie Song , and Zhiling Zhu

 Abstract—Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) commonly man- cybersecurity [1]. To inform systematic APT investigation,
ifest through a sequence of attack steps, known as Tactics, Tech- knowledge bases such as ATT&CK [2] codify the multi-stage
niques, and Procedures (TTPs). Recent studies identify TTPs by lifecycle of APTs into an operational taxonomy of Tactics,
converting audit logs into causal provenance graphs and applying
expert-driven mappings that correlate low-level system events with Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs), which structures intrusion
high-level TTP patterns. However, these methods face persistent progression and provides a common vocabulary that significhallenges: determining the impact boundaries of TTP activities, cantly supports security research and practice.
adapting to evolving TTP stacks, and recognizing fine-grained TTP In practice, an investigation typically begins when an Endsemantics for deeper forensic insights. To address these challenges, point Detection and Response (EDR) system raises an alert [3].
we present ZOOMER, a novel TTP recognition framework that segments provenance graphs into multiple TTP subgraphs with multi- Analysts must then rapidly verify its validity, trace the root
granular annotations (i.e., tactics, techniques, and sub-techniques). cause, and assess its broader impact. Given that alerts in isolation
First, we devise a heuristic subgraph sampling algorithm guided provide insufficient context for multi-stage APT investigation,
by anomalous node detection to precisely delineate the scope of recent work has utilized system provenance that transforms audit
TTP activities. Second, we introduce a dual-tower Deep & Wide logs into a structured graph (called provenance graph) capturarchitecture that integrates contextual behavior semantics from
provenance graphs and domain-informed features to learn expres- ing causal relations among system activities [4]. Provenance
sive TTP representations. Finally, we adopt a prototypical network graphs have empowered attack investigation via graph-theoretic
that reformulates TTP recognition as a few-shot pattern matching techniques, such as graph compression to alleviate analytical
task, thereby enhancing adaptability and accuracy under limited complexity [5], [6], [7], contextual behavior correlation to filter
supervision. To advance future research, we built and released the false alarms [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], and
first TTP-annotated provenance dataset, encompassing the most
comprehensive collection of TTP instances to date. Extensive ex- automated causal tracing to reconstruct attack scenarios [16],
periments show that ZOOMER achieves TTP recognition with 88% [17], [18], [19], [20], [21].
accuracy at the sub-technique level and 94% at the tactic level, Despite recent advances, a fundamental semantic gap persists
significantly outperforming state-of-the-art baselines. between low-level provenance data and high-level attack intents
 Index Terms—Advanced persistent threat (APTs), graph neural characterized by ATT&CK TTPs, which constrains the practical
network, ATT&CK TTP, data provenance.
 utility of APT knowledge during investigations. Take the Buran
 I. INTRODUCTION ransomware incident (Fig. 1) [22] as an example. Its lifecycle
 spans phishing-based initial access (T1566), script execution
 DVANCED Persistent Threats (APTs) remain one of the
A most persistent and sophisticated challenges in modern
 (T1059), persistence via registry modifications (T1547) and
 service manipulation (T1543), deletion of recovery mechanisms
 (T1490), and eventual file encryption (T1486), covering more
 Received 22 July 2024; revised 26 September 2025; accepted 15 December
2025. Date of publication 30 December 2025; date of current version 12 than ten ATT&CK techniques (detailed in Appendix A, available
May 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science online). As depicted in Fig. 1(a), these attack semantics (approx-
Foundation of China under Grant U22B2028 and Grant 62372410, in part imately 300 nodes) are deeply buried in a vast provenance graph
by the Key Research Program of Hangzhou under Grant 2025SZD1A56, in
part by the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China under that consists of more than 40,000 entities and 137,000 events.
Grant LD22F020002, in part by the Key Research Program of Shaoxing under Investigating attacks in such predominantly benign provenance
Grant 2025B11004, in part by the Key Research Program of Huzhou under Grant graphs presents a daunting task. Although intrusion detection
2025ZD2037, and in part by Zhejiang Province Leading Goose Program under
Grant 2025C01013. (Corresponding author: Mingqi Lv.) systems can reduce the search space by sifting through this
 Xuebo Qiu, Tiantian Zhu, Qijie Song, and Zhiling Zhu are with the Col- background noise to pinpoint suspicious entities [23], [24],
lege of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University of Tech- [25], [26], [27], their coarse binary classifications (benign or
nology, Hangzhou 310023, China, and also with the Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing, Hangzhou 310023, China malicious) yield only fragmented anomalies and fail to reveal
(e-mail: xueboqiu@zjut.edu.cn; ttzhu@zjut.edu.cn; songqijie@zjut.edu.cn; the potential attack intents. Consequently, analysts are left to
zhilingzhu@zjut.edu.cn). rely on their expertise to piece together explanatory views that
 Mingqi Lv and Tieming Chen are with the College of Geoinformatics, Zhejiang University of Technology, Huzhou 310014, China, and also with the Zhe- map observed anomalies to established TTP patterns. For exjiang Key Laboratory of Visual Information Intelligent Processing, Hangzhou ample, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), the abnormal modification of
310023, China (e-mail: mingqilv@zjut.edu.cn; tmchen@zjut.edu.cn). registry entries by the process vssvc.exe can be interpreted
 This article has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TDSC.2025.3646355, provided by the authors. as technique T1543. While such semantic correlation yields
 Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDSC.2025.3646355 actionable insights into adversarial intent and significantly aids

 1545-5971 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
4894 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 1. Provenance graphs of Buran ransomware attack lifecycle: (a) raw graph directly generated from audit logs, (b) simplified graph with TTP labels. Dotted
boxes represent different TTP patterns, red edges denote control and data flows between TTPs with operation types (ex=execute, ld=load, r=read, w=write,
d=delete, cn=connect, sn=send, rv=receive, sv=set-value, si=set-information), and the red-boxed Buran.exe denotes the primary malicious process.

 TABLE I discriminative representations enable accurate TTP recognition
 SIGMA RULE FOR T1027 RECOGNITION. ONLY KEY FIELDS
 ARE RETAINED FOR CLARITY.
 with minimal human involvement. Nevertheless, training finegrained TTP recognition models over large-scale provenance
 graphs introduces the following unique challenges, which this
 work aims to address.
 C1. Ambiguous Recognition Targets: Unlike APT detection,
 which has well-defined targets (i.e., a specific node or graph [23],
 [24]), TTP recognition often involves indistinct boundaries.
 Within a provenance graph, the scope of a TTP instance is
 difficult to delineate, as it may span from only a few nodes to
 several hundred. This ambiguity complicates the definition of
 recognition units.
 C2. Expansive and Evolving Label Space: TTP recognition
 is inherently a multi-class classification task with an unusually
investigation (Fig. 1(b)), the process remains labor-intensive, large label space. The ATT&CK matrix defines over 531 entercomplex and error-prone. prise techniques and sub-techniques, and this stack continually
 To alleviate these issues, prior research has attempted to expands as new TTPs are introduced. Such scale and dynamism
link system events to TTPs using expert-crafted rules [6], [16], strain model accuracy and adaptability.
[28], [29]. For instance, the sigma rule [30] in Table I flags C3. Complexity and Diversity of TTP Features: Although
technique T1027 when the process certutil.exe is invoked existing provenance graph representations have proven effective
with the “-encode” argument. Unfortunately, the ever-expanding in differentiating benign from malicious activities, they struggle
ATT&CK taxonomy (over 531 sub-techniques) renders such to capture discriminative features across the diverse spectrum
heuristic methods difficult to scale and costly to maintain. of TTP patterns. This limitation arises because distinctions be-
Moreover, shallow token dependencies (e.g., certutil.exe tween TTPs are often subtle (e.g., confusing T1003.001-9 with
and “-encode” in Table I) make these rules prone to false T1222.001-4, as discussed in Section IV-D), making accurate
positives [9], [31]. While follow-up studies enrich rules with recognition particularly difficult.
multi-step provenance context to reduce false alarms [6], [28], C4. Scarcity of TTP Samples: The sophistication and pro-
[29], these efforts essentially patch symptoms rather than root longed duration of APT campaigns lead to limited availability of
causes, resulting in increasingly complex and fragile rule sets. TTP samples. Most public datasets are curated for APT detection
By contrast, deep graph learning offers a promising alterna- rather than TTP recognition, and thus provide restricted TTP
tive, as it can autonomously capture high-order dependencies coverage. For example, DARPA TC E3 [32] includes merely
across heterogeneous entities in a data-driven manner, thereby 27 TTPs and lacks annotations. This scarcity hinders effective
encoding subtle distinctions among TTP patterns. The resulting model training and generalization.
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4895

 To address these challenges, we introduce ZOOMER1 , a pattern matching, while Tags [37] and Sleuth [39] incorporate
learning-based TTP recognition framework that segments prove- contextual interactions to improve detection robustness and
nance graphs into TTP-specific subgraphs and assigns multi- reduce false alarms. Although computationally efficient, these
granular labels (i.e., tactics, techniques, and sub-techniques) methods often fail to generalize to unseen attacks. Learningwith both efficiency and accuracy. To tackle challenge C1, a based methods instead employ deep learning models trained on
heuristic subgraph sampling algorithm that builds on the detec- large-scale provenance data to detect intrusions. Early supertion of anomalous process nodes, referred to as Nodes of Interest vised learning approaches [11], [18], [19], [26], [27], [41] train
(NOIs), is proposed to identify the boundaries of TTP instances. models on labeled attack samples using specialized optimiza-
For challenge C3, ZOOMER employs a dual-tower Deep & Wide tion mechanisms. However, given the scarcity of labeled data,
architecture [33], where a graph learning-based model serves as recent work [23], [24], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46] has shifted
the deep component to extract structural and semantic behavior to unsupervised learning paradigms. These methods model befeatures for broad generalization, while a knowledgeguided gen- nign behaviors on provenance data at scale and flag deviations
eralized linear model serves as the wide component to memorize as potential APTs [23], [24], [42], [43], [44], [45], [46], or
domainspecific TTP features. By integrating these complemen- cluster malicious network events to identify coordinated camtary features, ZOOMER constructs highly discriminative TTP paigns [47]. Recent provenance-based detectors further exploit
representations. To address challenges C2 and C4, ZOOMER Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) with self-supervised learning
adopts a few-shot learning method based on the prototypical to capture normal system behaviors. For instance, MAGIC [24]
network, and transforms TTP recognition from a multi-class employs a graph masked auto-encoder to reconstruct masked
classification task into a metric-based pattern matching problem. node features and structures, thereby encoding high-order se-
To support rigorous evaluations, we further built and released mantic and structural patterns of benign activity. Flash [25]
the KELLECT4APT dataset [34] by executing atomic TTP integrates a word semantic encoder with a GNN-based conscripts from Red Canary2 [35] and collecting the generated textual encoder to generate semantically rich embeddings of
audit logs with KELLECT3 [36]. The dataset spans 9 tactics, 26 benign nodes. THREATRACE [23] adapts an inductive GNN
techniques, 45 sub-techniques, and 473 procedures, representing to learn benign entity roles in streaming provenance data for
the most comprehensive TTP corpus to date. Our contributions real-time anomaly detection. The trained model flags anomalies
are summarized as follows: as deviations from the distribution of learned benign representar We propose a knowledge- and data-driven framework capa- tions. Despite their effectiveness, these methods remain limited
 ble of performing TTP recognition at multiple granularities to flagging isolated anomalies (e.g., individual nodes or edges
 based on prototypical network. in Fig. 1(b)) without clarifying how they map to higher-level
 r We design an NOI detection model combined with a heuris- TTP patterns or delineating their boundaries. These limitations
 tic subgraph sampling algorithm to efficiently segment motivate our work on TTP recognition, which explicitly extracts
 TTP subgraphs from provenance graphs. TTP subgraphs and infers their underlying patterns, thereby
 r We introduce a Deep & Wide architecture that extracts supporting more structured and insightful attack investigations.
 generalizable structural and semantic behavior features,
 and memorizes domain-informed features, thereby yield-
 B. TTP Recognition.
 ing robust and discriminative TTP representations.
 r We build and release the first provenance dataset with com- TTP recognition aims to align anomalous system behavprehensive TTP annotations, establishing a solid bench- iors with TTP patterns, thereby enriching the semantic context
 mark for future research. of attack investigations. Prior methods predominantly rely on
 r We conduct extensive experiments that demonstrated expert-crafted mappings. For instance, Holmes [28] formulates
 ZOOMER’s effectiveness, achieving recognition of 160 multiple TTP specifications to associate events with Kill-Chain
 TTPs with 88% accuracy at the sub-technique level and tactics, while E-Audit [18] correlates EDR rules with ATT&CK
 94% accuracy at the tactic level. techniques through statistical associations. However, their limited use of contextual anomaly information often causes elevated
 II. RELATED WORK AND LIMITATIONS false positives, particularly when benign processes mimic TTPlike behaviors. For instance, routine scheduled scripts executed
A. APT Detection
 via Powershell may be mistakenly classified as the “T1059:
 Current APT detection studies generally fall into rule-based Command and Script Interpreter” technique [48]. Later studies
and learning-based paradigms. Rule-based methods encode ex- address this by incorporating richer execution context [6], [18],
pert knowledge into handcrafted detection policies [6], [18], [28], [29]. APTShield [6], for instance, propagates suspicious
[19], [28], [29], [37], [38], [39], [40]. For example, Holmes [28] states across system entities using curated transition rules and
and Rapsheet [31] identify suspicious behaviors via single-hop black/white lists (e.g. sensitive files) to infer tactic-level predictions. Similarly, Conan [29] models contextual behaviors with a
 1 The system is named ZOOMER for its ability to correlate low-level system
 with a Finite State Automata (FSA) framework to capture state
events with TTP patterns at multiple granularities (i.e., tactics, techniques, and
sub-techniques), similar to the zooming effect of a lens.
 transitions. Despite these advances, such methods remain tied
 2 Red Canary is an industry-leading threat detection and response provider. to handcrafted rules, which hinders scalability and generaliza-
 3 KELLECT is our self-developed tool for collecting system audit events. tion. More critically, static rule design confines recognition to
4896 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE II Procedures (TTPs). Tactics denote high-level adversarial ob-
 MONITORED SYSTEM ENTITIES AND EVENTS
 jectives, techniques describe the means to achieve these objectives, sub-techniques further refine them into more granular
 actions, and procedures represent concrete implementations. We
 define a TTP subgraph (T SG) as a provenance graph segment
 corresponding to a procedure under a specific technique or
 sub-technique, presented by the dashed boxes in Fig. 1(b).
 Deep & Wide Architecture: The Deep & Wide architecture enhances user preference prediction in recommender systems [33].
 It combines a wide linear model that captures explicit feature
 interactions to memorize user preferences, and a deep neural
 network that extracts dense embeddings to support generalization. Motivated by the parallels between its design philosophy and TTP recognition objectives, we adapt this architeccoarse-grained tactics and fails to delineate the precise bound- ture to jointly learn knowledge-driven and data-driven TTP
aries of fine-grained behaviors. These limitations motivate our representations.
design of a generalized TTP recognition system that simulta- Prototypical Network: The prototypical network [53] is a
neously extracts TTP behavior subgraphs and identifies fine- few-shot learning framework that learns a discriminative metric
grained patterns (e.g., techniques and sub-techniques), thereby space, where classification can be performed by measuring
offering deeper insights to strengthen APT investigations. the distance between query samples and class prototypes. This
 approach enables effective generalization from limited labeled
C. Threat Hunting. data, making it well-suited for TTP recognition, where annotated
 samples are inherently scarce.
 Recent advances in threat hunting [7], [49], [50], [51] adopt
graph pattern matching to align provenance graphs with attack B. Problem Statement
campaigns documented in Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) reports. For instance, Poirot [49] employs heuristic queries to This work focuses on delineating TTP behavior boundaries
retrieve abnormal system activities resembling CTI-recorded in provenance graphs and identifying their multi-granular patattacks. More recently, GNNs have been introduced to model terns. Concretely, given a real-time stream of audit events that
complex behavior semantics in provenance data. Based on this, comprise numerous benign behaviors and a small fraction of
GHunter [51] learns hierarchical behavior representations via malicious ones, our goal is to precisely extract the involved
order embeddings [52] to predict approximate subgraph rela- TSGs and assign them ATT&CK TTP labels, thereby enrichtionships between CTI-derived attack graphs and provenance ing semantic insights of the attack investigation beyond binary
graphs, while ProvG-Searcher [7] mitigates dependency explo- malicious predictions. Importantly, our work differs from APT
sion and GNN over-smoothing through graph partitioning and attribution [54], [55], which seeks to identify the specific threat
compression, followed by process-centric subgraph entailment actor (e.g., a known APT group) behind an attack. Nevertheless,
prediction. Although these methods advance embedding-based the enriched TTP semantics produced by ZOOMER could serve
matching for APT hunting, they largely focus on coarse pattern as a valuable input to attribution pipelines.
similarities to confirm attack presence, while struggle to distinguish subtle variations across TTP patterns. This limitation C. Threat Model
motivates us to develop a more expressive TTP representa- We consider the auditing framework, operating systems, and
tion model that captures fine-grained distinctions among TTPs, system logs are trustworthy, meaning that the observed system
thereby enabling more precise recognition of TTP subgraphs activities are not tampered with. Adversaries are presumed
and enhancing the fidelity of APT investigations. to conduct APT campaigns by leveraging diverse tactics and
 techniques defined in ATT&CK. However, threats that cannot
 III. BACKGROUND be captured by the auditing framework, such as side-channel
 attacks, kernel-level exploits, or hardware-based attacks, are
A. Definitions considered out of scope. Moreover, we assume that TTPs be-
 Provenance Graph: A provenance graph (Fig. 1(b)) organizes longing to the same technique or sub-technique category share
system entities and their interactions into a graph structure [4]. consistent contextual semantics, while TTPs across different
Formally, it is defined as P = (V, E), where V denotes entities categories exhibit distinguishable patterns.
(e.g., process, file) and E denotes their interactions (e.g., read,
write). An event e = {u, v, a} ∈ E connects two system entities IV. SYSTEM DESIGN
u, v ∈ V through an interaction a. Table II summarizes the
 A. Overview
monitored entities and events.
 TTP Subgraph: The ATT&CK framework [2] hierarchically The architecture of ZOOMER is presented in Fig. 2, which
abstracts adversarial behaviors into Tactics, Techniques, and comprises five modules: 1) provenance graph construction,
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4897

Fig. 2. Overview of ZOOMER architecture. PG: Provenance Graph. ⊕: Feature Concatenation.

2) NOI detection, 3) TTP subgraph sampling, 4) semantic sub- Structural Feature: Malicious nodes typically display ingraph representation, and 5) TTP recognition. Initially, stream- teraction patterns with their neighbors that differ from those
ing audit logs are iteratively parsed to extract relevant entities and of benign nodes, resulting in distinct local graph structheir interactions. These extracted elements are subsequently tures [23]. Based on this insight, we consider 37 event
transformed into provenance graphs, where various compression types and form a 74-dimensional structural feature ht =
strategies [5], [6] are applied to remove redundant interactions. [a0 , a1 , a2 , . . . , a36 , . . . a73 ] for each process, where the first 37
Following the graph construction, the NOI detection model dimensions ai (0 ≤ i ≤ 36) represent counts of incoming edges
locates anomalous process nodes within the provenance graph. by event type, while the second 37 dimensions aj (37 ≤ j ≤ 73)
Guided by these NOIs, a heuristic subgraph sampling algo- correspond to counts of outgoing edges.
rithm extracts candidate T SGs centered around them. After Semantic Feature: Leveraging structural features alone for
that, the semantic subgraph representation model takes each NOI detection can result in high false positives, as benign
T SG, derives both data-driven and knowledge-driven features, and malicious processes may share similar local structures. For
and projects them into a dense embedding space. Finally, a instance, both legitimate system backup processes and malicious
prototypical network tailored for few-shot graph learning com- data exfiltration processes may read files and transmit data
pares the T SG embeddings against TTP prototypes to achieve to a cloud server. Generally, the command line of a process
multi-granular TTP recognition. We elaborate these designs in reflects its functionality, which motivates us to incorporate
the following subsections. such semantics as complementary features for NOI detection.
 To this end, we employ a hierarchical hashing scheme [42],
 [57] to encode command lines. First, each command line is
B. NOI Detection decomposed into hierarchical substrings. For example, given a
 APT campaigns are camouflaged within a sea of benign command line “C:\Windows\regedit.exe”, we generate its hieractivities, making exhaustive search and analysis of TTP patterns archical substrings s1 = “C:”, s2 = “C:\Windows” and s3 =
computationally prohibitive (challenge C1). As TTP activities “C:\Windows\regedit.exe”.  Each substring is then embedded
are typically initiated around anomalous process nodes [7], [27], via hashing: φi (s) = k:h(sj )=i H(si ), where φi represents the
[56], we designate process NOIs as primary analysis targets. i-th dimension of the embedding, sj denotes the j-th character in
Focusing on these nodes could substantially narrow down the s, h(·) maps sj to a dimension index, and H(·) is another hash
search space and improve the efficiency. Furthermore, given function mapping sj to {±1}. H(sj ) would be added to the
the high cost of manually annotating malicious samples for su- i-th dimension if h(sj ) = i. Finally, substring embeddings are
pervised training, we adopt an unsupervised anomaly detection aggregated to yield a 32-dimensional semantic feature vector hs .
approach, whose robustness under limited supervision makes it Note that the encoding scheme can be replaced by any methods
particularly suitable for our task. Concretely, we first model a that capture text similarity [25], [27].
baseline distribution of normal process behaviors from a large After initialization, we normalize ht and hs to mitigate scale
corpus of attack-free provenance graphs, and then flag a process discrepancies, and then concatenate them into a unified feature
node as an NOI if its behaviors significantly deviate from this vector to represent each process node.
baseline. The remainder of this section details node feature 2) Anomaly Detection: We employ a k-nearest neighbors
initialization and anomaly detection methods. (KNN) detector [58] for distance-based anomaly detection. The
 1) Feature Initialization: For each process node, we extract baseline feature space F is constructed from feature vectors
two feature types to characterize its behaviors. of process nodes in benign provenance graphs, representing the
4898 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 Algorithm 1: NOI Detection. Algorithm 3: TTP Subgraph Pruning.

 Algorithm 2: TTP Subgraph Sampling.

 dependencies essential for comprehensive behavior representation. To overcome this limitation, we propose a temporal-aware
 breadth-first traversal that samples both backward (incoming)
 and forward (outgoing) dependencies while strictly following
 event timestamps. The full procedure is outlined in Algorithm 2.
 For each process NOI (line 2), incoming edges are explored
 in reverse chronological order (lines 8–11) and outgoing edges
 are sampled in chronological order (lines 12–15). To control
 graph expansion and sampling cost, we impose a 2-hop traversal
 limit (lines 6–7), an empirically supported bound of T SGs in
 KELLECT4APT.
 2) Subgraph Pruning: After the initial subgraph sampling,
 two major issues arise that undermine the semantics of T SGs.
 First, dependency explosion nodes (e.g., long-running processes
 or shared system files) introduce large volumes of benign interactions that obscure TTP activities. Second, the sampled
 T SGs encapsulate edges that are part of routine tasks, such as
 powershell loading system dynamic link libraries (detailed
 in Appendix B, available online). To address these issues, we dedistribution of normal behaviors. During inference, as outlined in
 velop a subgraph pruning algorithm, as outlined in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 1, each provenance graph is first initialized to obtain
 We begin by pruning high-degree nodes (i.e., potential depenthe feature matrix X (line 2). For each process node, its k nearest
 dency explosion nodes [59], [60]) along with their edges (lines
neighbors are then retrieved from F (lines 3–4), and the average
 2–5). Then, we apply three heuristics to further eliminate noise
Euclidean distance d¯ to these neighbors is computed (line 5).
 (lines 6–8): 1) filter out edges with historically high occurrence
If d¯ exceeds a predefined threshold θ, the process is flagged as
 frequency; 2) remove file and registry nodes singly connected
anomalous (lines 6-7). The detected NOIs subsequently serve as
 to one process; and 3) discard low-informative edge types (e.g.,
anchors for extracting T SGs.
 open, close). The first rule primarily eliminates routine system
 or user activities characterized by high frequency, whereas the
C. TTP Subgraph Sampling
 latter two suppress “static” nodes and edges, such as those
 Precisely delineating the impact scope of a T SG is crucial for involving log or temporary files [7], [59], which contribute little
effective TTP recognition and attack investigation (challenge to meaningful TTP representation. Finally, pruned T SGs with
C1). To this end, we propose a heuristic sampling algorithm overlapping nodes are merged (line 9) to preserve the coherence
that segments provenance graphs into individual T SGs, which of anomalous behaviors while still maintaining clear boundaries
then serve as the recognition units. Empirical analysis on the across distinct TTP instances. The resulting disjoint subgraphs
ATT&CK framework reveals that each T SG features a process serve as the final targets for TTP recognition.
node as the principal executor, with auxiliary nodes supporting
the tactic objective. Guided by this observation, our sampling algorithm anchors on process NOIs and iteratively expands along D. Semantic Subgraph Representation
neighboring nodes to capture semantically relevant context. TTP activities are inherently complex and diverse (challenge
 1) Suspicious Subgraph Sampling: Prior sampling methods C3). Distinct TTPs may induce subgraphs with similar structures
often perform forward-only traversal to extract behavior in- but divergent intents, while the same TTP can also appear in
stances [59], which inadvertently disregards preceding causal structurally different forms. For example, as depicted in Fig. 3(a)
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4899

 nodes, registry keys for registry nodes, IP addresses for socket
 nodes, and command lines for process nodes. These features
 only capture first-order interactions and fail to model higherorder contextual dependencies, which are crucial for accurately
 representing system behaviors. To address this, we stack multiple GAT layers to recursively incorporate information from
 multi-hop neighborhoods and thus capture richer contextual
 interactions. Through this design, the representation of node
 i is iteratively updated through weighted aggregation of its
 neighbors across multiple layers. Formally, at the k-th layer,
 the attention weight eij between nodes i and j is derived from
 their semantic similarities:
 eij = σ(W a (ht−1
 i j )),
 ⊕ ht−1 (1)
Fig. 3. Structural comparison of different TTPs.
 where ht−1
 i and ht−1
 j denote the features of nodes i and j at the
 (t − 1)-th layer, ⊕ stands for the concatenation operation, W a
and (b), T1003.001-9 leverages the procdump utility to dump is a learnable parameter matrix, and σ is a nonlinear activation
ttlsass.exe memory for credential theft, whereas T1222.001-4 function (e.g., ReLU [62]). To guarantee non-negativity of the
utilizes the attrib program to conceal system files. Although attention weights, a softmax normalization is applied over all
their objectives differ, these procedures produce structurally neighborhood interactions:
similar subgraphs, which can lead to misclassification. Conexp(eij )
versely, both T1069.002-8 and T1069.002-1 pursue domain αij =  , (2)
group enumeration. However, as revealed in Figs. 3(c) and (d), k∈Ni exp(eik )
T1069.002-8 leverages Adfind for active directory reconnais- where Ni is the neighbor set of node i. To enhance expressance, whereas T1069.002-1 relies on net for permission group siveness, we incorporate a multi-head attention mechanism that
queries, resulting in markedly different subgraph structures. Col- performs K parallel attention computations, allowing the model
lectively, such findings reveal the inadequacy of current purely to attend to complementary interaction semantics across distinct
structural encoding [23], [26], [51], and point to the necessity subspaces. The representation of node i is then computed as
of incorporating richer semantics into TTP representations. a nonlinear transformation of the weighted aggregation of its
 In response, we introduce a dual-tower Deep & Wide architec- neighbors’ embeddings:
ture that integrates data-driven feature learning with knowledge- ⎛ ⎞
driven pattern memorization to capture richer semantics. This 
architecture, originally proposed for recommender systems [33], hti = ⊕Kk=1 σ
 ⎝W k ht−1
 i + k t−1 ⎠
 αij hj , (3)
aligns with our task because both domains share the underlying vj ∈Ni

objective of balancing generalization and memorization. In rec- where akij is the attention coefficient from the k-th head, and W k
ommendation, the deep model generalizes by learning latent is its learnable parameter matrix. After stacking t-layer GATs,
user preference patterns, whereas the wide model memorizes we obtain the final set of node embeddings X.
frequent user-item interactions for improved accuracy. Simi- The deep representation hdeep of each T SG is finally obtained
larly, ZOOMER leverages the deep model to learn generalized by aggregating all node embeddings via average pooling:
representations of diverse TTP activities from semantic and
 1 
 N
structural features, while the wide model memorizes explicit
feature combinations (e.g., IoCs) tied to specific TTPs. These hdeep = X[i]. (4)
 N i=1
two complementary mechanisms yield expressive and robust
TTP representations. 2) Wide Model: The wide model is implemented as a gen-
 1) Deep Model: The deep model functions as a graph en- eralized linear model designed to capture explicit feature incoder to autonomously extract intricate interaction patterns teractions. It complements the deep model by memorizing
among system entities. Specifically, we employ the Graph At- knowledge-driven features that exhibit strong correlations with
tention Network (GAT) [61], which assigns adaptive attention specific TTPs. To this end, we design three heuristic feature
weights to neighbors rather than treating them uniformly as in families, namely node characteristics, edge relations, and IoCs
conventional GNNs. This enables the model to emphasize in- distributions, which together offer a complementary perspective
formative interactions while suppressing trivial ones, a property on TTP semantics.
that is valuable for provenance graphs, where critical behaviors Abstract Node Feature: Nodes are abstracted into semantic
(e.g., sensitive file accesses) are often buried within abundant types based on their intrinsic attributes (Table III). For example,
benign context (e.g., temporary file reads). a file node “C:\Windows\System32\kernel32.dll” can be ab-
 With this motivation, we initialize node features using the stracted into types “system_file” and “dll_file”. Such abstraction
structural and semantic features described in Section IV-B, enables the capture of semantic similarities in entity distributions
where semantic features are extracted from file paths for file across various TTPs, thereby strengthening the wide model’s
4900 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE III where ci is a randomly sampled binary indicator that determines
 ABSTRACT NODE TYPES
 whether the i-th feature is included (1) or excluded (0), and d is
 the feature dimensionality. By applying this transformation K
 times over hcat with different random selections, we produce
 a diverse set of cross-product features. Finally, these generated
 features are concatenated with the original hcat and projected
 through a linear layer to form a 64-dimensional representation
 hwide for each T SG:

capacity to memorize recurrent patterns. The resulting feature hwide = W w [hcat ⊕ Φ1 (hcat ) ⊕ · · · ⊕ ΦK (hcat )] + bw ,
vector hnode is 18-dimensional. (6)
 Edge Feature: The distribution of edge types within a T SG where W w and bw are the learnable parameters. Finally, the
reflects statistical evidence of behavior signatures. For instance, representation of each T SG is constructed by concatenating
“T1485: Data Destruction” that aims to destroy system and user hwide with the deep representation hdeep .
files typically manifests frequent file operations. By capturing
such regularities, edge feature allows the wide model to mem-
 E. TTP Recognition
orize shared interaction characteristics among different TTPs.
Following Table II, we construct a 37-dimensional feature vector A simple solution for TTP recognition is to train a multi-class
hedge encapsulating these statistics. classifier that distinguishes TTP patterns by learning class-
 IoC Feature: To enhance interpretability and robustness, we specific decision boundaries. However, the scarcity of labeled
incorporate IoC features contextualized by ATT&CK tactics. data and the ever-expanding TTP stack make this strategy neither
Such domain features are initialized through knowledge bases practical nor scalable (challenges C2 and C4). Consequently,
derived from established CTI repositories. Since most CTI we adopt the prototypical network [53], a representative metricrepositories (e.g., Red Canary) describe unstructured associa- based few-shot learning framework that transforms TTP recogtions between IoCs and APT tactics, we design an automated nition from a classification problem into a pattern matching
extraction framework to leverage this knowledge. For unstruc- problem. Within this paradigm, each TTP is represented by a
tured CTI sources, we apply regex-based matching to identify prototype vector, and a discriminative metric space is learned
IoCs and their associated tactics [2]. For structured sources, we to enforce samples to cluster around their respective prototypes
directly parse formatted fields (e.g., YAML entries). Examples while remaining well separated from others. This approach not
of the extracted mappings are presented in Appendix C, available only allows TTP recognition with a handful of labeled samples
online. The resulting IoCs span file paths, registry keys, and but also readily accommodates the emergence of novel TTPs.
C&C domains, covering 11 ATT&CK tactics. Each T SG is thus 1) Model Training: The prototypical network is trained in
represented as a 33-dimensional feature vector hioc , where each a N -way K-shot setting, where N denotes the number of
dimension encodes the occurrence frequency of IoCs associated classes and K denotes the number of samples per class. Training
with a specific tactic. episodes are constructed from the KELLECT4APT dataset.
 These domain-informed features are continuous values span- Each episode consists of a support set covering 32 TTP classes
ning broad and disparate ranges. Learning stable interaction pat- with 3 samples per class (32-way 3-shot), while the query set is
terns from these variable numerical features poses a significant formed from the remaining 2-3 samples per class. The prototype
challenge [63]. To this end, we propose two feature optimization vector ck for the k-th TTP class is derived by averaging the
strategies to improve their utility. First, a feature discretization embeddings of its support samples Sk :
mechanism [64] is employed to transform continuous values into
 1 
categorical formats, thereby emphasizing recurring patterns and ck = fφ (x), (7)
reducing variability in raw numeric inputs. This transformation |Sk |
 x∈Sk
is achieved using a clustering-based method [65], where each
feature dimension is partitioned into a set of disjoint intervals where fφ is our subgraph representation module. For each query
(e.g., [0,20], [21,34], [35,46], and [47,60] for the “system_file” sample x, we calculate its Euclidean distance to each prototype
dimension). Continuous values are then mapped to one-hot vector as d(x, ck ) = fφ (x) − ck 2 . The cross-entropy loss
vectors corresponding to their respective intervals (e.g., a value is utilized to minimize intra-class distances while maximizing
of 24 is encoded as [0,1,0,0]). The resulting categorical features inter-class separation for model optimization.
hcat allow the model to more effectively capture common 2) Model Inference: During inference, a sampled T SG is
patterns. Second, we apply a Cross-Product transformation to provided as input x and embedded via the subgraph represenhcat to explicitly generate higher-order feature interactions that tation module fφ . The embedding is then compared against all
facilitate model learning. Formally, a single transformation is TTP prototypes {ck }k∈C in the learned metric space, and the
defined as: predicted class is determined based on the nearest prototype
 under Euclidean distance:
 
 d
 Φ(h) = hci i , ci ∈ {0, 1}, (5) k(x) = arg min fφ (x) − ck 2 , (8)
 i=1 k∈C
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4901

where k(x) denotes the predicted label of x. To reduce false TABLE IV
 TTP DISTRIBUTIONS OF DATASET KELLECT4APT
positives, a decision constraint is imposed: if the minimum
distance to any prototype exceeds a predefined threshold, the
sample is classified as benign.

 V. EXPERIMENT
 This section presents a comprehensive experimental evaluation of ZOOMER. Section V-A introduces the experimental
setup, including dataset descriptions and evaluation strategies.
In Section V-B, we conduct parameter sensitivity analysis on
different components of ZOOMER to determine the optimal
configuration. Section V-C provides ablation studies analyzing the importance of the deep and wide models in the TTP
representation module. We then compare ZOOMER against
baseline methods for both NOI detection and TTP recognition
in Section V-D. Section V-F evaluates its computational overhead. Section V-G demonstrates ZOOMER’s effectiveness on
real-world datasets. Finally, Section V-H presents a case study
that qualitatively illustrates how ZOOMER facilitates attack TABLE V
investigation in practice. DATASET DISTRIBUTION OF NOI DETECTION

A. Experiment Setup
 1) Dataset: Existing public datasets typically provide only
graph-level binary labels [43], [66] or coarse attack descriptions [32]. The lack of fine-grained TTP annotations and limited
coverage of TTP types make them unsuitable for evaluating matched nodes. All process nodes within 2 hops of the matched
TTP recognition. To fill this gap, we built and released KEL- nodes were subsequently labeled as NOIs, resulting in a total
LECT4APT, the first kernel-level APT dataset with diverse TTP of 647 process NOIs. In addition, we deployed KELLECT on
instances and detailed annotations. multiple hosts to collect benign evaluation data. Consistent with
 We constructed the dataset using the kernel-level provenance prior studies [23], [24], we assumed that no malicious behaviors
collection tool KELLECT [36] and the Atomic Red Team frame- occurred during this period. This process yielded 23.9 GB of
work developed by Red Canary, which provides modular TTP audit logs with 12,743 process nodes.
scripts and corresponding attack reports. During data collec- TTP Recognition Subset: Leveraging the modular design of
tion, each script was executed in Windows virtual machines Atomic Red Team scripts, where each script simulates an APT
(VMware4 ) via PowerShell, while KELLECT continuously cap- procedure aligned with a specific ATT&CK technique or subtured provenance logs. To approximate real-world conditions, technique, we thus directly mapped the collected provenance
we also introduced benign background activities (e.g., web graphs to their corresponding TTP labels. This automatic procebrowsing, file downloads). To protect privacy, we ensured that 1) dure removes subjective bias. To ensure a robust evaluation, we
all background activities used only synthetic content; 2) system retained only technique labels supported by at least five distinct
identifiers were anonymized or replaced with generic placehold- scripts (i.e., each label has five different samples). This process
ers; and 3) virtual environments were reverted to a clean snapshot yielded 160 provenance graphs covering 7 tactics and 32 disafter each TTP execution to eliminate residual state contam- tinct sub-techniques/techniques. From these, we constructed two
ination. These precautions prevent sensitive data from being evaluation datasets: 1) ground-truth TTP subgraphs (denoted as
included in the released dataset. We further refined the dataset by gT SG), manually extracted by experts; and 2) sampled TTP
discarding duplicate, failed, or incomplete executions, resulting subgraphs (denoted as sT SG), automatically generated using
in 473 complete system traces of TTP activities spanning 9 our NOI detection model and sampling algorithm (see Sec-
APT tactics, 26 techniques, and 45 sub-techniques. Table IV tion IV-C). These subsets provide a rigorous basis for evaluating
summarizes the data distribution. Using KELLECT4APT, we TTP recognition.
then constructed the following two evaluation subsets. 2) Evaluation Strategies: We define the following evaluation
 NOI Detection Subset: This subset is used to evaluate the strategies for different tasks.
NOI detection. To establish ground truth, we adopted the an- NOI Detection: The NOI detection model is evaluated on an
notation strategy described in [23]. For each TTP execution, unbalanced dataset with a benign-to-malicious node ratio of 6:1.
IoCs were extracted from the Atomic Red Team’s attack reports Specifically, benign processes were segregated into a training set
and mapped to the corresponding provenance graph to identify and a testing set at a ratio of 7:3. In addition, 647 annotated
 malicious nodes were incorporated into the testing set. The
 4 https://www.vmware.com/ data distribution for NOI detection is detailed in Table V. The
4902 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

evaluation metrics include Recall, False Positive Rate (FPR),
Accuracy, Precision, F1-score, and ROC AUC score.
 TTP Recognition: We evaluate TTP recognition performance
under two experimental scenarios: gT SGs are used to specifically evaluate the model’s ability to identify TTPs in a noisefree setting, while sT SGs provide an end-to-end performance
evaluation of ZOOMER under realistic deployment conditions.
For both settings, we report TTP recognition accuracy at three
hierarchical levels:
 r Sub-technique Accuracy (Sub-tech. Acc.): The proportion Fig. 4. The effect of neighbors n and threshold θ on the NOI detection
 performance.
 of T SGs with correctly predicted sub-technique labels.
 r Technique Accuracy (Tech. Acc.): The proportion of T SGs
 whose predicted technique labels are correct.
 r Tactic Accuracy (Tac. Acc.): The proportion of T SGs
 whose predicted tactic labels are correct.
 As the evaluation shifts from sub-techniques to tactics, the
classification label space is narrowed (from 32 to 7), thereby
simplifying the TTP recognition task but reducing the depth of
analytical insight. We provide a comprehensive evaluation of
ZOOMER across different recognition granularities. To ensure
statistical reliability, all reported results are the average performance of 10 independent runs with varying random seeds.
 3) Experiment Environment: All experiments were conducted on a server featuring Intel Xeon Gold 5128 CPUs, Fig. 5. The impact of parameters d and l on the TTP recognition performance.
NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs, and 128 GB of RAM. The implementation of ZOOMER contains about 7,500 lines of Python codes.
We utilized NetworkX5 for provenance graph construction, and According to the experiment results in Fig. 5(a), recognition
the NOI detection model was built with Scikit-Learn.6 The performance improves as d increases but saturates at d = 128.
Deep & Wide model and the subgraph sampling algorithm were This phenomenon can be attributed to the fact that larger dideveloped using PyTorch and DGL.7 The parameter settings of mensions introduce noise and lead to performance degradation,
NOI detection and subgraph representation modules are detailed while overly small dimensions fail to capture the behavioral
in Section V-B. semantics of TTP patterns. Fig. 5(b) shows a similar trend
 for l. Performance is poor at l = 1, suggesting that first-order
B. Parameter Sensitivity Analysis neighbor aggregation is insufficient. Performance peaks at l = 3,
 The first experiment explored the effects of different param- indicating that incorporating up to third-order interactions adeters on NOI detection and TTP recognition. equately captures contextual information. Balancing accuracy
 1) Parameter Tuning for NOI Detection: The NOI detection and computational efficiency, we adopt d = 128 and l = 3 in
model involves two hyperparameters: the number of nearest subsequent experiments.
neighbors n to search and the anomaly threshold θ. We conducted a sensitivity analysis to examine their impact on perfor- C. Ablation Study
mance. Specifically, n was varied from 5 to 20 and the AUC
was used as the evaluation metric. As illustrated in Fig. 4(a), We conducted ablation experiments to evaluate the contribuperformance decreased steadily with larger values of n. Fixing tion of Deep & Wide model to multi-granular TTP recognition.
n, we then varied θ between 7 and 15 and measured performance Specifically, we compared three model variants:
using the F1-score. As shown in Fig. 4(b), the F1-score peaked 1) Wide: It utilizes the wide model for TTP representation;
at θ = 12. Based on these observations, we adopt n = 5 and 2) Deep: It utilizes the deep model for TTP representation;
θ = 12 as the default configuration in all subsequent experi- 3) Deep & Wide: It merges both deep and wide models for
ments. TTP representation.
 2) Parameter Tuning for Subgraph Representation: This ex- All three variants rely on their respective embedded properiment tuned two hyperparameters of the deep component: totypes for TTP recognition. The results, summarized in
the embedding dimension d and the number of GAT layers l. Table VI, lead to three key observations. First, the joint Deep
The embedding dimension was varied from 64 to 256, and the & Wide model consistently outperforms the individual modnumber of layers from 1 to 4, while keeping others fixed. els, achieving the highest TTP recognition accuracy across
 all granularities. Importantly, even with sT SGs sampled from
 5 https://networkx.org/ real-world provenance graphs, ZOOMER maintains robust perfor-
 6 https://scikit-learn.org/. mance, demonstrating its resilience under realistic deployment
 7 https://www.dgl.ai/ conditions. Second, the wide-only model performs about 16%
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4903

 TABLE VI
 IMPACT OF GRAPH REPRESENTATION MODELS ON TTP RECOGNITION ACCURACY

 TABLE VII
 COMPARISON OF NOI DETECTION WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART NODE-LEVEL APT DETECTION METHODS. BEST RESULTS ARE BOLDED. SECOND-BEST ARE
 UNDERLINED.

worse, suggesting that deep semantic representations of prove- Both THREATRACE and TREC yield lower F1-scores,
nance graphs are crucial for enhancing generalization. Third, reflecting their inability to balance Recall and FPR. This
the deep-only model lags behind by 12%–23%, underscoring performance gap can be attributed to their narrow focus on
the value of incorporating prior knowledge and cross-feature node structural semantics while neglecting richer attribute
interactions in the wide component. These features complement semantics. Similarly, MAGIC underperforms across Recall and
the deep embeddings by capturing recurrent patterns within the FPR, further confirming that jointly modeling structural and
same TTP class, thereby boosting recognition performance. In semantic features yields a more informative representation of
summary, these findings validate the complementary strengths process nodes for NOI detection.
of the deep and wide models and the necessity of their integration 2) TTP Recognition Comparison: We benchmarked
for accurate TTP recognition. ZOOMER against five representative baselines, categorized
 into heuristic rule-based and graph learning-based approaches.
 We present our evaluations in two distinct parts for clarity.
D. Comparative Experiment
 Comparison with Rule-based Methods: We first compared
 This experiment compared the NOI detection and the TTP ZOOMER with two heuristic rule-based approaches:
recognition models with the state-of-the-art baselines. 1) Holmes [28]: It designs a set of TTP specifications to
 1) NOI Detection Comparison: We evaluated our NOI de- map low-level events to high-level TTP activities within
tection model in comparison with the following APT detection the Kill Chain framework. Moreover, it also leverages the
methods on the process NOI detection task. information flow analysis to correlate ancestor processes
 1) THREATRACE [23]: It transforms the APT detection to infer tactic labels of suspicious nodes.
 problem into a node type classification task. Specifically, 2) APTShield [6]: It introduces an APT detection framework
 it trains a hierarchy of node type classification sub-models based on the ATT&CK matrix. The framework defines
 based on the structural features, and detects malicious suspicious labels for nodes, customizes label propagation
 nodes as those misclassified by sub-models. rules, and ultimately recognizes ATT&CK tactics through
 2) MAGIC [24]: It pre-trains the GNN model to capture node aggregation of target node labels.
 contextual behaviors via masked self-supervised represen- Both heuristic baselines are restricted to tactic-level recognitation learning, and identifies malicious nodes through the tion and operate at the node level. For a fair comparison, we evaldistance-based anomaly detection. uated their subgraph-level APT tactic recognition performance
 3) TREC [67]: It employs a heterogeneous graph attention via majority voting over node-level predictions. Consistent with
 network to learn node embeddings by traversing prede- their original designs, Holmes was evaluated under the Kill
 fined meta-paths. Then, it pinpoints malicious nodes using Chain model, while APTShield was assessed with respect to the
 the distance-based anomaly detection. ATT&CK framework. Since Holmes is not publicly available,
 We employed the open-source implementations of we re-implemented it following the original specification [28].
THREATRACE and MAGIC, training them from scratch Our prior work APTShield, initially developed for Linux, was
on our datasets and tuning their hyperparameters following the also re-implemented to a Windows-compatible version. The
optimization details specified in their respective papers. For implementation details are provided in Appendix D, available
TREC, as our prior work, we directly applied its pre-trained online.
model to the evaluation datasets. From the experiment results in As shown in Table VIII, ZOOMER significantly outperforms
Table VII, it can be concluded that our method achieves optimal Holmes and APTShield, with margins of ∼17% and ∼30%,
performance in terms of Recall, Accuracy, and F1-score. respectively. The inferior performance of heuristic methods
4904 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

 TABLE VIII TABLE IX
 TACTIC RECOGNITION ACCURACY COMPARISON WITH HEURISTIC TTP RECOGNITION ACCURACY COMPARISON WITH GRAPH LEARNING-BASED
 RULE-BASED BASELINES. BEST RESULTS ARE BOLDED. BASELINES. BEST RESULTS
 ARE BOLDED. SECOND-BEST ARE UNDERLINED.

stems from two main limitations. First, their reliance on expert
knowledge alone fails to capture the full diversity and complexity of multi-step TTP patterns, leading to reduced recognition
accuracy. Second, their dependence on rigid black-white lists
often results in misidentifications among TTPs with similar
signatures. In contrast, ZOOMER overcomes these issues while
achieving higher recognition accuracy and stronger adaptability
across diverse tactic frameworks.
 Comparison with Learning-based Methods: We next evaluated ZOOMER against three learning-based approaches:
 1) NeuroMatch [52]: It introduces an accurate and efficient
 neural network-based inexact subgraph matching method
 that assumes the partial order of subgraph relationships
 is inherent aligned with order embedding and can be
 exploited to predict subgraph matches. Fig. 6. Sensitivity of TTP recognition to T SG variations.
 2) GHunter [51]: It abstracts nodes with similar semantics
 across compared subgraphs into uniform types, and em- granularities. The limitations of the baselines can be attributed
 ploys Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) [68] to generate to the following factors. First, they restrict the size of query and
 graph representations via node and edge embeddings. target graphs, which constrains the semantic expressiveness of
 Then, subgraph correlation prediction, inspired by Neu- different T SGs. Second, their node abstraction in the proveroMatch, is utilized to identify known attacks. nance graph weakens the deep semantic representation among
 3) ProvG-Searcher [7]: It uses GNN to embed subgraphs T SGs, leading to multiple T SGs with similar representations
 centered on process nodes, integrating node, edge, and and thus degrading accuracy. Third, they convert provenance
 time information. Like GHunter, it predicts subgraph re- graphs to undirected representations, preventing deep learning
 lationships based on the order embedding technique. models from capturing meaningful information flow directions.
 The intuition behind this comparison is that the baselines Fourth, ProvG-Searcher leverages the behavior semantic presershare a similar workflow with ZOOMER. Specifically, the baseline vation scheme to deduplicate repeated behaviors, potentially
leverages attack graphs extracted from CTI reports as templates eliminating specificity between T SGs. In contrast, ZOOMER
to identify potential threats in provenance graphs, which paral- adopts a Deep & Wide model that jointly captures structural
lels ZOOMER’s approach of using TTP subgraphs as templates and semantic node features while leveraging prior knowledge
to detect corresponding TTP patterns. In our setup, the baselines to better distinguish subtle differences among TTP patterns.
employ manually extracted gT SGs as query graphs and perform Furthermore, the prototypical network aligns intra-class samples
subgraph matching on sampled sT SGs for TTP recognition, by pulling their representations closer, while simultaneously
with the matched gT SGs’s label returned as the recognition maximizing inter-class separation. This design enhances the
result. This configuration is consistent with their original use performance under few-shot learning conditions.
cases. Moreover, we enforced that target graphs are strictly larger
than gT SGs, thereby preserving the intended subgraph entailment constraints described in their original work. NeuroMatch E. Sensitivity Analysis
and ProvG-Searcher were evaluated using their open-source We evaluated the sensitivity of TTP recognition to perturimplementations, while GHunter was re-implemented by ex- bations in sampled T SGs. To simulate such perturbations, we
tending NeuroMatch’s code with the reinforcement mechanisms injected previously unseen but benign interactions that bypass
described in the original paper [51]. Following the setup in [52], the heuristic subgraph sampling rules, thereby introducing contraining datasets for all learning-based baselines were generated trolled noise into each T SG. A noise ratio r ∈ [0, 1] is defined
from benign provenance graphs. to quantify the proportion of injected nodes.
 As demonstrated in Table IX, ZOOMER consistently outper- Experimental results in Fig. 6 reveal that ZOOMER preforms the baselines by over 25% across all TTP recognition serves stable performance across different TTP recognition
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4905

 TABLE X
 OVERHEAD OF ZOOMER’S KEY COMPONENTS

granularities as r increases, indicating strong resilience to various semantic perturbations. Concretely, tactic-level recognition
 Fig. 7. Overhead analysis of subgraph sampling algorithm in provenance
proves the most robust, with accuracy consistently above 87% graphs with different scales.
regardless of noise ratio, partially due to the smaller label
space reducing the task complexity. Technique-level recognition displays only a mild downward trend, while sub-technique
recognition experiences the largest performance drop, yet the
degradation is bounded at roughly 9%. In summary, these results
confirm that ZOOMER is robust against T SG precision loss.
We attribute this resilience to the knowledge-driven feature
engineering, which yields generalized TTP representations less
susceptible to simple additive noise.

F. Overhead Experiment
 This experiment assesses the computational and memory
overheads of ZOOMER’s key modules, including the NOI de-
 Fig. 8. Overhead analysis of graph representation across varying graph sizes.
tection, subgraph sampling, TTP subgraph representation and
recognition. The results are summarized in Table X.
 1) Overhead of NOI Detection: The overhead of NOI detection comprises node feature extraction and anomaly detection. does not scale proportionally with the the original graph size,
As shown in Table X, extracting features for 1,000 nodes requires underscoring the robustness of our sampling algorithm against
an average of 0.71 s and less than 1 MB of memory. Searching noisy neighbor nodes.
and calculating distance to the 5 nearest neighbors takes 0.05 s 3) Overhead of TTP Recognition: The TTP recognition
on average for 1,000 nodes, with a memory footprint around pipeline comprises two main stages: T SG representation and
48 MB, primarily for storing the baseline embeddings of the TTP prototype matching. Table X highlights that the average
benign process nodes. runtime of TTP recognition for a T SG is less than 2 s, with a
 2) Overhead of Subgraph Sampling: The primary computa- stable memory footprint under 1 GB. More precisely, Figs. 8(a)
tional overhead in T SG sampling arises from graph traversal and (b) illustrate the effect of T SG size on graph representation
and pruning strategies. Table X reveals that sampling a T SG costs. The wide feature extraction stage incurs a constant memwith 1,000 nodes costs on average 2.25 s and 3 MB of constant ory overhead of 258 MB, primarily attributed to IoC knowledge
memory, showcasing its high efficiency. We further evaluated base storage. While its runtime scales proportionally with the
the sampling performance on provenance graphs ranging from size of the T SG, the average size of a T SG typically contains
1,500 to 50,000 nodes, which reflects the typical graph scale in fewer than 1,000 nodes, ensuring a processing time as low as
real-world scenarios. The results, presented in Fig. 7, indicate 2 s. The deep model loads a pretrained GAT with a fixed memthat the execution time generally lies between 1 s and 5 s, ory footprint of around 468 MB and shows negligible runtime
with heuristic pruning accounting for the dominant cost. At variation across different T SG sizes. The graph matching stage
smaller scales, each additional 1,000 nodes in the provenance compares the T SG embedding against various TTP prototypes,
graph increases the runtime by roughly 0.5 s, reflecting the requiring about 150 MB of memory and only 0.05 s per T SG.
rising complexity of local structures handled during pruning. Overall, the TTP recognition pipeline averages ∼2 s runtime and
As the graphs become larger, the sampling time becomes more ∼876 MB memory usage, highlighting its efficiency and scalavariable due to fluctuations in local structural patterns. Notably, bility. This performance allows ZOOMER to sustain a throughput
the runtime peaks at around 5 s, suggesting an upper bound on the of 1,200 alerts per hour, making it well-suited for handling
local structural complexity. Moreover, the size of sampled T SG large-scale malware incidents in enterprise environments [69].
4906 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

Fig. 9. TTP recognition case from the Darpa OpTC project: “Malicious Upgrade” attack initiated on Day 3. For clarity, only key entities involved in the attack are
retained, while noisy entities generated during sampling are excluded. T SGs associated with different tactics are distinguished using colored boxes, with circled
numbers indicating the tactic transitions.

 TABLE XI Access tactic). By exploiting this semantic proximity, ZOOMER
 TTP RECOGNITION ON THE DARPA OPTC DATASET
 proves its effectiveness and robust generalization.

 H. Case Study
 We used the third attack campaign “Malicious Upgrade” from
 DARPA OpTC as a case to illustrate how TTP recognition aids
 the APT investigation. As shown in Fig. 9, the campaign begins
 with a Notepad++ update ( 1 Initial Access), which downloads update.exe to stage a Meterpreter payload. Thereafter,
 the adversary invokes cmd.exe to enumerate the local system,
 network, and shared resources ( 2 Discovery). To enhance its
 foothold, the implant migrates into the lsass.exe process,
 a common technique to evade detection. Using this substitute,
 the attacker proceeds to dump credentials from LSASS memory
 (3 Credential Access), reinforces persistence through script
 deployment and registry modification ( 4 Persistence), and
G. Real-World Attack Evaluation finally creates a new administrator account for remote access
 (5 Privilege Escalation).
 To further assess the practical utility of ZOOMER in real-world
 Fig. 9 illustrates the resulting TTP-annotated attack chain. Our
scenarios, we conducted experiments on the DARPA OpTC
 evaluation revealed that while process NOI detection largely
dataset [70], which comprises three realistic multi-stage APT
 narrowed down the investigative scope, the presence of nucampaigns: “Plain PowerShell Empire”, “Custom PowerShell
 merous adjacent interactions and unclear behavior boundaries
Empire”, and “Malicious Upgrade”, all executed within an
 still posed challenges for in-depth analysis. ZOOMER effectively
enterprise-scale environment comprising more than 1,000 Winaddresses this by sampling each NOI-centric T SG (colored subdows hosts. Given the lack of available TTP annotations, we engraph in Fig. 9) and aligning them with correlated APT tactics,
gaged three experts to independently annotate ATT&CK tactics
 yielding a concise, well-bounded, and interpretable represenfor each campaign based on official attack reports. Discrepancies
 tation. This process directs analysts’ attention to single-stage
in annotations were resolved through majority voting to achieve
 attack activities and provides fine-grained TTP insights, thereby
consensus.
 reducing analytical complexity and accelerating incident
 The experimental results in Table XI reveal that ZOOMER
 response.
attains accuracy exceeding 80% for APT tactic recognition.
Mainstream techniques (e.g., T1059) are correctly classified,
indicating that ZOOMER effectively captures their distinctive VI. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS
behavior characteristics. Misclassifications mainly occur with Practicality: Current research predominantly centers on the
techniques such as T1083 and T1018, primarily due to the detection of isolated malicious activities [7], [23], [24], [49],
absence of their implementations in the Red Canary repository, while failing to provide an interpretable view of correlated
limiting the availability of TTP prototypes. Notably, despite the attack stages. ZOOMER serves as a practical assistant for security
lack of a prototype for T1195, its T SG was mapped to the analysts by streamlining multiple analysis tasks. First, for false
semantically related technique T1566 (both under the Initial alarm reduction, it automatically samples subgraphs around
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4907

alarm nodes and validates alerts by matching behavior patterns dual-tower architecture that unifies a deep model for generalized
against known TTPs. Second, in attack scenario reconstruction, graph representation learning with a wide model for domain-
ZOOMER maps anomalous behaviors to corresponding TTPs, informed feature memorization, producing comprehensive and
thereby enabling analysts to piece together complete APT attack discriminative TTP representations. To further enhance generchains. Third, for threat hunting, it uses TTP-driven query alization under limited supervision, this architecture is embedgraphs to proactively search for known adversarial activities and ded into a prototypical network, which supports few-shot TTP
strengthen defensive measures. recognition. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ZOOMER
 Concept Drift: Both the NOI detection and TTP recognition achieves recognition accuracies of 88% at the sub-technique
in ZOOMER are susceptible to concept drift. For NOI detection, level and 94% at the tactic level, substantially outperforming
the model relies on historical benign patterns and is thus prone existing baselines.
to triggering false positives when new normal behaviors are Our future work aims to extend KELLECT4APT by genencountered, a limitation also observed in prior work [24], [25], erating more TTP samples across different platforms, thereby
[42]. This issue can be alleviated through periodic retraining. For strengthening ZOOMER’s ability to recognize newly emerging
TTP recognition, drift occurs when novel TTP patterns emerge attack patterns. Furthermore, we plan to incorporate adversarial
without corresponding prototypes. To address this, we adopt a training for graph-based detection models and integrate unhierarchical validation strategy: T SGs are first matched against certainty quantification into TTP recognition, with the goal of
prototypes at the technique level, and unmatched samples are improving resilience against adaptive adversaries.
further evaluated at the broader tactic level. This two-stage validation improves adaptability to unseen TTPs while preserving
 REFERENCES
recognition fidelity.
 Adversarial Robustness: Adversarial attacks pose additional [1] S. T. H. Team, “Daggerfly: Apt actor targets telecoms company in africa,”
 2023. [Online]. Available: https://symantec-enterprise-blogs.security.
challenges, as sophisticated attackers may deliberately craft eva- com/blogs/threat-intelligence/apt-attacks-telecoms-africa-mgbot
sive behaviors to exploit detection boundaries. However, evading [2] M. Corporation, “Mitre ATT&CK,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https:
ZOOMER’s detection is non-trivial in many cases, due to the fol- //attack.mitre.org
 [3] P. Fang, P. Gao, C. Liu, E. Ayday, K. Jee, and T. Wang, “Back-propagating
lowing design choices. First, our NOI detection model leverages system dependency impact for attack investigation,” 31st USENIX Secur.
both semantic and structural features to identify process NOIs, Symp., pp. 2461–2478, 2022.
providing greater robustness against adversarial perturbations [4] M. A. Inam et al., “SOK: History is a vast early warning system: Auditing
 the provenance of system intrusions,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy,
compared to previous approaches that rely solely on struc- 2023, pp. 2620–2638.
tural features. Second, our TTP subgraph sampling algorithm [5] T. Zhu et al., “General, efficient, and real-time data compaction strategy
heuristically prunes previously observed substructures, render- for APT forensic analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 16, pp.
 3312–3325, 2021.
ing naive addition-only perturbations ineffective [71]. Third, [6] T. Zhu et al., “APTSHIELD: A stable, efficient and real-time APT detection
our TTP recognition model demonstrates resilience against system for linux hosts,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 20,
imprecise TTP subgraphs (see Section V-E), which strength- no. 6, pp. 5247–5264, Nov./Dec. 2023.
 [7] E. Altinisik, F. Deniz, and H. T. Sencar, “ProVG-Searcher: A graph
ens robustness against adversarial manipulations. Importantly, representation learning approach for efficient provenance graph search,”
while ZOOMER cannot recognize entirely novel TTP patterns, in Proc. 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023,
it remains capable of detecting previously unseen attacks when pp. 2247–2261.
 [8] Y. Liu, X. Shu, Y. Sun, J. Jang, and P. Mittal, “Rapid: Real-time alert investheir execution patterns align with known TTP prototypes (see tigation with context-aware prioritization for efficient threat discovery,” in
Section V-G). Proc. 38th Annu. Comput. Secur. Appl. Conf., Dec. 2022, pp. 827–840.
 Limitations:ZOOMER relies on a diverse set of TTP subgraphs [9] W. U. Hassan et al., “NoDoze: Combatting threat alert fatigue with
 automated provenance triage,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp.,
during the training phase to enhance detection capability. At Feb. 2019.
present, KELLECT4APT covers 473 TTP instances from Red [10] M. E. Aminanto, L. Zhu, T. Ban, R. Isawa, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue,
Canary’s repository [35] on the Windows platform, which still “Automated threat-alert screening for battling alert fatigue with temporal
 isolation forest,” in Proc. 17th Int. Conf. Privacy, Secur. Trust, 2019, pp.
covers only a subset of the full ATT&CK framework. Expanding 1–3.
this scope by incorporating additional TTP samples through [11] T. V. Ede et al., “DeepCase: Semi-supervised contextual analysis of secuautomated generation tools or extracting TTP patterns from rity events,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2022, pp. 522–539.
 [12] T. Ban, N. Samuel, T. Takahashi, and D. Inoue, “Combat security alert
CTI reports is essential. Furthermore, extending the dataset to fatigue with ai-assisted techniques,” in Proc. Cyber Secur. Experimentation
multiple platforms (e.g., Linux) will increase ZOOMER’s gener- Test Workshop, Aug. 2021, pp. 9–16.
alization capacity. [13] C. Fu, Q. Li, K. Xu, and J. Wu, “Point cloud analysis for ml-based
 malicious traffic detection: Reducing majorities of false positive alarms,”
 in Proc. 2023 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur., Nov. 2023,
 pp. 1005–1019.
 VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK [14] Z. Yu, J. Wang, B. Tang, and L. Lu, “Tactics and techniques classification
 in cyber threat intelligence,” Comput. J., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 1870–1881,
 This paper presents ZOOMER, a novel framework for multi- 2023.
granularity TTP recognition. By integrating an NOI detection [15] X. Wang, X. Yang, X. Liang, X. Zhang, W. Zhang, and X. Gong, “Commodel with a heuristic subgraph sampling algorithm, ZOOMER bating alert fatigue with alertpro: Context-aware alert prioritization using
 reinforcement learning for multi-step attack detection,” Comput. Secur.,
segments provenance graphs into T SGs with precise bound- vol. 137, Feb. 2024, Art. no. 103583.
aries, enabling both fine-grained attack analysis and accurate [16] A. Alsaheel et al., “Atlas: A sequence-based learning approach for attack
TTP recognition. For recognition, we design a Deep & Wide investigation,” 30th USENIX Secur. Symp., pp. 3005–3022, 2021.
4908 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEPENDABLE AND SECURE COMPUTING, VOL. 23, NO. 3, MAY/JUNE 2026

[17] H. Ding, J. Zhai, Y. Nan, and S. Ma, “{AIRTAG}: Towards automated [43] X. Han et al., “Unicorn: Runtime provenance-based detector for advanced
 attack investigation by unsupervised learning with log texts,” in Proc. persistent threats,” in Proc. 2020 Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020,
 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp., 2023, pp. 373–390. pp. 1–18.
[18] R. Patil et al., “E-Audit: Distinguishing and investigating suspicious events [44] Y. Wu et al., “Paradise: Real-time, generalized, and distributed provenancefor APTs attack detection,” J. Syst. Archit., vol. 144, Nov. 2023, Art. no. based intrusion detection,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol.
 102988. 20, no. 2, pp. 1624–1640, Mar./Apr. 2023.
[19] N. Yan et al., “Deepro: Provenance-based apt campaigns detection via [45] F. Yang et al., “{PROGRAPHER}: An anomaly detection system based
 GNN,” in Proc. 2022 IEEE Int. Conf. Trust, Secur. Privacy Comput. on provenance graph embedding,” in Proc. 32nd USENIX Secur. Symp.,
 Commun., 2022, pp. 747–758. 2023, pp. 4355–4372.
[20] K. Pei et al., “Hercule: Attack story reconstruction via community discov- [46] Q. Wang et al., “You are what you do: Hunting stealthy malware via data
 ery on correlated log graph,” in Proc. 32nd Annu. Conf. Comput. Secur. provenance analysis,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2020.
 Appl., Dec. 2016, pp. 583–595. [47] M. Balduzzi, V. Ciangaglini, and R. McArdle, “Targeted attacks detection
[21] E. Hu, A. Fu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Guo, and Y. Liu, “Actracker: A with spunge,” in Proc. Privacy, Secur. Trust, 2013 11th Annu. Int. Conf.,
 fast and efficient attack investigation method based on event causality,” 2013, pp. 185–194.
 in Proc. 2021 IEEE Conf. Comput. Commun. Workshops, May 2021, [48] “Command and scripting interpreter,” 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
 pp. 1–6. //attack.mitre.org/techniques/T1059/
[22] “Buran ransomware; the evolution of vegalocker,” 2019. [Online]. [49] S. M. Milajerdi, B. Eshete, R. Gjomemo, and V. Venkatakrishnan, “Poirot:
 Available: https://www.mcafee.com/blogs/other-blogs/mcafee- Aligning attack behavior with kernel audit records for cyber threat
 labs/buran-ransomware-the-evolution-of-vegalocker/ hunting,” in Proc. 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun. Secur.,
[23] S. Wang et al., “THREATRACE: Detecting and tracing host-based threats Nov. 2019, pp. 1795–1812.
 in node level through provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Foren- [50] R. Wei, L. Cai, L. Zhao, A. Yu, and D. Meng, “Deephunter: A graph neural
 sics Secur., vol. 17, pp. 3972–3987, 2022. network based approach for robust cyber threat hunting,” in Proc. Secur.
[24] Z. Jia, Y. Xiong, Y. Nan, Y. Zhang, J. Zhao, and M. Wen, “Magic: Detecting Privacy Commun. Netw., 2021, pp. 3–24.
 advanced persistent threats via masked graph representation learning,” [51] Z. Cheng et al., “Ghunter: A fast subgraph matching method for threat
 33rd USENIX Secur. Symp., pp. 5197–5214, 2024. hunting,” in Proc. 26th Int. Conf. Comput. Supported Cooperative Work
[25] M. U. Rehman, H. Ahmadi, and W. U. Hassan, “Flash: A comprehen- Des., May 2023, pp. 1014–1019.
 sive approach to intrusion detection via provenance graph representation [52] Z. Lou et al., “Neural subgraph matching,” 2020, arXiv:2007.03092.
 learning,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3552–3570. [53] J. Snell, K. Swersky, and R. Zemel, “Prototypical networks for few-shot
[26] T. Chen, “APT-KGL: An intelligent APT detection system based on threat learning,” in Proc. 31st Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2017, pp.
 knowledge and heterogeneous provenance graph learning,” IEEE Trans. 4080–4090.
 Dependable Secure Comput., pp. 1–15, 2022. [54] N. Rani, B. Saha, and S. K. Shukla, “A comprehensive survey of advanced
[27] M. E. Ahmed, H. Kim, S. Camtepe, and S. Nepal, “PEELER: Profiling persistent threat attribution: Taxonomy, methods, challenges and open
 kernel-level events to detect ransomware,” in Proc. Eur. Symp. Res. Com- research problems,” J. Inf. Secur. Appl., vol. 92, p. 104076, 2025.
 put. Secur., 2021, pp. 240–260. [55] V. Sachidananda, R. Patil, A. Sachdeva, K.-Y. Lam, and L. Yang, “APTer:
[28] S. M. Milajerdi, R. Gjomemo, B. Eshete, R. Sekar, and V. N. Venkatakrish- Towards the investigation of APT attribution,” in Proc. 2023 IEEE Conf.
 nan, “HOLMES: Real-time apt detection through correlation of suspicious Dependable Secure Comput., 2023, pp. 1–10.
 information flows,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy, May 2019, [56] A. Goyal, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “R-CAID: Embedding root cause
 pp. 1137–1152. analysis within provenance-based intrusion detection,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE
[29] C. Xiong et al., “CONAN: A practical real-time APT detection system with Symp. Secur. Privacy, 2024, pp. 3515–3532.
 high accuracy and efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., [57] Z. Zhang, P. Qi, and W. Wang, “Dynamic malware analysis with feature envol. 19, no. 1, pp. 551–565, Jan./Feb. 2022. gineering and feature learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.Apr. 2020,
[30] “Sigma - Generic signature format for SIEM systems,” 2022. [Online]. vol. 34, no. 01, pp. 1210–1217.
 Available: https://github.com/SigmaHQ/sigma [58] L. E. Peterson, “K-nearest neighbor,” Scholarpedia, vol. 4, no. 2, 2009,
[31] W. U. Hassan, A. Bates, and D. Marino, “Tactical provenance analysis Art. no. 1883.
 for endpoint detection and response systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Secur. [59] J. Zeng, Z. L. Chua, Y. Chen, K. Ji, Z. Liang, and J. Mao, “Watson:
 Privacy, May 2020, pp. 1172–1189. Abstracting behaviors from audit logs via aggregation of contextual se-
[32] “Transparent computing engagement 3 data release,” 2017. [On- mantics,” in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021.
 line]. Available: https://github.com/darpa-i2o/Transparent-Computing/ [60] A. Aly, S. Iqbal, A. Youssef, and E. Mansour, “MEGR-APT: A
 blob/master/README-E3.md memory-efficient apt hunting system based on attack representation
[33] H.-T. Cheng et al., “Wide & deep learning for recommender systems,” in learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 19, pp. 5257–5271,
 Proc. 1st Workshop Deep Learn. Recommender Syst., Sep. 2016, pp. 7–10. 2024.
[34] “Kellect4APT dataset,” 2023. Available: https://www.kellect.org/#/ [61] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Li o, and Y. Bengio,
 kellect-4-aptdataset “Graph attention networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations,
[35] “Atomic red team,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ 2018.
 redcanaryco/atomic-red-team [62] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted
[36] T. Chen, Q. Song, X. Qiu, T. Zhu, Z. Zhu, and M. Lv, “Kellect: A kernel- Boltzmann machines,” in Proc. 27th Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2010, pp.
 based efficient and lossless event log collector for windows security,” 807–814.
 Comput. Secur., vol. 150, p. 104203, 2025. [63] Z. Li, Z. Qin, and P. Shen, “Intrusion detection via wide and deep model,”
[37] Z. Li et al., “Tags: Real-time intrusion detection with tag-propagation- in Proc. Int. Conf. Artif. Neural Netw., 2019, pp. 717–730.
 based provenance graph alignment on streaming events,” CoRR, 2024. [64] J. Dougherty, R. Kohavi, and M. Sahami, “Supervised and unsupervised
[38] Y. Liu et al., “Towards a timely causality analysis for enterprise security,” discretization of continuous features,” in Machine Learning Proceedings.
 in Proc. Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., vol. 24, 2018, p. 141. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1995, pp. 194–202.
[39] M. N. Hossain et al., “SLEUTH: Real-time attack scenario reconstruction [65] J. MacQueen, “Some methods for classification and analysis of multivarifrom cots audit data,” 26th USENIX Secur. Symp., pp. 487–504, 2017. ate observations,” in Proc. 5th Berkeley Symp. Math. Statist. Probability,
[40] R. Yang et al., “RATScope: Recording and reconstructing miss- 1967, pp. 281–298.
 ing rat semantic behaviors for forensic analysis on windows,” IEEE [66] “Streamspot data,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/
 Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 1621–1638, sbustreamspot/sbustreamspot-data?tab=readme-ov-file
 May/Jun. 2020. [67] M. Lv et al., “Trec: Apt tactic/technique recognition via few-shot prove-
[41] S. Kok, A. Abdullah, and N. Jhanjhi, “Early detection of crypto- nance subgraph learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. Comput. Commun.
 ransomware using pre-encryption detection algorithm,” J. King Saud Univ. Secur., 2024, pp. 139–152.
 - Comput. Inf. Sci., vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1984–1999, May 2022. [68] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural
[42] Z. Cheng et al., “Kairos: Practical intrusion detection and investigation networks?” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Representations, 2019.
 using whole-system provenance,” IEEE Symp. Secur. Privacy., pp. 3533– [69] “Top cybersecurity statistics for 2024,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https:
 3551, 2024. //www.cobalt.io/blog/cybersecurity-statistics-2024
QIU et al.: ZOOMER: AN APT TTP RECOGNITION SYSTEM VIA DEEP & WIDE PROVENANCE GRAPH LEARNING 4909

[70] “Operationally transparent cyber (OPTC) data release,” 2020. [Online]. Tiantian Zhu (Member, IEEE) received the PhD
 Available: https://github.com/FiveDirections/OpTC-data degree in computer science from Zhejiang university,
[71] A. Goyal, X. Han, G. Wang, and A. Bates, “Sometimes, you aren’t what Hangzhou, China, in 2019. He is currently an assoyou do: Mimicry attacks against provenance graph host intrusion detection ciate professor with the college of computer science
 systems,” in Proc. 30th Netw. Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2023. and technology, Zhejiang University of Technology,
 China. His research interests include system security
 and artificial intelligence.

 Xuebo Qiu received the bachelor’s degree from Wenzhou University, Wenzhou, China, in 2021. He is currently workjng toward the PhD degree with the Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China. Qijie Song received the PhD degree in computer
 His research interests include system security and science from the Zhejiang University of Technology,
 data mining. Hangzhou, China, in 2025. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher with the college of geoinfomatics, Zhejiang University of Technology. His research
 interests include system security and spatiotemporal
 intelligence.

 Mingqi Lv received the PhD degree in computer
 science from Zhejiang University, China, in 2012.
 He is currently a full professor with the College of
 Geoinformatics, Zhejiang University of Technology, Zhiling Zhu received the PhD degree in computer
 Huzhou, China. His research interests include spatial- science from the Zhejiang University of Technology,
 temporal data mining and data-driven cyber security. Hangzhou, China, in 2025. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher with the College of Geoinfomatics, Zhejiang University of Technology. His research
 interests include software engineering, open-source
 software, and automated CI/CD.

 Tieming Chen received the PhD degree in computer
 software and theory from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2011. He is currently a full professor
 with the College of Geoinformatics, Zhejiang University of Technology, Huzhou, China. His research
 interests include cyberspace security and intelligence
 security.